Land Governance Assessment Framework
               (LGAF)
            Afghanistan




            Final Report




           December 2015




                 1
Table of content

1. Acknowledgements
2. Acronyms
3. Executive Summary
4. Introduction
5. Methodology
6. Consolidated Scorecard
7. Context
8. Land Tenure System, Tenure Typology, Institutional Organigram
9. Presentations of substantive findings per topic
    93     Land Rights Recognition
    93     Rights to forest and common lands
    93     Urban Land Use, Planning and Development
    93     Public Land Management
    93     Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investors
    93     Public Provision of Land Information
    93     Land Valuation and Taxation
    93     Dispute Resolution
    93     Institutional Arrangements
10. Policy Issues and Recommendations (per thematic area)
11. Policy Matrix
12. Conclusion and next steps
13. Annexes:
    133    Annex I - Glossary
    133    Annex II - Revised LGAF Definitions Regarding Concepts and Terminology
    133    Annex III - List of Experts and Qualifications
    133    Annex IV - Lists of Participants – panel workshops
    133    Annex V - List of Participants- Technical Validation Workshop
    133    Annex VI - List of Participants – Policy Dialogue
    133    Annex VII – Institutional Map
    133    Annex VIII. – Technical Concepts’ Definitions
14. Bibliography




                                               2
1. Acknowledgements

I would like to express my gratitude to all experts in Afghanistan both public and private
who participated in the LGAF process and shared their experiences and expertise at all
stages of the process. Particularly, Khalid Bahrami, Ghulam Dastageer Sarwaree, Jamshid
Habib, Ghulam Hussain Rahmani, Arifullah Arif, Yasin Safar, Abdul Salam Kohistani, Gul
Rahman Totakhail, Fahim Hakim, Weeda Mehran and Shahla Naimi, Peyton Cook and Lucile
Martin, who contributed extensively to the nine LGAF thematic areas and developed the
first drafts of nine panel reports. Without having their continuous support, it would not be
possible to develop this report. This report is the reflection of their views and I hope I have
been successful in capturing their concerns.

My sincere appreciation goes to all government agencies that have supported this study. I
would like to thank in particular the ARAZI (and the ARAZI Director Mr. Jawad Peikar),
Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock for their
cooperation in the final stages of the report writing to clarify the outstanding issues. I hope
that they will use this report as an important contribution to the development of a much
needed cross sectoral dialogue on land.

To my office LGAF team, please accept my gratitude for your support and hard work, as
well as Mr. Arifullah Arif, who facilitated all the workshops related to this project.

Special thanks go to my predecessor Aruni Jayakody, who laid the ground for this important
exercise, which enabled me to bring the project to successful end. Furthermore, I would
like to extend my gratitude to already mentioned Aruni Jayakody, Peyton Cook and Lucile
Martin for compiling the project’s Inception Report, which was widely used in this report. I
am also grateful for the comments of our peer-reviewers, who pointed out important issues
in relation to land governance in Afghanistan.

Finally, I would like to thank the World Bank for giving me the opportunity to coordinate
the LGAF in Afghanistan. Special thanks goes to Asta Olsen and Mohammad Yasin Noori, the
World Bank team in Afghanistan. I would like to specially acknowledge in this regard the
guidance I have received from Thea Hilhorst, the LGAF Global Coordinator.




                                              3
2. Acronyms

ACCI – Afghanistan Chamber of Commerce and Industries
AGCHO – Afghan Geodesy and Cartography Head Office
AIHRC – Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
AISA – Afghanistan Investment Support Agency
ALCO – Afghanistan Land Consulting Organization
AMLAK - A dedicated land administration authority, named AMLAK was established within
the Ministry of Finance (predecessor of ARAZI)
ANDMA – Afghanistan National Disaster Management Authority
ANP – Afghan National Police
ARAZI – Afghanistan Independent Land Authority
CCM – Community Coordinating Mechanisms
CDC – Community development council
CEO – Chief Executive Officer
CRA – Cooperation for Rehabilitation of Afghanistan
CSOs – Civil society organisations
CSO – Central Statistics Office
DDR – Disaster Risk Reduction
DFID – Department for International Development
EITI – Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
FML – Forest Management Law
GIZ – Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GDMA – General Directorate of Municipal Affairs
GDP – Gross Domestic Product
GIS – Geographic Information System
GPS – Global positioning system
HOOAC – High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption
ICLA – Information, Counseling and Legal Assistance (NRC project)
ICSID – International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
IDLG – Independent Directorate of Local Governance
IDP – Internally displaced person
IFMS – Integrated Financial Management System
IGO – International Government Organization
ILAC – Information and Legal Assistance Center
INGO – International non-governmental organisations
IWA – Integrity Watch Afghanistan
JICA – Japan International Cooperation Agency
LAL – Land Acquisition Law
LAMP – Land Administration Management Project
LARA – Land Reform in Afghanistan
LEL – Land Expropriation Law
LGAF – Land Governance Assessment Framework
LML – Land Management Law
LOJJ – Law on the Organization and Jurisdiction of Judiciary
LTERA – Land Titling and Economic Restructuring in Afghanistan (USAID programme)
MAIL – Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock
MAU – Municipality Property Office
MEC – Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation Committee
ML – Minerals Law
MoE – Ministry of Education
MoBTA – Ministry of Border and Tribal Affairs
MoEW – Ministry of Energy and Water
MoF – Ministry of Finance
MoHE – Ministry of Higher Education
MoI – Ministry of Interior
MoJ – Ministry of Justice
MoMP – Ministry of Mines and Petroleum
MoPH – Ministry of Public Health
MRRD – Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development


                                           4
MoRR – Ministry of Refugees and Repatriation
MUDA – Ministry of Urban Development Affairs
NATO – North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
NEPA – National Environment Protection Agency
NGO – non-governmental organisations
NLP – National Land Policy
NRC – Norwegian Refugee Council
NRVA – National Risk and Vulnerability Survey
NUG – National Unity Government
PTRO – Peace Training and Research Organisation
RAMP UP – Regional Afghan Municipalities Program for Urban Populations
SIGTAS – Standard Integrated Government Tax Administration System
SNAP – Strategic National Action Plan
TLO – The Liaison Office
UN Habitat – United Nations Human Settlements Programme
UNAMA – United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
UNCITRAL – United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
UNDP – United Nations Development Programme
UNEP – United Nations Environment Programme
UNHCR – United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF – United Nations Children’s Fund
US – United States
USAID – United States Agency for International Development
USD – United States Dollar
USIP – United States Institute of Peace




                                           5
3. Executive Summary

1. Introduction
In the past decade, land and control of resources have been a significant aspect of government and
donor concerns in Afghanistan. In the light of social transformations, increased demographic
pressure, displacement, and economic evolutions, land is indeed more than ever at the heart of
economic and social considerations. At the same time, the legal framework for land governance
remains incoherent in many aspects and ill-suited to the Afghan reality, and administrative
structures with responsibility over land both lack clarity in repartition of responsibilities, and
appear under-capacitated to carry out their mandate.
The Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF), developed by the World Bank in partnership
with FAO, IFAD, IFPRI, UN Habitat, the African Union, and numerous bilateral partners, is a
diagnostic tool to assess the status of land governance at country level using a participatory process
that draws systematically on existing evidence and local expertise rather than on outsiders. There
are nine key general areas of a country’s good land governance that LGAF focuses on. These areas
have traditionally often been dealt with in separation from each other. LGAF aims to bring these
into one framework. For these nine focus areas, a series of land governance indicators, each
divided into several dimensions, have been selected based on international experience. For each
dimension, pre-coded statements are given for scoring (from best practice = A to weak practice =
D), again based on international experience (please see the Consolidated Scorecard in the section 5
of the full report and at the beginning of the each sub-section in the section 9). It is also important
to note that due to a number of specificities of the Afghan context, some of the indicators and
terminology had to be adapted in order to be able to capture the realities of land governance in
Afghanistan. These include mainly the key areas dealing with the public land and its allocation to
private interests (please see the detailed modifications in the Annex II of the full report).
Implementation of LGAF happened in a number of steps:

  •   Preparation
  •   Background documentation (nine panel reports): To provide the common basis of information
      that is indispensable as a basis of consensus on rankings or priority actions, three sets of
      written outputs are needed.
  •   Expert/subject matter specialist panels: Intensive work sessions of between half a day and a
      full day per topic, consisting of five to eight subject matter experts and users of land
      systems from different backgrounds. They discuss each of the dimensions in detail to arrive
      at a consensus ranking and agree on policy priorities.
  •   Synthesis country report: All material (background documentation, tenure typology,
      institutional map, background reports and the panel minutes) is synthesised in a well-
      structured report to be shared widely.
  •   Country level validation and policy workshop: The Country report is reviewed by experts to
      provide input. These results are incorporated and the report is presented for a National
      workshop to have results validated and prioritise policy conclusions and associated
      monitoring indicators for presentation to key policy-makers during a policy workshop.

Legal framework

The Afghan Constitution of 2004 established a legal framework for property rights safeguarding the
right of individuals to own property, stating property shall be safe from violation, no one shall be
forbidden from owning and acquiring property, except by law, and private property can only be
confiscated by legal order (Article 40).
Legislation for classification of land tenure is comprised of over 30 laws and decrees including the
following: Civil Code, Presidential Decree 83 of 2003, Presidential Decree 99 of 2002, Land
Expropriation Law of 2000, Survey and Cadastre Law of 1988, the Law on Pastures and Mara’a of
2000, Forest Law of 2012, Municipal Law 2000, Mineral Law 2015, Land Tax Law of 1976 and Income
Tax Law 2007. The Land Management Law (LML) of 2008, which is currently before the Ministry of
Justice for further amendments, is probably the most comprehensive one dealing with range of
land issues. Afghan land laws, however, sometimes contradict each other on the classification of
state, public and private land and various other issues.



                                                  6
National Land Policy (NLP) was adopted in 2007 containing international best practices and
constituted a major improvement in Afghan land administration if implemented. Unfortunately,
neither the LML of 2008 nor any other laws which were enacted after 2007 take the NLP into
account, leaving the operationalisation of different provisions an unfulfilled promise.
Land Tenure Typology
The situation of land tenure in Afghanistan remains opaque, with an ill-suited legal framework,
inconsistent legislation, unclear delimitation of boundaries and conflicting definitions of property,
including between the State and private entities (individuals and communities) contesting the
State’s presumption of ownership over land. Patterns of land tenure in Afghanistan further present
significant regional variations, calling for a context-specific analysis.
Legislation for classification of land tenure primarily stems from four sources of law: the Civil Code,
Presidential Decree 83 of 2003, the Land Management Law (LML) of 2008, currently under revision,
and the Shari’a. These, however, sometimes contradict each other on the classification of state,
public and private land. The presence of what may be considered residual legislation, such as the
Taliban-era Rangelands Law, along with non-legal government documents which proffer land
classifications, such as the Ministry of Agriculture Master Plan, further exacerbates this lack of
clarity.
There is general agreement among authors of studies on land tenure in Afghanistan that the current
legal framework is both incoherent and unsuitable to the reality of land tenure and land use in the
country.1 Whereas we have observed at least eight types of land based on field research 2, the legal
experts agree on three primary types of ownership based on the Afghan legal framework, with
different              outcomes               for                their              transferability:




1 See, for instance, Yohannes Gebremedhin, “Legal issues in Afghanistan’s land titling and registration” (Kabul:
USAID, Emerging Markets Group, 2005); Wily “Land, People and the State.”
2
  Collectively held land without documentation, collectively held land with customary documentation,
collectively held land with title issued by a previous government regimes, individually held land without any
title, individually held land with non-recognised title, individually held land with state title from a pre-Karzai
regime, individually held land with title from the Karzai and Ghani regime and land owned by the State (versus
public land).



                                                        7
Type of   Legal basis           Sub-categories                        Type of rights          Ownership and        Key challenges
land                                                                                          responsible
                                                                                              organization
Private   Legal code            •   Collectively     held     land    •   Sold, transferred   Individual    or     •   Limited    possibilities  for   tenure
land                                without documentation, with           inherited           legal persons            formalisation
                                    customary      documentation      •   Compulsory          (ARAZI)              •   Formerly displaced people and refugees
                                    and    with    documentation          acquisition                                  who find their lands occupied are
                                    issued       by       previous        possible only for                            unable to reclaim them back
                                    government regimes                    public    welfare                        •   High number of informal settlements in
                                •   Individually held land without        projects                                     urban settings
                                    title                                                                          •   Some privatised land is perceived as
                                •   Individually held land with                                                        having been acquired by “grabbing”
                                    non-recognised            title                                                    state or public land
                                    (customary title deeds and
                                    other informal records)
                                •   Individually held land with
                                    state formal title (from
                                    various regimes)
Public    No clear definition   •   Pastures - allocated for          •   Cannot be sold      Municipalities       •   Includes     lands     under   ancestral
land      in Afghan law             public use (collectively held)        nor       leased,   (within        the       customary rights incl. pastures/forests
                                    (MAIL)                                transferred    or   Master      Plan),       – ownership is contested between
                                •   Forests (MAIL)                        exchanged           Ministries    and        either state or public
                                •   Graveyards,     entertainment                             ARAZI (manages       •   Art. 3(8) of LML 2008 and Decree 83
                                    parks, roads, green areas,                                all lands outside        blur boundaries between state and
                                    playgrounds (Municipalities)                              of Master plan)          public land by putting emphasis on
                                •   Schools (MoE); universities                                                        formal documentary proof of ownership
                                    (MoHE); hospitals (MoPH)                                                       •   Law does not define public land and
                                                                                                                       has no provisions on registering “public
                                                                                                                       land”; reason why public land is easily
                                                                                                                       claimed as state property and
                                                                                                                       reassigned subsequently to private
                                                                                                                       parties
State     Registered as state   •   Forests (MAIL)                    Only arid and virgin    Governmental         •   Lack of adequate mapping
land      land and any land     •   Protected land                    land can be leased      institutions and     •   Some privatised land is perceived as
          that    is  deemed    •   Arid and virgin land              or sold provided        ministries               having been acquired by “grabbing”
          public but is not                                           certain   conditions    (ARAZI)                  state or public land
          registered in the                                           (forests         and
          book of government                                          protected       land




                                                                                   8
lands   cannot             be
        transferred)




                       9
      2. Presentations of substantive findings per topic
      2.1.        Land Rights Recognition
      *Please note that the text below the tables in each section does not contain all the indicators. For
      the purposes of the executive summary, only the main issues identified by the experts during the
      Technical Validation Workshop and Policy Dialogue were mentioned. The related information for
      all of the indicators can be found in the full report.

                                                                                                       Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                              Topic                                     A   B C     D
PANEL 1: Land Rights Recognition
LGI 1: Recognition of a continuum of rights
             Individuals' rural land tenure rights are legally recognised and protected in
1 1 1
             practice.
1 1 2 Customary tenure rights are legally recognised and protected in practice.
             Indigenous rights to land and forest are legally recognised and protected in
1 1 3
             practice.
1 1 4 Urban land tenure rights are legally recognised and protected in practice.
LGI 2: Respect for and enforcement of rights
1 2 1 Accessible opportunities for tenure individualisation exist.
1 2 2 Individual land in rural areas is recorded and mapped.
1 2 3 Individual land in urban areas is recorded and mapped.
1 2 4 The number of illegal land sales is low.
1 2 5 The number of illegal lease transactions is low.
1 2 6 Women's property rights in lands as accrued by relevant laws are recorded.
1 2 7 Women’s property rights to land are equal to those by men.

      The LML provides for a variety of ways to establish legal ownership, based upon possession of
      documents (customary or formal), or long-term physical occupancy. However, in practice, only the
      formal method of establishing ownership appears secure.
      According to Art. 5 of the LML, valid recorded deeds include:
             1. Documents issued by a legally recognised court, such as: title deeds, donation deeds,
                  bequest, division, and the decision, which is made by court.
             2. Presidential decree, government degree (council of ministers) (and a land purchase
                document from government’s properties)
             3. Tax payment documents (maylati)
             4. Water rights documents (haqaba)
             5. Customary deeds (asnad-e orfi)
             6. Official ownership deed (sanad rasmee mulkyet) – during Democratic Republic of
                Afghanistan, 1978 - 79
             7. Official deed for land ownership issued after a legal settlement of the land ( qabala-e
                qatae)
      In terms of undocumented rights 3, long term unchallenged possession is ensured in Art. 8 of LML,
      2008. However the article stipulates that in order to prove ownership the land must be cultivated
      and a proof of continued ownership since 1973 is required as testified by the neighbours, de facto
      limiting claims to land acquired after that date. Considering the occurrence of wars in the period
      after 1973, this article is in reality of limited usage.
      In terms of customary tenure rights, their recognition has been at the heart of debates concerning
      the discrepancy of the statutory land law with the reality of practices in rural Afghanistan,
      primarily based on customary norms. Article 5 of the LML, 2008, recognises the validity of
      customary deeds under the condition that they were prepared and submitted before August 1975.
      In locations where declaration forms were not distributed or the registration book was lost, the LML
      provides a customary deed may be recognised if there are no claims to the land, and the land


      3   Which will be further discussed in the next sections of the report.



                                                               10
purchase and the possession by the buyer has been confirmed by the landowners holding lands next
to the plot, as well as by the inhabitants of the locality where the land is situated. Additionally, it
is only recognised only under condition that the land seller owns the valid deed.
The fact that most properties in rural and urban areas are neither evidenced by formal deeds (it
was assessed that at the time of the Bonn Agreement in 2001, court-prepared documents were
believed to cover 10% of rural properties and 30% of urban properties 4) nor recorded (there has
been no systematic update of records since 1978) has direct implications on the effective rights of
rural residents. A Social Impact Assessment conducted by the World Bank on the LML noted that the
law demonstrated “strong orientation towards those with formal documentation” when 90% of
Afghans have no documentation at all. 5 It further noted that the LML, despite provisions such as
Article 8, failed to adequately spell out instances where undocumented rights could be protected.
Although at the local level, despite the absence of formal legal recognition, ownership is often well
recognised and accepted by communities, according to certain provisions of Afghan law (being it
mainly the Presidential Decree 83), the lands with undocumented rights are de facto the property
of the state. According to the Presidential Decree 83, which supersedes all previous laws relevant
to establishing ownership property rights, including through customary documents, all land whose
ownership cannot be proven shall be considered under the ownership of the State. Given a) the
conditions tied to the recognition of customary documentation in the LML 2008, and the difficulty
to comply with those in practice; b) the absence of any type of documents for the majority of rural
Afghans; and c) the non-recognition of collective tenure, representing a significant portion of
customary tenure, the legal framework for customary land tenure rights appears disconnected from
the reality of the majority of rural Afghans.
It is unknown how much land automatically fell back to the State. Based on the figures estimated
by AREU’s earlier research, the figure could potentially be as high as 90% for rural lands (70% for
urban lands).
Recording/registering the land
The majority of Afghan land remains unrecorded and unmapped with considerable regional
variations. Even in the areas, however, where the rights are to various extents documented, the
records have not been updated. Based on different accounts, reportedly only 33-36% of the land in
the country has been formally registered, with latest records dating back to the regime of Daud
Khan (1973-1978). Additionally, the last nation-wide cadastral land survey, which covered only 34%
of mostly rural and peri-urban private land of the country before it was stopped, 6 was conducted
between 1970 and 1978, and has not been updated since 7.
Since the policy on how to improve land governance has changed with each regime change, there
are various, and not always interlinked, ways to record and/or register land in Afghanistan.
Throughout this research, we have identified three distinctive ways of registering/recording rights
in Afghanistan: a) through land clearance process ( Tasfia) with ARAZI, b) acquiring of a title deed
through the courts, c) through the cadastral survey. Based on the experience of the experts
interviewed for this study, the registration through ARAZI’s land clearance and the court
registration through acquisition of a formal title deed are the only uncontested mechanisms of
registering land in Afghanistan.
One of the reasons mentioned for low registration and formalisation is reportedly the widespread
corruption of government institutions, which require the payment of bribes. Another reason
mentioned was the perceived complexity of the administrative process. According to the World
Bank Doing Business in Afghanistan report of 2015, it takes approximately 250-360 working days for
the completion of land tenure recognition in Afghanistan 8. Paying taxes also deters people from
registering their property, in particular when adding the informal fees, which often have to be paid
in addition to regular land taxes fees. Additionally, the lack of awareness of general public, as well

4Wily,“Land, People and the State,” 22.
5Wily,“Land, People and the State,” 44.
6 There is no data available on the types of lands that were surveyed. According to the Expert’s anecdotal

understanding, all types of land were surveyed.
8“Registering
            property, “World Bank Group,
http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/afghanistan/#registering-property (accessed 4
September 2015).



                                                   11
as Afghan National Police and Army, on land issues and land rights contributes, in certain cases, to
the limited land rights recognition in Afghanistan.
Due to the largely customary tenure of Afghan land with only minimal portion being recorded or
mapped, the opportunities for illegal land transactions are enormous. Illegal land sales are more
broadly known in Afghanistan as ‘land grabbing’ or ‘land usurpation’. Presidential Decree 45 on
grabbed land policy requested the mapping of all land grabbed across Afghanistan. According to
this decree, the list of land grabbers was to be compiled by all ministries from which land had been
grabbed, and submitted to ARAZI. Statistics compiled by ARAZI indicate that more than 1.2 million
jeribs of land have been usurped over the past decade. 9 A special Parliamentary Committee
created to align a list of land grabbers with the list already drafted by ARAZI includes over 15,000
individuals who had allegedly participated in land grabbing. 10 However, despite the extensive
nature of the problem, the current legal framework does not adequately address the crime of land
grabbing.11
Policy Recommendations:
       •   The minimal limit of continued ownership and cultivation of the land needed in order for
           the long term unchallenged possession to be formally recognised should be decreased
           through the amendment of current LML.
       •   Customary deed documents prepared after August 1975 but otherwise meeting all the other
           requirements as per Art. 5 of LML 2008 should be formally recognized through the
           amendment of current LML.
       •   The efforts of various NGOs (such as TLO and Checci) to capacitate Afghan citizens on what
           information a customary deed document should include in order for it to be formally
           recognised should be further enhanced involving the government in these efforts.
       •   Creation of centralised (gradually computerised) system at ARAZI as one-stop-shop for land
           registration.
       •   As an interim measure, community-based land recording system should be developed,
           which will be later on connected to ARAZI registering system (when transferred from courts
           to ARAZI) and their Principal Books.
       •   Awareness of public, Afghan National Police and Army on the land issues and land rights has
           to be increased. The land governance has to be included in the teaching and training
           curricula for these target groups.

       •   ARAZI’s plans to implement National Demarcation Project identifying the boundaries of
           villages and Gozars (administrative units smaller than districts in urban areas) should be
           materialized. As a follow-up step the land clearance process on large scale should be
           restarted. The judge should be included in Tasfia delegation to deal with the land disputes,
           if necessary. In case of more complex land disputes, the fact that the ownership of land is
           disputed, should be indicated on the Tasfia report and forwarded to courts. Adequate
           financial resources should be allocated for this purpose from the national budget. The
           support in form of financial means, as well as technical expertise should be sought with
           international community and civil society.
       •   The possibility of a first-stage land clearance done by communities to enable nationwide
           land identification should be explored.
       •   The regulation proposed by ARAZI that allows for registering of urban properties should be
           approved promptly.
       •   Relevant authorities should work together to operationalise already existing efforts to
           incorporate a provision on land usurpation into the Criminal Code. Where appropriate,
           donors and civil society stakeholders should provide technical assistance to the drafting
           process.


9“Public   Inquiry into Land Usurpation,” 9.
10“Stolen   Lands,” Note 184.
11   See “Stolen Lands of Afghanistan,” 9.



                                                   12
          •   Approval and support of the draft Restitution Policy on Land Grabbing.
          •   Prosecution of land grabbers should be made a priority within the Attorney General’s
              office. Similarly investigation and technical capacity to do so should be enhanced within
              the Afghan National Police (ANP) with the possibility to establish a special police force
              tasked with the protection of lands against the land grabbing.




      2.2.    Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations


                                                                                                           Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                             Topic                                          A   B C     D
PANEL 2: Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations
LGI 1: Rights to Forest and Common Lands
             Forests and common lands are clearly identified in law and responsibility for use is
2 1 1
             clearly assigned.
2 1 2 Rural group rights are formally recognised and can be enforced.
             Users' rights to key natural resources on land (incl. fisheries) are legally recognised
2 1 3
             and protected in practice.
             Multiple rights over common land and natural resources on these lands can legally
2 1 4
             coexist.
             Multiple rights over the same plot of land and its resources (e.g., trees) can legally
2 1 5
             coexist.
             Multiple rights over land and mining/other sub-soil resources located on the same
2 1 6
             plot can legally coexist.
2 1 7 Accessible opportunities exist for mapping and recording of group rights.
2 1 8 Boundary demarcation of communal land.
LGI 2: Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
2 2 1 Restrictions regarding rural land use are justified and enforced.
2 2 2 Restrictions on rural land transferability effectively serve public policy objectives.
             Rural land use plans are elaborated/changed via public process and resulting
2 2 3
             burdens are shared.
             Rural lands, the use of which is changed, are swiftly transferred to the destined
2 2 4
             use.
2 2 5 Rezoning of rural land use follows a public process that safeguards existing rights.
             For protected rural land use (forest, pastures, wetlands, national parks, etc.) plans
2 2 6
             correspond to actual use.
             Rural lands, the use of which is identified for rehabilitation, are swiftly transferred
2 2 7
             to the destined use.


      Although the rights to forests and common (or public) lands in Afghanistan and the restrictions on
      their usage are clearly defined in Afghan legal framework, the lack of adequate law enforcement
      leads to their illegal usage, overexploitation and destruction. The United Nations Environment
      Programme (UNEP) conducted a survey in 2003 and reported an estimated 50-70% of land is being
      used for unspecified purposes in Afghanistan. 12 Taking into account the fact that there are no rural
      land use plans existing in Afghanistan, the usage of the forests and common lands is often
      unregulated.
      Despite various efforts of MAIL and MRRD, natural resources including forests, pastures and
      protected areas are affected by the lack of a comprehensive mechanism for effective and
      sustainable use of natural resources. For this purpose, programmes have been developed in 2014 to
      manage and protect natural resources in co-operation with the public so as to build community
      capacity in the area of sustainable utilisation, promote a sense of ownership among the people and

      12“Afghanistan   Post-Conflict Environmental Assessment” (Geneva: UNEP, 2003).



                                                            13
      motivate people to contribute to the survival of these resources. The results of these efforts still
      remain to be seen.
      Policy Recommendations:
           •   Identifying mechanisms to promote forest management in areas which are currently out of
               reach of the government such as developing and empowering community based
               adjudication groups (comprising of elders and influential figures in the community) to
               address rural land use restrictions violations. One possible option would be channelling the
               rural land management through CDCs.
           •   Raising awareness of the local population about the importance of forests and other natural
               resources and the negative impacts of deforestation in order to encourage communities to
               take part in maintaining the forests, particularly in the areas where the presence of the
               central government is limited.
           •   The development of the rural land use plans by the MRRD through a participatory and
               transparent process where public voice can be heard and the burdens are shared.
           •   Prioritising surveying of natural resources identified as in high risk of degradation.
           •   Identifying mechanisms to promote protected areas management in areas which are
               currently out of reach of the government such as developing and empowering community
               based adjudication groups (comprising of elders and influential figures in the community) to
               address rural land use restrictions violations

           •   Expediting the process of land change to protected areas by mainstreaming the steps and
               organisations responsible.


      2.3.     Urban Land Use, Planning and Development
                                                                                                            Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                              Topic                                          A   B C D
PANEL 3: Urban Land Use, Planning, and Development
LGI 1: Restrictions on Rights
               Restrictions on urban land ownership/transfer effectively serve public policy
 3    1 1
               objectives.
 3    1 2 Restrictions on urban land use (disaster risk) effectively serve public policy objectives.
LGI 2: Transparency of Land Use Restrictions
               Process of urban expansion/infrastructure development process is transparent and
 3    2 1
               respects existing rights.
               Changes in urban land use plans are based on a clear public process and input by
 3    2 2
               all stakeholders.
               Approved requests for change in urban land use are swiftly followed by
 3    2 3
               development on these parcels of land.
LGI 3: Efficiency in the Urban Land Use Planning Process
               Policy to ensure delivery of low-cost housing and services exists and is
 3    3 1
               progressively implemented.
 3    3 2 Land use planning effectively guides urban spatial expansion in the largest city.
               Land use planning effectively guides urban development in the four next largest
 3    3 3
               cities.
 3    3 4 Planning processes are able to cope with urban growth.
LGI 4: Speed and Predictability of Enforcement of Restricted Land Uses
               Provisions for residential building permits are appropriate, affordable and
 3    4 1
               complied with.
               A building permit for a residential dwelling can be obtained quickly and at a low
 3    4 2
               cost.
LGI 5: Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
 3    5 1 Formalisation of urban residential housing is feasible and affordable.
 3    5 2 In cities with informal tenure, a viable strategy exists for tenure security,



                                                         14
             infrastructure, and housing.
             A condominium regime allows effective management and recording of urban
3   5    3
             property.


    There are certain restrictions on transferability of (urban) public land; i.e., public land cannot be
    transferred (sold and bought) to private interests. Taking into account an unclear definition of
    public and state land in Afghan legal framework (this will be discussed in more details in the next
    section), public land can be easily interchanged with state land, thus allowing the transactions of
    the land that would otherwise be illegal. In terms of urban land use restrictions, there are certain
    land use restrictions defined in the original Master Plans of the cities. However, in most of the
    cases the restrictions on the land use prescribed by Master Plans, including Kabul Master Plan, are
    not enforced. The rampant corruption in the ranks of government and land management authorities
    allows for the uncontrolled usage of the land.
    Following the commencement of the internationally-backed war in Afghanistan in 2001,
    Afghanistan’s urban land use has undergone significant changes due to, most notably, a massive
    influx of refugee-returnees to urban centres throughout the country and extensive rural-urban
    migrants searching for security and/or employment opportunities. Today, approximately a quarter
    of Afghans live in urban areas, rendering the topic of urbanisation at the core of Afghanistan13.
    Despite having said that, policies for low-cost housing and services remain tenuous. Current
    provisions of LML 2008 do not specify low-cost housing offers to the poor, but instead rely on
    instalment schemes that typically amount to the normal (not low) cost of the land. Lack of
    payment can result in evictions. Nevertheless, the state land distribution schemes were developed
    by the government through the Presidential Decrees 104 and 1091 during President Karzai ’s
    administration to allocate state land to teachers, low ranking public employees and returnees and
    IDPs. However, these are rather an exception from the general policy of not distributing the state
    land. Additionally, the implementation of the distribution policies, mirrored with rampant
    corruption and conflicts caused by unclear ownership claims of distributed land, does not serve the
    interests of poor Afghan population. For what is worse, the implementation of the Presidential
    Decree 104, allowing for the distribution of land to returnees and IDPs, has been paused in recent
    years.
    Additionally, due to rampant corruption, extensive land grabbing and a great influx of refugees,
    IDPs and rural to urban migrants, building in Kabul throughout the 1990s and, more recently, the
    2000s largely remain outside of the Third Master Plan, and are thus considered ‘informal’ in
    nature14. It is believed that 70% of people in Kabul live in informal settlements 15. Indeed, with the
    suspension of the Third Master Plan by then-President Karzai at the request of the Minister of Urban
    Development Affairs, the city has no clear functioning reference for planning purposes. The lack of
    an updated framework for regulating the urban expansion of the largest city, Kabul, is
    complemented with little coordination between responsible government bodies (such as the
    Municipality and Ministry of Urban Development). The carrying capacity of infrastructure has been
    long overloaded, and the plan for land use has not been updated since 1978. Further, Kandahar,
    Herat, Jalalabad and Mazar-e Sharif, four largest cities in Afghanistan after Kabul, suffer from an
    outdated urban plan as well.
    Finally, although the USAID supported MUDA in drafting Policy on Upgrading Informal Settlements,
    it has not yet been approved by the Cabinet. Having said that, current requirements for formalising
    housing in urban areas are not clear to the public, and prone to power-brokering and corruption.
    Policy Recommendations:
         •   Clear mechanism for use change of each type of urban land should be devised, including
             the requirement of permits to do so. Municipalities should establish a monitoring
             mechanism for this purpose, as well as a database of land use changes, which will be
             updated regularly, including new spatial information.

    13 Ibid.
    14
      The distinction has to be made here between Kabul Informal Settlements (KIS), pursued often by Afghan poor,
    and informal construction in the richest areas of Kabul city.
    15
      “KnowingKabul: A potential powerhouse of social and economic development, ”Discussion Paper #10, UN-
    Habitat, March 2015.



                                                        15
          •   Zoning Law for both national and municipality purposes should be enacted.
          •   Long-awaited National Urban Policy and new Municipality Law have to be enacted.
          •   An inter-agency commission between MUDA and municipalities should be established to
              clearly delineate the responsibilities between these two institutions in relation to the
              formulation, implementation and monitoring of the master plans. In future, this commission
              can serve as a forum for discussion of various pressing issues such as status of informal
              settlements in Afghan cities.
          •   New Master Plans have to be developed for biggest cities in Afghanistan as per MUDAs
              commitments within “Big Cities Master Plan” initiative with the support of international
              community.

          •   With the development of new master plans for the biggest cities, the infrastructural needs
              of the population and the current state of the cities (considerably changed in comparison to
              1990s) needs to be taken into account and adequate mechanisms to provide necessary
              infrastructure have to be developed.
          •   Presidential Decree 104 has to be amended (or annulled and new law should be adopted)
              that tackles the shortcomings of the Presidential Decree 104 such as the allocation of non-
              viable land and cumbersome eligibility criteria. The National IDP Policy (including Forced
              Eviction Guidelines) has to be adequately implemented.
          •   The initiatives like Maslakh, where IDPs are given the land titles, should be supported and if
              possible reproduced.
          •   The policy on Upgrading of Informal Settlements has to be approved and implemented.
          •   A policy on low-cost housing for the poor should be adopted. The policy should be
              developed in a consultative manner, with input from all stakeholders including civil society
              representatives, the government and the public in question itself. Additionally, anti-
              eviction laws should be designed (based on Forced Eviction Guidelines already existing
              within the National IDP Policy) with constitutional protections in mind and, in the case of
              eviction, a legal commitment to fair compensation should be established.


      2.4.    Public Land Management
                                                                                                          Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                             Topic                                         A   B C     D
PANEL 4: Public Land Management
LGI 1: Identification of Public Land and Clear Management
              Criteria for public land ownership are clearly defined and assigned to the right
4    1 1
              level of government.
4    1 2 There is a complete recording of public land.
4    1 3 Information on public land is publicly accessible.
              The management responsibility for different types of public land is unambiguously
4    1 4
              assigned.
              Responsible public institutions have sufficient resources for their land
4    1 5
              management responsibilities.
              All essential information on public land allocations to private interests is publicly
4    1 6
              accessible.
LGI 2: Justification and Time-Efficiency of Acquisition Processes
4    2 1 There is minimal transfer of acquired land to private interests.
4    2 2 Acquired land is transferred to destined use in a timely manner.
              The threat of land acquisition does not lead to pre-emptive action by private
4    2 3
              parties.
LGI 3: Transparency and Fairness of Acquisition Procedures
              Compensation is provided for the acquisition of all rights regardless of their
4    3 1
              recording status.



                                                        16
4   3      2   Land use change resulting in selective loss of rights there is compensated for.
4   3      3   Acquired owners are compensated promptly.
4   3      4   There are independent and accessible avenues for appeal against acquisition.
4   3      5   Timely decisions are made regarding complaints about acquisition.


        There is no specific definition of public land in Afghan legal code. However, the Afghan state does
        manage some lands which would broadly meet potential definitions of public land. According to the
        broad definition, the lands that have been allocated for public use and are neither the property of
        the state nor the property of the individual are public lands. The issue arises with Art. 3(8) of LML
        2008, which stipulates that any land that is deemed public but is not registered in the book of
        government lands is considered state land. Additionally, Presidential Decree 83 further blurs the
        boundaries between state and public land by putting emphasis on formal documentary proofs of
        ownership. The fact that the Afghan legal framework does not define public land, does not provide
        provisions on how to register public land and the registration of land in general occurs rarely in
        Afghanistan, public land can be easily interchanged for the state land. In other words, land that is
        under public use and not registered can easily be claimed by the state as its property and be
        reassigned subsequently. Furthermore, it is prone to various illegal occupation, uses and
        transactions.
        Acquisition procedures
        The purpose of land acquisition is that lands owned by individuals are appropriated by the state
        with the aim to be used for public benefit in return for just compensation. In other words, land is
        only acquired for the execution of public welfare projects such as the construction of hydropower
        dams, airports, roads and other infrastructure. Due to the lack of adequate monitoring mechanisms
        to verify the authorised use of the land, it is not clear how much land was acquired by the state
        and then turned to the project with private purpose. Having said that, it is important to note that
        from the limited field research conducted for this study, people talked about illegal transfers of
        land after state acquisition processes. The availability of qualitative evidence combined with lack
        of state monitoring mechanism might suggest that the process of acquisition is at best highly
        imperfect where the illegal use of acquitted land cannot be ruled out. Furthermore, no database of
        acquisition processes exist, therefore it is not possible to estimate how fast the acquired land is
        transferred to destined use in timely-manner.
        Probably the most disturbing shortcomings of the current LEL are the provisions on compensation.
        Compensation is provided only to people holding the legal title deed document. Considering the
        prevalence of informal land tenure in Afghanistan, a considerable number of Afghans are
        susceptible for acquisition without any right for compensation. Additionally, there is no stipulation
        in the LEL about the unrecorded rights such as grazing, right of passage and gathering forest
        products. Finally, although the compensation for land, residential buildings and fruit-bearing trees
        and other samplings is legally prescribed in Afghanistan, in the majority of cases, the paid
        compensation is not sufficient for the individual whose land has been acquired to be able to
        maintain his/her previous status of life. 16 The cases when the acquired land has been located in a
        central part of the city, but the exchanged land is situated on the outskirts can serve as an
        example of this. Another problem is that there is no deadline for the payment of compensation for
        land acquisition. Compensations may be made three or four years after the acquisition. When the
        land prices go up in this time period, the landowner might find himself not being able to afford the
        same standard of living as before. Finally, there is no particular authority where individuals can
        lodge their complaints against acquisition and the compensation that has been paid to them.
        Having mentioned the shortcomings of the current LEL, the newly proposed Land Acquisition Law
        (LAL), currently under review by the MoJ, would be a major improvement in Afghan land
        acquisition practices if adopted and properly implemented.
        Policy Recommendations:




        16Interview   with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015.



                                                              17
         •   Newly proposed amended LML addressing the shortcomings of the public land definition,
             classifying four types of land including “land specific to village(s),” containing a clear
             definition of “public interest,” classifying types of public land and delineating
             responsibilities between the institutions responsible for different types of public land
             should be enacted.
         •   The plans of ARAZI to restart the cadastral survey of the remaining 66% of lands (including
             public lands) should be implemented promptly and adequately financed. The survey, as
             planned by ARAZI, should start in Bamiyan province no later than end of 2015.
         •   A community-based management of public lands should be put in place (potentially
             thorough shuras, jirgas, CDCs), when the definition of public lands is clarified including
             raising awareness of the public about the public land, laws and regulations associated with
             its use.
         •   The amended LAL containing clear provision on fair and just compensation process
             including compensation paid prior to the project start, compensation of grazing and other
             rights, identification of the suitable exchanges for acquired land and provisions on
             resettlement of individuals who face losses as a result of acquisition of their lands should
             be promptly enacted.
         •   An IT-based database system where all acquired land together with the cadastral maps and
             other related land documents will be recorded should be developed, kept with ARAZI and
             shared with other land institutions.
     2.5.    Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investors
                                                                                                        Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                              Topic                                        A B C D
PANEL 5: Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investors
LGI 1: Transfer of Public Land to Private Use Follows a Clear, Competitive Process and Payments are Collected
5    1 1 Public land transactions are conducted in an open transparent manner.
5    1 2 Payments for public leases are collected.
5    1 3 Public land is transacted at market prices unless guided by equity objectives.
5    1 4 The public captures benefits arising from changes in permitted land use.
              Policy to improve equity in asset access and use by the poor exists, is implemented
5    1 5
              effectively and monitored.
LGI2: Private Investment Strategy
              Land to be made available to investors is identified transparently and publicly, in
5    2 1
              agreement with right holders.
              Investments are selected based on economic, socio-cultural and environmental
5    2 2
              impacts in an open process.
              Public institutions transferring land to investors are clearly identified and regularly
5    2 3
              audited.
              Public bodies transferring land to investors share information and coordinate to
5    2 4
              minimize and resolve overlaps (incl. sub-soil).
              Compliance with contractual obligations is regularly monitored and remedial
5    2 5
              action taken if needed.
              Safeguards effectively reduce the risk of negative effects from large scale land-
5    2 6
              related investments.
              The scope for resettlement is clearly circumscribed and procedures exist to deal
5    2 7
              with it in line with best practice.
LGI3: Policy Implementation is Effective, Consistent and Transparent
              Investors provide sufficient information to allow rigorous evaluation of proposed
5    3 1
              investments.
5    3 2 Approval of investment plans follows a clear process with reasonable timelines.
              Right-holders and investors negotiate freely and directly with full access to
5    3 3
              relevant information.
5    3 4 Contractual provisions regarding benefit sharing are publicly disclosed.
LGI 4: Contracts Involving Public Land are Public and Accessible



                                                     18
                Information on spatial extent and duration of approved concessions is publicly
5   4      1
                available.
                Compliance with safeguards on concessions is monitored and enforced effectively
5   4      2
                and consistently.
5   4      3    Avenues to deal with non-compliance exist and obtain timely and fair decisions.


        (Note: the analysis of this section makes the assumption that the indicator talks about “state
        land” rather than “public land” in the context of Afghanistan.)
        There are five possibilities of state land transactions:
            1. Transfer to other government entities – ARAZI transfers state land to other governmental
               entities based on their request
            2. Exchange – ARAZI provides an exchange of private land in one area with the state land in
               desired area based on request. The private land is exchanged for state land with the same
               grade. When same grade land is not available in desired area, the value of the acquired
               land has to match the value of the original land. Monthly, ARAZI receives 7 - 10 requests
               for exchange.

            3. Donation – ARAZI allocates the land for donation based on the Presidential Decree. In
               comparison to distribution, where minimal prices for distributed land are set, donations are
               free of charge.
            4. Lease – these transactions will be discussed in detail in this section of this report.
            5. Sale/Distribution – there is ambiguity in the Afghan legal framework about the sale of state
               land (see below). For distribution purposes, ARAZI allocates the land based on the
               Presidential Decree and the respective ministries are responsible for the actual
               distribution.
        The sale of state land was banned by Presidential Decree 99 in 2002, including virgin and arid land
        for housing and all other purposes.17 However, despite the ban on state land sales prescribed by
        this decree, the LML enacted in 2008 allows for both selling and leasing of state land and provides
        guidelines and procedures. However, state land is sometimes sold for investment and not always in
        an open and transparent manner. Of particular interest are the transactions of Afghanistan
        Investment Support Agency (AISA), established as a part of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
        The ministry can request state land from ARAZI to be transferred to AISA, which then sells it to
        investors. The legality of these transactions remains unclear.
        The leases of the state land are a major venue for providing large tracks of land to investors.
        ARAZI is responsible for managing the leases and ensuring that the requirements of the LML are
        observed. The bidding for contracts goes through public auction, which is announced publically and
        the process starts ideally after at least three bidders show interest. If there are not at least three
        applicants after the determined bidding deadlines, the auction is re-advertised at least two times.
        If after a third announcement less than three bidders have expressed interest, the process
        continues with the existing number of bidders. However, this does not always happen in reality
        and sometimes the ARAZI Land Lease Procedures are not fully followed, making the transparency
        on paper unfulfilled in the reality. Additionally, the results of land valuation are not made public,
        further compromising the transparency of land lease processes.
        Land lease prices are determined either through the valuation commission established based on
        Art. 69 of LML 2008, or, if this larger commission cannot be established, based on the type, grade
        (quality) and size of land by the smaller Leasing Committee comprised of local representatives of
        ARAZI, MoF (Mustofiat) and district administration representative. Although provisions stated in
        the Afghan legal framework set clear procedures for the land valuation, delays in assessing the
        land and setting price is an issue as the members of the valuation delegation often take time to
        present themselves. Sometimes it takes longer than one year to get the lease contract signed off
        on by both parties despite the fact that ARAZI has reduced the number of steps. Taking into
        account the lack of clarity on when the larger commission based on Art. 69 of LML 2008 should be
        formed; the market value of the land is not always taken into account. Additionally, due to the
        high level of corruption in Afghanistan, powerful strongmen and public officials at times put

        17 See art. 1 of the presidential decree #99



                                                           19
      pressure on the valuation committee to decrease the value of the land. Finally, the results of the
      valuation are not publicly accessible creating transparency issues within the process, providing the
      room for setting the lease price value irrespective of the market price.
      The LML 2008 stipulates that any failure to comply contractual obligations will result in contract
      termination. LML also stipulates that ARAZI monitor the progress of land development, which is
      under lease contract every six months. 18 In practice, however, there is no regular monitoring taking
      place. In very rare cases ARAZI performs monitoring every six months due to the lacking human
      resources, financial capacity and bad security situation is some parts of Afghanistan. The lack of
      proper and regular monitoring creates space for corruption and illegal practices.
      Policy Recommendations:
             •   The possibility for state land sales should be clarified through the Cabinet Regulation
                 clarifying current legal provisions on this matter. Clear categorisation should be developed
                 based on which the restrictions on transferability will be applied.
             •   The status of AISA and its activities should be clarified by clear rules of engagement
                 interlinked with ARAZI Investment Policy.
             •   Devising mechanism for assessing performance of members of the valuation commission,
                 with poor performance being addressed immediately.
             •   Addressing corruption in land valuation process.
             •   The results of land valuation for land lease purposes and the information about the land
                 leases for various projects particularly where it concerns the public should be made
                 publicly available.
             •   Establishing clear monitoring system of application of lease contracts and benefit-sharing
                 mechanisms, with participation of local communities.


      2.6.       Public Provision of Land Information, Registry and Cadastre
PANEL 6: Public Provision of Land Information: Registry and Cadastre
LGI 1: Mechanisms for Recognition of Rights
              Land possession by the poor can be formalised in line with local norms in an
6    1 1
              efficient and transparent process.
6    1 2 Non-documentary evidence is effectively used to help establish rights.
6    1 3 Long-term unchallenged possession is formally recognised.
              First-time recording of rights on demand includes proper safeguards and access is
6    1 4
              not restricted by high fees.
6    1 5 First-time registration does not entail significant informal fees.
LGI 2: Completeness of the Land Registry
6    2 1 Total cost of recording a property transfer is low.
6    2 2 Information held in records is linked to maps that reflect current reality.
6    2 3 All relevant private encumbrances are recorded.
6    2 4 All relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded.
6    2 5 There is a timely response to requests for accessing registry records.
6    2 6 The registry is searchable.
6    2 7 Land information records are easily accessed.
LGI 3: Reliability of Registry Information
              Information in public registries is synchronised to ensure integrity of rights and
6    3 1
              reduce transaction cost.
6    3 2 Registry information is up-to-date and reflects ground reality.
LGI 4: Cost-effectiveness and Sustainability of Land Administration Services
              The registry is financially sustainable through fee collection to finance its
6    4 1
              operations.
6    4 2 Investment in land administration is sufficient to cope with demand for high

      18   See LML Art.67.3.



                                                         20
              quality services.
LGI 5: Fees are Determined Transparently
              Fees have a clear rationale, their schedule is public, and all payments are
6    5 1
              accounted for.
6    5 2 Informal payments are discouraged.
6    5 3 Service standards are published and regularly monitored.


      The ways of registering the land in Afghanistan (already explained in the section 2.1) has a number
      of shortcomings preventing a considerable portion of the population (including the poor) to have
      their rights recognised. The petty bureaucracy in the form of multiple steps and offices creates
      opportunities for corruption and defers the poor to proceed with the registration process. This
      lengthy and time-consuming process can be expedited by informal payments; however, people who
      cannot afford or refuse to engage in corrupt practices have to follow the proper procedure, which
      can take over a year to finalise.
      Furthermore, only 34% of land was surveyed in Afghanistan. From 1965 to 1978, the state surveyed
      state and private agricultural and barren lands (deserts, pastures, forests) covering approximately
      30% of Afghan lands 19 . Land surveying was put to a halt after the land reforms by Democratic
      Republic of Afghanistan. During the communist regime (1978-1992), surveying was only available on
      demand for land clearance and resolution of land conflict purposes. During the transitional Islamic
      State of Afghanistan the surveying process was suspended based on Presidential Decree 99 of 2003.
      Following this decree cadastral survey activities were carried out only based on official request of
      ministries and government institutions, which had obtained presidential orders (approximately 4%).
      Finally, Afghanistan does not have one single registry so the information is scattered across various
      registries with different ministries and agencies (such as Principal Book of Private and State Land at
      ARAZI, Deeds Registration Book in courts, Land Statistics Registration book at the Cadastral
      Department, Land and Property Taxation Book at MoF, Safayi tax registration book at the
      municipalities) with only limited synchronisation. This compromises the reliability and access to the
      land information.
      Policy Recommendations:
          •   Different registries in Afghanistan should be mainstreamed and interlinked (more details
              below) in order to prevent overlaps, outdated and missing information. ARAZI should be
              established as “one-stop-shop” for registering the land (both within and outside of the
              Master Plan): The land clearance process Tasfia should be done on large scale and should
              always include the members of the Cadastral Department to conduct the survey. Then the
              land is recorded to ARAZI Principal Books and the formal title deed is given to the owner.
              Technical and financial support to ARAZI’s pilot project in Herat that, if successful, will be
              extended to all 34 provinces, should be accorded. This process should be later
              computerised to allow for the inter linkages with other registries such as in courts and MoF
              tax books.
          •   An independent monitoring body should be created that will monitor the process of land
              formalisation in order to maintain the process effective and transparent.
          •   In-house procedures and anti-corruption policies of ARAZI should be reviewed to prevent
              lengthy and costly process of land registration.
          •   ARAZI’s plans, based on their Operational Strategy , to establish national comprehensive
              cadastral registration programs should be technically and financially supported.
          •   Cadastral records have to be connected to both ARAZI Principal Books and courts title deed
              registration in consistent manner. Furthermore, uniform and standard format of circular
              form including the verification of the Cadastre should be developed stating all the personal
              information of the buyer and seller, photos, signatures (or fingerprints), physical
              specification of land etc.




      19Cadastral   Survey Statistics Report, 1978.



                                                       21
          •   As an interim measure, all cadastral maps should be scanned to expedite the manual search
              happening at present in the Cadastral Department; however, with the aim to be later
              included in the computerised system.


      2.7.    Land Valuation and Taxation
PANEL 7: Land Valuation and Taxation
LGI 1: Transparency of Valuations
7    1 1 There is a clear process of property valuation.
7    1 2 Valuation rolls are publicly accessible.
LGI 2: Collection Efficiency
7    2 1 Exemptions from property taxes payment are justified and transparent.
7    2 2 All property holders liable to pay property tax are listed on the tax roll.
7    2 3 Assessed property taxes are collected.
7    2 4 Receipts from property tax exceed the cost of collection.


      In Afghanistan, there are only four instances, when the land valuation through the establishment of
      impartial commission is used - during the acquisition of the private land by the state in order to
      estimate the amount of the compensation, when transferring the state land from one governmental
      entity to another, when leasing the state land to the private investors and when estimating land
      and property transaction tax.
      However, this process if often mirrored by a number of shortcomings such as that the process of
      land valuation at times does not happen with each transaction, the commission takes longer than
      one month to set the price, the whole process can take more than a year (in cases where an
      individual’s land has been appropriated for state projects), s o by the time the individual is
      compensated, the compensation amount is less than the current market value, real estate dealers
      are not providing accurate assessment of the price, and corruption and strongmen and powerful
      individuals whose economic interests are at stake are putting pressure on the commission so that
      the set price benefits them. In none of these cases is the land valuation used for the land/property
      taxation purposes. The calculation for taxation purposes is determined according to the fixed
      calculation schemes based on the size and the grade of land. The market values of the land are not
      used in this procedure.
      Although the land valuation happens in certain instances, there are no legal provisions in
      Afghanistan that would require making the valuation rolls public. State organisations can provide
      information regarding the value of land or property upon request as long as an individual has a legal
      basis for such a request, such as a land dispute case that he/she is involved in.
      In terms of the tax collection, there are four types of tax collections in Afghanistan connected to
      land and property: land tax (from agricultural land both in rural and urban areas), Safayi tax (from
      all the properties only in urban areas), tax on the transfer of property and land and tax on rents.
      There is no property tax collected in rural areas.
      The tax collection is, however, mirrored with numerous shortcomings, one of which is the fact that
      the tax rolls are often out-dated. Most of the property and land owners are not registered with MoF
      taxation provincial offices because they didn’t wish to go through the formal procedures to register
      their land, which requires payments and taxation, or the information sharing between courts,
      ARAZI and MoF is not happening in consistent manner. Furthermore, the capacity of the MoF
      provincial and district offices to update records and to collect taxes is limited. There is not always
      enough staff to pursue cases of tax evasion. In some areas, there are no MoF district offices at all,
      either due to the lack of security or simply because such offices are not formed yet. This means
      that in certain areas the land transactions are not recorded and land tax books are not modified.
      Since not all property holders are registered, collecting taxes from these property owners faces
      challenges. Taking into account the scale of urban informality reaching an estimated 70% of Afghan
      cities20, not all taxes that are supposed to be paid in reality actually are.

      20“Managing   Land Mobilizing Revenue.”




                                                       22
     Policy Recommendations:
         •   There are four instances when the valuation of land through the commission (of different
             members and sizes) is conducted. Mainstreaming of land valuation for different purposes
             through the Cabinet Resolution bringing all valuation practices under one regulation should
             be performed and the land valuation process should happen regularly, with each
             transaction.
         •   A clear mechanism should be developed for the activities of the various valuation
             commissions to expedite the valuation process. Additionally, performance-based
             evaluations should be introduced for the members and a corresponding monitoring
             mechanism should be established to verify the compliance.
         •   Land valuation for acquisition should be done before the acquisition process is announced
             to prevent rapid increase of the land price and possible land grabbing by powerful
             individuals.
         •   Valuation rolls should be compiled in one national database and made public only after the
             adequate actions against land grabbing are implemented to prevent empowering the land
             usurpers from benefiting from this action.
         •   A study should be conducted on the current state of tax collection in Afghanistan and its
             deficiencies. Clear policy recommendations and guidelines should be devised to establish a
             well-functioning system that is suitable for Afghan context. Lessons learned from other
             countries should be used as a guideline.
         •   The Land Taxation Law of 1988 should be reviewed, drafted by MoF and approved by MoJ
             taking the findings of the study into account.
         •   Formalisation of largely informal land tenure in Afghanistan is a prerequisite for successful
             tax collection efforts (see the sections above for more details on land tenure recognition)
             together with the improvement of security situation.
         •   Formal mechanism has to be developed for courts and ARAZI to inform MoF about the
             changes in ownership and land sizes and adequate enforcement mechanism have to be
             devised aiming to pursue possible tax evaders.


     2.8.    Dispute Resolution
PANEL 8:Dispute Resolution
LGI 1:Assignment of Responsibility
8    1 1 There is clear assignment of responsibility for conflict resolution.
8    1 2 Conflict resolution mechanisms are accessible to the public.
             Mutually accepted agreements reached through informal dispute resolution
8    1 3
             systems are encouraged.
             There is an accessible, affordable and timely process for appealing disputed
8    1 4
             rulings.
LGI 2: The Share of Land Affected by Pending Conflicts is Low and Decreasing
8    2 1 Land disputes constitute a small proportion of cases in the formal legal system.
8    2 2 Conflicts in the formal system are resolved in a timely manner.
8    2 3 There are few long-standing (> 5 years) land conflicts.


     Afghanistan’s court system enjoys competence to address land disputes. However, alleged
     corruption in courts and, consequently, costliness is most commonly cited among Afghan population
     preventing them from reaching out to the formal system. Although notable improvements were
     made in Afghanistan’s formal justice system after 2001, the inform al non-state justice sector still
     handles what appears to be the majority of disputes in the country.
     Even though the informal justice system is widely used in Afghanistan, it does not enjoy full legal
     recognition and the evidence and rulings are shared between state formal mechanisms such as
     Huqooq and courts and formal mechanism and non-state dispute resolution venues only on an ad



                                                      23
     hoc basis. Often it happens that the court decides the case differently than the shura or jirga,
     creating obstacles for the implementability of any decision.
     Recently a new wave of interest in the possible linkages of formal and informal justice system has
     arisen among Afghan political circles and international community. The debate started around the
     possibility of the revival of the draft “Law on Dispute Resolution, Shuras and Jirgas” that was
     initiated in 2010 and is still pending at the Ministry of Justice. Secondly, the first draft of Land
     Dispute Resolution Regulation for ARAZI, supported by USIP, is currently being drafted. However,
     the outcome of the current debate on the possibilities to link formal and informal justice system
     still remains to be seen, particularly in relation to the alleged complaints towards informal justice
     system of non-respecting rights of women and minorities.
     The majority of Afghans lack access to conflict resolution mechanisms for land disputes. However,
     the level of access varies dramatically between demographic groups. Adult men of majority
     populations enjoy the greatest degree of access, whether it is to formal or informal justice
     systems. Men from marginalised population groups face additional barriers to accessing conflict
     resolution services. However, women in Afghanistan have extremely limited access to both state
     and non-state dispute resolution forums. In both instances, strong and strictly enforced social
     norms discourage women from approaching any dispute resolution forum.


     Policy Recommendations:
          •   Case Management System (CMS) – implemented by the USAID is already being rolled out,
              however this system needs internet and it does not connect all the conflict resolution
              bodies such as police. The adequate solutions for remote areas should be found to be able
              to benefit from this system. Additionally, the access to this system should be granted to all
              conflict resolution institutions such as Huqooq and ARAZI.
          •   Computer databases such as Oracles that are cheaper and take less time to implement,
              should be considered as an interim measure before fully operational computerised system is
              in place to create a database of all land disputes within each formal conflict resolution
              body’s central office.
          •   Fighting corruption, particularly in courts, should become the priority of the NUG. The
              Anti-Corruption Strategy established by the President Karzai in 2008 should be implemented
              through the stronger engagement of the President himself and increased results-based
              support of the international donor community. Additionally, the past and yet unaddressed
              cases of corruption should be the priority of the Attorney General’s Office.
          •   The auditing capacities of the High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption should be
              increased by the provision of technical and financial support and internal audits should be
              conducted to prevent corruption within formal justice system.
          •   Internal audits of all land administration institutions should be conducted on regular basis.
          •   The law devising more effective linkages between formal and informal conflict resolution
              mechanisms (taking into account lessons learned from projects like NRC’s Information and
              Legal Assistance Centres (ILACs), PEACE, LC Project and USIP/ARAZI sponsored pilot) should
              be broadly and inclusively consulted with the public and approved 21.
          •   Mechanisms to encourage women to approach formal justice system should be devised
              while sensitising the rest of the community about the right of women to equal access to
              justice.


     2.9.     Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies
PANEL 9: Institutional Arrangements and Policies
LGI 1: Clarity of Mandates and Practice

     21
       As mentioned in this report already, there are currently two draft laws with this objective at the MoJ
     awaiting the decision. The effort to adequately publicly consult the content of both draft laws is of utmost
     importance as the enactment of such law is a highly sensitive and political issue.



                                                         24
              Land policy formulation, implementation and arbitration are separated to avoid
9    1    1
              conflict of interest.
              Responsibilities of the ministries and agencies dealing with land do not overlap
9    1   2
              (horizontal overlap).
9    1   3 Administrative (vertical) overlap is avoided.
              Land right and use information is shared by public bodies; key parts are regularly
9    1   4
              reported on and publicly accessible.
              Overlaps of rights (based on tenure typology) are minimal and do not cause
9    1   5
              friction or dispute.
              Ambiguity in institutional mandates (based on institutional map) does not cause
9    1   6
              problems.
LGI 2: Equity and Non-discrimination in the Decision-making Process
              Land policies and regulations are developed in a participatory manner involving all
9    2   1
              relevant stakeholders.
              Land policies address equity and poverty reduction goals; progress towards these
9    2   2
              is publicly monitored.
              Land policies address ecological and environmental goals; progress towards these
9    2   3
              is publicly monitored.
              The implementation of land policy is costed, matched with benefits and
9    2   4
              adequately resourced.
9    2   5 There is regular and public reporting indicating progress in policy implementation.
              Land policies help to improve land use by low-income groups and those who
9    2   6
              experienced injustice.
9    2   7 Land policies proactively and effectively reduce future disaster risk.


      The separation of land policy formulation, implementation and arbitration in Afghanistan is
      relatively well ensured. However two particular issues deserve the attention.
      With the decision of Council of Ministers 23 of 2009 and 11 of May 2013, ARAZI is aiming to become
      an independent “one-stop-shop” for land issues in Afghanista n. However, concentrating all the
      responsibilities for land issues in ARAZI, although making the administrative procedures more
      effective and management of land issues more coordinated, risks blurring the lines between land
      policy formulation, implementation and arbitration. This is of a particular concern in relation to
      the land registration and land dispute resolution. ARAZI is aiming to be responsible for all the land
      registration in the country through promoting itself to a “one -stop-shop” for Afghan la nd issues as
      well as aiming to be responsible for land dispute resolution, while ARAZI’s Department of
      Addressing can already informally resolve the dispute, which is then recorded at ARAZI. One has to
      be careful not to create a similar conflict of interest such as one already existent in courts
      (responsible for both conflict adjudication and land registration).
      The National Land Policy was adopted in 2007 after extensive but informal consultations with
      public institutions over a two-year period 22 . Although the contents of the policy are largely
      considered to hold up to international best practices 23, most of the pledges of the National Land
      Policy of 2007 have not yet been ‘absorbed’ 24 into the legal framework of the country.
      One example of the provisions meeting international standards is the Policy’s pro-poor and equality
      provisions. However, while the policy is generally intended to alleviate poverty and increase equity
      among citizens of Afghanistan, the goals of the policy have not been sufficiently incorporated into
      the legal framework, nor has the monitoring mechanism put in place to measure those.
      Policy Recommendations:
           •    The role of ARAZI as a dispute resolution body has to be decided, while making sure not to
                replicate the same conflict of interest as currently courts inhibit (being the issuer of title
                deeds as well as the adjudicator of land conflicts)



      22Wily, “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 9.
      23Ibid,9.
      24Wily, “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 1.




                                                         25
   •   The draft Land Dispute Resolution Regulation prepared by ARAZI, which includes provisions
       on appellate procedures establishing the district level commission as a first instance and
       the provincial level commission as an appellate stage, should be promulgated and
       effectively implemented taking into account the new draft law on Shuras and Jirgas.
   •   Creation of centralised (gradually) computerised system at ARAZI as “one-stop-shop” for
       land registration and information (as opposed to the land registration at courts) to
       mainstream the access to land information.
   •   The current draft of LML 2014 should be promptly ratified by the Afghan Parliament and
       enforced by the Afghan National Unity Government because it builds on the National Land
       Policy 2007. If necessary, the law should be adopted through the Presidential Decree.
   •   The Plans of ARAZI to conduct a conference on Land Policy 2007 and its possible
       amendments should be supported.



3. Conclusion

Various stages of LGAF implementation identified a number of issues that require immediate
attention. Clear policy recommendations and responsible institutions for implementing these
recommendations were also identified to provide the ways forward on each of the pressing issues.
Monitoring indicators of success/failure of the approaches were devised as well. All of this
information was put in one Policy Matrix (section 11 of this report), which will serve as a Roadmap
for Afghan policy-makers and international community to improve the land governance in
Afghanistan.

Based on the discussions during the Policy Dialogue, the participants suggested the following steps
for the future implementation of LGAF recommendations:

   1. Follow-up meetings with ARAZI to internalize the Policy Matrix document
   2. Presentation of the document to the High Council on Land and Water chaired by the
      President by ARAZI
   3. Review of the measuring indicators and the capacities of the institutions to perform the
      monitoring. If needed, new measuring system should be devised (lead by ARAZI with the
      participation of all related land administration institutions).
   4. Review conference of the progress of the Policy Matrix implementation conducted by ARAZI
      every 6 months




                                                26
4. Introduction
In the past decade, land and control of resources have been a significant aspect of government and
donor concerns in Afghanistan. In the light of social transformations, increased demographic
pressure, displacement, and economic evolutions, land is indeed more than ever at the heart of
economic and social considerations. At the same time, the legal framework for land governance
remains incoherent in many aspects and ill-suited to the Afghan reality, and administrative
structures with responsibility over land both lack clarity in repartition of responsibilities, and
appear under-capacitated to carry-out their mandate.
Despite efforts of the Afghan government and donors to reform land governance and clarify land
tenure, recent research showed major challenges are yet to be addressed due to poor land
management and a legal framework ill-suited to the reality faced by the majority of Afghans. 25
Customary rights and collective ownership of land, a major pattern of land holding across the
country, remain out of the scope of the legal framework. Deregulated practices of land acquisition
and transfer, land grabbing 26 and poor management of urban expansion have increased tensions
surrounding land and further blurred an already murky land tenure situation. The status of state
and public land also remains opaque. Attempts to recognize private property and clarify the land
tenure situation of holders settled on government land has barely gone beyond wishful thinking,
with Presidential Decree 83 (2003) even reinforcing government capture of off-farm land by making
government land the default form of land holding. Finally, the majority of Afghans still do not hold
valid documentation for land ownership. Most land holders probably have no documents at all, with
customary documentation unrecognized by the state filling some of the gap.
Acknowledging these problems, donors and the Afghan Government have pushed for reforms in land
administration and governance. As noted by Alden Wily 27 among others, most of these, however,
remained ineffective. The National Land Policy (NLP) of 2007, designed to set property norms and
renew land governance has been unfruitful and was mostly ignored in setting the government’s
subsequent course of action. The four primary bodies of Law governing land tenure, the Civil Code,
Presidential Decree 83, the Shari’a, and the current Land Management Law, amended in 2008, and
under constant redraft since, contradict each other in several aspects and insufficiently address the
reality of land governance in Afghanistan. Furthermore, supplementary land –related legislation is
currently under draft and yet remains to be implemented.
Though ongoing amendments are a positive sign of a will to reform the current system, significant
effort needs to be put into addressing the above mentioned issues and structural problems. That
being said, the emergence of the Afghan Land Authority (ARAZI), whose goals closely reflect NLP
priorities to facilitate reform of land laws; set up a comprehensive, computerized database of land
holdings; provide a “one-stop shop” for the leasing of government lands for investment; and
establish an efficient, simplified land registration system 28; might represent an opportunity for
reform better tailored to the current reality of land tenure and conflicts in Afghanistan.




25Liz Alden Wily, “Land, People and the State in Afghanistan, 2002-2012,” (Kabul: Afghanistan Research and
Evaluation Unit [AREU]/United States Institute for Peace [USIP], 2013); Yohannes Gebremedhin, “Land Tenure
and Administration in Rural Afghanistan: Legal Aspects,” (Kabul: Asian Development Bank [ADB]/Department
for International Development [DFID], 2007).
26 Given the wide variety of situations that communities can regard as “land -grabbing,” TLO does not here

define the term. Rather, we treat “land-grabbing” as that perceived to be land-grabby by communities – as it
is this perception, rather than any a priori definition, that shapes individual and community response and
action preferences.
27See, e.g., Wily, “Land, People and the State.”
28 Wily, “Land, People and the State,” 16-18.




                                                    27
5. Methodology
Governance has been be defined as “the manner in which public officials and institutions
acquire and exercise the authority to shape public policy and provide public goods and
services” (World Bank 2007, 67) 29 . As far as land governance is concerned, this definition
includes the ways property rights to land (held by groups or individuals) are defined and can be
exchanged and transformed; the ways in which public oversight over land use, land
management, and taxation are exercised; the types of land that is state owned and the way
such land is managed, acquired, and disposed of; the nature and quality of land ownership
information available to the public and the ease with which it can be accessed or modified;
and the ways in which disputes are resolved and conflict is managed.

Within the Afghan historical context deficiencies in these dimensions of land governance have
resulted in poorly managed processes of urban expansion, concentration of poverty in slums,
lack of clarity on land rights, and resulting conflicts over land. These issues underline the need
to strengthen land governance to create the preconditions for environmentally and socially sustainable
investments and appropriate economic development30.

The Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF), developed by the World Bank in partnership
with FAO, IFAD, IFPRI, UN Habitat, the African Union, and numerous bilateral partners, is a
diagnostic tool to assess the status of land governance at country level using a participatory process
that draws systematically on existing evidence and local expertise rather than on outsiders. There
are nine key general areas of a country’s good land governance that LGAF focuses on. These areas
have traditionally often been dealt with in separation from each other. LGAF aims to bring these
into one framework. The areas are (1) Land Rights Recognition (2) Rights to Forest and Common
Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations; (3) Urban Land Use, Planning, and Development (4) Public
Land Management (5) Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investors, (6) Public Provision of Land
Information: Registry and Cadastre, (7) Land Valuation and Taxation, (8) Dispute Resolution and (9)
Institutional Arrangements and Policies. For these nine focus areas, a series of land governance
indicators, each divided into several dimensions, have been selected based on international
experience. For each dimension, pre-coded statements are given for scoring (from best practice = A
to weak practice = D) again based on international experience. In the section 9 the findings of this
study will be presented based in each of the nine areas and the scores will be provided based on
the consensus of the technical experts on land governance in Afghanistan. While the section 9
serves as an assessment of the above mentioned subject-areas, the next section will provide the
conclusions and recommendations.

The LGAF process helps to establish a consensus and priority actions for these areas on:

3. Gaps in existing evidence, areas for regulatory or institutional change
4. Piloting of new approaches
5. Interventions to improve land governance on a broader scale (e.g. by strengthening land rights
   and improving their enforcement);
6. Criteria to assess the effectiveness of these measures.

Undertaking a LGAF has a number of benefits. In particular, it:

     •   Helps facilitate communication and collaboration between different Government
         Departments as well as the private sector, civil society, and academics to agree on key gaps
         and priority actions in the land sector as a basis for specific actions to foster change and in
         doing so establish a reference group of qualified and interested stakeholders with a shared
         understanding of the challenges of land governance and ways to address them;

29
  For the full list of technical concepts’ definitions please see Annex VIII.
30
  The previous two paragraphs were suggested by David Stanfield, land governance expert with extensive
experience in Afghanistan and other countries, currently serving as Professor Emeritus at Land Tenure Center,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.
.


                                                     28
  •   Documents good practice against global standards and allow broad dissemination, evaluation,
      and eventually up-scaling of innovative approaches to improving land governance; and
  •   Puts in place a structure (and associated institutional arrangements) to monitor progress in
      the quality of land governance and the effective service delivery over time that can
      increasingly be used to inform policy decisions and allocation of resources. Key land
      indicators are being identified and tested, which can be monitored using administrative data.

Implementation of LGAF happens in a number of steps:

  •   Preparation: This phase includes review of the LGAF framework to identify any areas where
      customization to country conditions may be needed as well as potential data availability,
      identification of the team of expert investigators and panel members from a wide range of
      sectors/stakeholders, formulation of a time plan; and enhancing government buy-in.
  •   Background documentation (nine panel reports): To provide the common basis of information
      that is indispensable as a basis of consensus on rankings or priority actions three sets written
      outputs are needed.
  •   Expert/subject matter specialist panels: Intensive work sessions of between half a day and a
      day per topic consisting of 5-8 subject matter experts and users of land systems, from
      different backgrounds. They discuss each of the dimensions in detail to arrive at a consensus
      ranking and agreed policy priorities.
  •   Synthesis country report: All material (background documentation, tenure typology,
      institutional map, background reports and the panel minutes) is synthesized in a well-
      structured report to be shared widely.
  •   Country level validation and policy workshop: The Country report is reviewed by experts to
      provide input. These results are incorporated and the report is presented for a National
      workshop to have results validated and prioritize policy conclusions and associated
      monitoring indicators for presentation to key policy-makers during a policy workshop. Ideally
      this will result in agreement on follow up actions some of which can be supported by
      government and other partners.

Adapting the LGAF to the Country Situation
Due to a number of specificities of Afghan context, some of the indicators and terminology had to
be adapted in order to be able to capture the realities of land governance in Afghanistan. These
include mainly the key areas dealing with the public land and its allocation to private interests
(please see the detailed modifications in the Annex II.)
In addition to the number of adjustments in terms of the substance, modifications have been made
to the methodology of the project itself. Originally the expert investigators were nominated from
the pool of national and international researchers on the topic. However, this approach was
changed after the beginning of the project and Afghan practitioners of land governance were
chosen to develop the panel reports. Lack of writing skills and often-limited knowledge of land
governance issues in Afghanistan created a number of problems and delays to the project. To
counterbalance the delays, it was decided to skip the development of background reports and
separate briefing notes and only the longer panel reports were prepared. From those, after the
panel workshops, the final LGAF report was developed.

Government Engagement
Government representatives were engaged on regular basis throughout the whole duration of the
project by providing their inputs to the content of the panel reports, approving their final versions
(done mainly by ARAZI) and providing the final validation for the final LGAF report. Additionally,
number of participants for panel workshops, technical validation workshop and policy dialogue
were suggested by government employees and experts on land governance.
Five out of nine expert investigators tasked with the development of the panel reports were
current employees of the state institutions dealing with land governance (such as ARAZI and MAIL),
four remaining were previous employees of the government institutions (such as Cadaster and
AIHRC) and independent experts, all with an extensive experience in land issues. Secondly, the lists
of participants for the panel, technical validation workshops and policy dialogue were developed in
a close partnership with a number of national experts on land governance in Afghanistan, including



                                                 29
the national representatives of the World Bank, government employees and Afghan CSOs (in
particular TLO). Finally, the participation at all three types of workshops organized within this
project was relatively high with the government representatives from various ministries and
governmental agencies such as ARAZI, MAIL, Cadaster, MUDA, various municipalities and national
and international NGOs. It is worth to mention, that the participation of the government
representatives was higher than the NGOs’ partners, with the highest participation of ARAZI 31. In
the technical validation workshop and policy dialogue these ministries and government agencies
were present: Presidential Office, ARAZI, Kabul and Kandahar Municipality, Afghanistan Investment
Support Agency (AISA), MAIL, NEPA, MoF, Ministry of Mines and Petroleum (MoMP), AIHRC, Ministry
of Border and Tribal Affairs (MoBTA) and MoJ.
In addition to the official outreach activities, the Country Coordinator often approached personally
MoF, ARAZI, Cadastral Department and MAIL to provide clarifications for certain issues.

From the collection of background data to the Policy Dialogue
Nine experts – Afghan practitioners (the list names and qualifications is in the Annex III)- were
selected for the development of nine panel reports. Semi-structured qualitative interviews, mainly
with the experts from ARAZI, and extensive desk research were used to collect information about
land management in Afghanistan. While some officials were interviewed individually, at times
discussions pertaining to a particular indicator were conducted in groups of two or three officials
who jointly decided on analysis and rating of an indicator. Follow-up interviews were conducted in
Kabul to clarify certain issues and scoring dimensions. The desk research included a review of
Afghan laws and regulations, reports published by NGOs and international organizations and data
collected by the government. Different sources of information, such as official documents,
published literature and interviews with officials, were used as a triangulation technique to ensure
the validity of the information collected. There was a minimal field research conducted, mainly
due to a specific methodology prescribed for this study, however previous AREU research in this
field, as well that of other research organizations was used.
It is important to note that lack of reliable statistics about land management and absence of
surveys covering all the lands in Afghanistan makes it difficult to provide an exact and
comprehensive picture of issues discussed in various indicators. Hence, land experts make
informed estimates based on their work experience in the field. However, in number of cases, lack
of data does not allow making estimations at all. Hence, while this report provides a general
overview of public land management issues, many aspects of this topic need more extensive
surveying.
Nine panel workshops (please see Annex IV or the lists of participants) were organized after the
finalization and translation 32 of all the panel reports to validate the information, acquire new
information on more complex issues and create a debate among technical experts on the issues of
land governance. Despite of various problems 33 during the workshops, they have attracted a
number of experts in the field, hence created a lively debate on certain issues related to land in
Afghanistan.
Based on the panel reports, aide memoires from the panel workshops and follow-up semi-
structured personal interviews the final report was developed, peer-reviewed by two international
experts and validated through the Technical validation workshop (the list of participants is in the
Annex V). Aiming to inform Afghan policy-makers and to create a momentum for a debate on land


31 For example, in most of the panel workshops, often two or three representatives from different
departments of ARAZI were present. This was mainly because the facilitator of all the panel workshops was an
employee of ARAZI, as well as due to the fact that three out of nine expert investigators were working for
ARAZI. Since the expert investigator was always present for the panel discussion, ARAZI often had more than
one representative present. However, at times this could also be contributed to the pro-activity and height
level of knowledge of certain ARAZI employees and the high and unique standing of this organization among
land institutions in Afghanistan (one-stop-shop for land issues in Afghanistan).
32 All nine panel workshops had to be translated to Dari because the majority of the participants at the panel

reports did not speak English.
33 Unwillingness of participants to read and score the corresponding panel report beforehand, limited

knowledge on certain complex issues, tendency to speak in general terms without providing detailed
information, translation discrepancies between Dari and English versions of the reports etc.



                                                     30
governance among Afghan policy circles, the Policy Dialogue was organized at the beginning of
November     2015     (the      list     of      participants    is     in     Annex      VI).




                                             31
      7. Consolidated Scorecard
      Legend:

             Regular scoring as per LGAF indicators
             N/A in Afghanistan or no data
             available
             Divided indicator
             New indicator established

                                                                                                            Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                               Topic                                         A   B C     D
PANEL 1: Land Rights Recognition
LGI 1: Recognition of a continuum of rights
              Individuals' rural land tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in
1 1 1
              practice.
1 1 2 Customary tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in practice.
              Indigenous rights to land and forest are legally recognized and protected in
1 1 3
              practice.
1 1 4 Urban land tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in practice.
LGI 2: Respect for and enforcement of rights
1 2 1 Accessible opportunities for tenure individualization exist.
1 2 2 Individual land in rural areas is recorded and mapped.
1 2 3 Individual land in urban areas is recorded and mapped.
1 2 4 The number of illegal land sales is low.
1 2 5 The number of illegal lease transactions is low.
1 2 6 Women's property rights in lands as accrued by relevant laws are recorded.
1 2 7 Women’sproperty rights to land are equal to those by men.
PANEL 2: Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations
LGI 1: Rights to Forest and Common Lands
              Forests and common lands are clearly identified in law and responsibility for use is
2 1 1
              clearly assigned.
2 1 2 Rural group rights are formally recognized and can be enforced.
              Users' rights to key natural resources on land (incl. fisheries) are legally recognized
2 1 3
              and protected in practice.
              Multiple rights over common land and natural resources on these lands can legally
2 1 4
              coexist.
              Multiple rights over the same plot of land and its resources (e.g. trees) can legally
2 1 5
              coexist.
              Multiple rights over land and mining/other sub-soil resources located on the same
2 1 6
              plot can legally coexist.
2 1 7 Accessible opportunities exist for mapping and recording of group rights.
2 1 8 Boundary demarcation of communal land.
LGI 2: Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
2 2 1 Restrictions regarding rural land use are justified and enforced.
2 2 2 Restrictions on rural land transferability effectively serve public policy objectives.
              Rural land use plans are elaborated/changed via public process and resulting
2 2 3
              burdens are shared.
              Rural lands, the use of which is changed, are swiftly transferred to the destined
2 2 4
              use.
2 2 5 Rezoning of rural land use follows a public process that safeguards existing rights.
              For protected rural land use (forest, pastures, wetlands, national parks, etc.) plans
2 2 6
              correspond to actual use.
              Rural lands, the use of which is identified for rehabilitation, are swiftly transferred
2 2 7
              to the destined use.
PANEL 3: Urban Land Use, Planning, and Development
LGI 1: Restrictions on Rights



                                                         32
              Restrictions on urban land ownership/transfer effectively serve public policy
3   1   1
              objectives.
              Restrictions on urban land use (disaster risk) effectively serve public policy
3 1 2
              objectives.
LGI 2: Transparency of Land Use Restrictions
              Process of urban expansion/infrastructure development process is transparent and
3    2 1
              respects existing rights.
              Changes in urban land use plans are based on a clear public process and input by
3    2 2
              all stakeholders.
              Approved requests for change in urban land use are swiftly followed by
3    2 3
              development on these parcels of land.
LGI 3: Efficiency in the Urban Land Use Planning Process
              Policy to ensure delivery of low-cost housing and services exists and is
3    3 1
              progressively implemented.
3    3 2 Land use planning effectively guides urban spatial expansion in the largest city.
              Land use planning effectively guides urban development in the four next largest
3    3 3
              cities.
3    3 4 Planning processes are able to cope with urban growth.
LGI 4: Speed and Predictability of Enforcement of Restricted Land Uses
              Provisions for residential building permits are appropriate, affordable and
3    4 1
              complied with.
              A building permit for a residential dwelling can be obtained quickly and at a low
3    4 2
              cost.
LGI 5: Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
3    5 1 Formalization of urban residential housing is feasible and affordable.
              In cities with informal tenure, a viable strategy exists for tenure security,
3    5 2
              infrastructure, and housing.
              A condominium regime allows effective management and recording of urban
3    5 3
              property.
PANEL 4: Public Land Management
LGI 1: Identification of Public Land and Clear Management
              Criteria for public land ownership are clearly defined and assigned to the right
4    1 1
              level of government.
4    1 2 There is a complete recording of public land.
4    1 3 Information on public land is publicly accessible.
              The management responsibility for different types of public land is unambiguously
4    1 4
              assigned.
              Responsible public institutions have sufficient resources for their land
4    1 5
              management responsibilities.
              All essential information on public land allocations to private interests is publicly
4    1 6
              accessible.
LGI 2: Justification and Time-Efficiency of Acquisition Processes
4    2 1 There is minimal transfer of acquired land to private interests.
4    2 2 Acquired land is transferred to destined use in a timely manner.
              The threat of land acquisition does not lead to pre-emptive action by private
4    2 3
              parties.
LGI 3: Transparency and Fairness of Acquisition Procedures
              Compensation is provided for the acquisition of all rights regardless of their
4    3 1
              recording status.
4    3 2 Land use change resulting in selective loss of rights there is compensated for.
4    3 3 Acquired owners are compensated promptly.
4    3 4 There are independent and accessible avenues for appeal against acquisition.
4    3 5 Timely decisions are made regarding complaints about acquisition.
PANEL 5: Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investors
LGI 1: Transfer of Public Land to Private Use Follows a Clear, Competitive Process and Payments are Collected
5    1 1 Public land transactions are conducted in an open transparent manner.



                                                     33
5    1   2    Payments for public leases are collected.
5    1   3    Public land is transacted at market prices unless guided by equity objectives.
5    1   4    The public captures benefits arising from changes in permitted land use.
              Policy to improve equity in asset access and use by the poor exists, is implemented
5    1 5
              effectively and monitored.
LGI2: Private Investment Strategy
              Land to be made available to investors is identified transparently and publicly, in
5    2 1
              agreement with right holders.
              Investments are selected based on economic, socio-cultural and environmental
5    2 2
              impacts in an open process.
              Public institutions transferring land to investors are clearly identified and regularly
5    2 3
              audited.
              Public bodies transferring land to investors share information and coordinate to
5    2 4
              minimize and resolve overlaps (incl. sub-soil).
              Compliance with contractual obligations is regularly monitored and remedial
5    2 5
              action taken if needed.
              Safeguards effectively reduce the risk of negative effects from large scale land-
5    2 6
              related investments.
              The scope for resettlement is clearly circumscribed and procedures exist to deal
5    2 7
              with it in line with best practice.
LGI3: Policy Implementation is Effective, Consistent and Transparent
              Investors provide sufficient information to allow rigorous evaluation of proposed
5    3 1
              investments.
5    3 2 Approval of investment plans follows a clear process with reasonable timelines.
              Right holders and investors negotiate freely and directly with full access to
5    3 3
              relevant information.
5    3 4 Contractual provisions regarding benefit sharing are publicly disclosed.

LGI 4: Contracts Involving Public Land are Public and Accessible
              Information on spatial extent and duration of approved concessions is publicly
5    4    1
              available.
              Compliance with safeguards on concessions is monitored and enforced effectively
5    4    2
              and consistently.
5    4    3 Avenues to deal with non-compliance exist and obtain timely and fair decisions.
PANEL 6: Public Provision of Land Information: Registry and Cadastre
LGI 1: Mechanisms for Recognition of Rights
              Land possession by the poor can be formalized in line with local norms in an
6    1    1
              efficient and transparent process.
6    1    2 Non-documentary evidence is effectively used to help establish rights.
6    1    3 Long-term unchallenged possession is formally recognized.
              First-time recording of rights on demand includes proper safeguards and access is
6    1    4
              not restricted by high fees.
6    1    5 First-time registration does not entail significant informal fees.
LGI 2: Completeness of the Land Registry
6    2    1 Total cost of recording a property transfer is low.
6    2    2 Information held in records is linked to maps that reflect current reality.
6    2    3 All relevant private encumbrances are recorded.
6    2    4 All relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded.
6    2    5 There is a timely response to requests for accessing registry records.
6    2    6 The registry is searchable.
6    2    7 Land information records are easily accessed.
LGI 3: Reliability of Registry Information
              Information in public registries is synchronized to ensure integrity of rights and
6    3    1
              reduce transaction cost.
6    3    2 Registry information is up-to-date and reflects ground reality.
LGI 4: Cost-effectiveness and Sustainability of Land Administration Services



                                                         34
              The registry is financially sustainable through fee collection to finance its
6    4   1
              operations.
              Investment in land administration is sufficient to cope with demand for high
6    4    2
              quality services.
LGI 5: Fees are Determined Transparently
              Fees have a clear rationale, their schedule is public, and all payments are
6    5    1
              accounted for.
6    5    2 Informal payments are discouraged.
6    5    3 Service standards are published and regularly monitored.
PANEL 7: Land Valuation and Taxation
LGI 1: Transparency of Valuations
7    1    1 There is a clear process of property valuation.
7    1    2 Valuation rolls are publicly accessible.
LGI 2: Collection Efficiency
7    2    1 Exemptions from property taxes payment are justified and transparent.
7    2    2 All property holders liable to pay property tax are listed on the tax roll.
7    2    3 Assessed property taxes are collected.
7    2    4 Receipts from property tax exceed the cost of collection.
PANEL 8:Dispute Resolution
LGI 1:Assignment of Responsibility
8    1    1 There is clear assignment of responsibility for conflict resolution.
8    1    2 Conflict resolution mechanisms are accessible to the public.
              Mutually accepted agreements reached through informal dispute resolution
8    1    3
              systems are encouraged.
              There is an accessible, affordable and timely process for appealing disputed
8    1    4
              rulings.
LGI 2: The Share of Land Affected by Pending Conflicts is Low and Decreasing
8    2    1 Land disputes constitute a small proportion of cases in the formal legal system.
8    2    2 Conflicts in the formal system are resolved in a timely manner.
8    2    3 There are few long-standing (> 5 years) land conflicts.
PANEL 9: Institutional Arrangements and Policies
LGI 1: Clarity of Mandates and Practice
              Land policy formulation, implementation and arbitration are separated to avoid
9    1    1
              conflict of interest.
              Responsibilities of the ministries and agencies dealing with land do not overlap
9    1    2
              (horizontal overlap).
9    1    3 Administrative (vertical) overlap is avoided.
              Land right and use information is shared by public bodies; key parts are regularly
9    1    4
              reported on and publicly accessible.
              Overlaps of rights (based on tenure typology) are minimal and do not cause
9    1    5
              friction or dispute.
              Ambiguity in institutional mandates (based on institutional map) does not cause
9    1    6
              problems.
LGI 2: Equity and Non-discrimination in the Decision-making Process
              Land policies and regulations are developed in a participatory manner involving
9    2    1
              all relevant stakeholders.
              Land policies address equity and poverty reduction goals; progress towards these
9    2    2
              is publicly monitored.
              Land policies address ecological and environmental goals; progress towards these
9    2    3
              is publicly monitored.
              The implementation of land policy is costed, matched with benefits and
9    2    4
              adequately resourced.
9    2    5 There is regular and public reporting indicating progress in policy implementation.
              Land policies help to improve land use by low-income groups and those who
9    2    6
              experienced injustice.
9    2    7 Land policies proactively and effectively reduce future disaster risk.



                                                      35
8. Context
Geographical Description
Afghanistan is a landlocked country neighbouring Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan from the
North, China from the Northeast, Pakistan from the East and South and Iran from the West. It has a
population of approximately 28.1 million inhabitants (51% males and 49% females) 34 with an area of
652,864 km2, which makes Afghanistan the 42nd most populous and 41st largest nation in the
world35. Most of the country in Afghanistan is covered with mountains and valleys, the Hindu Kush
splitting the country from the East to the West. The most flat lands can be found in the Southwest
and the North of the country with large areas of sandy desert particularly in the Southwest. Please
see the table below for the land coverage of Afghanistan:
Due to Afghanistan’s diverse geological foundation including the tectonic history as a result of the
country’s position west from Himalaya, Afghanistan possesses rich mineral heritage with over 1400
mineral occurrences recorded to date including various precious and semi-precious stones and
metallic minerals such as halite, talc and mica 36.
Afghanistan’s in general very dry climate varies from one region to another as the topography
changes dramatically throughout the country. Its arid and semi-arid climate creates very cold
winters and hot summers, with large areas experiencing little or no precipitation. The limited
rainfall usually occurs in the form of snow in the months of November to April. Consequently, the
droughts are a major problem in Afghanistan with estimated 2-3 years of drought conditions each
15 years. However, in recent years the drought cycle occurs more often with the droughts
experienced in years 1963-64, 1966-67, 1970-72, 1998-2006, 2011 and in specific locations in 2013
since 196037.
Historical Evolution
The history of modern Afghanistan started in 18 th century with Hotaki dynasty in Kandahar and
Ahmad Shah’s Durrani rise to power in 1747. In 19 th century Afghanistan served as a chessboard of
British and Russian “Great Game” until winning its independence in 1919 following the third Anglo-
Afghan war. Since 1970, Afghanistan witnessed long decades of war starting with the Soviet war
(1979 – 1989), followed by the civil war and Taliban era in 1990s to the US-led military operation to
overthrow Taliban regime in 2001 38. Since 2001 US and NATO coalition troops provided military
support to Afghan military forces until their partial withdrawal in December 2014. Since then, only
approximately 13,000 troops are providing training to Afghan military forces aiming for complete
withdrawal until the end of 2016. The outcomes from the current debates on slowing down the
withdrawal still remain to be seen.
Key Social and Economic Indicators
The “Transformation Decade 2015-2024” in Afghanistan has certain ly not started easy. The political
crisis arising from the outcomes of the presidential elections and withdrawal of foreign troops in
2014, followed by numerous cooperation issues among the members of the National Unity
Government, surge in violence by armed opposition groups with increased civilian casualties and
deadlocked negotiations with Taliban in 2015 are only some of a numerous issues that Afghanistan
is currently facing and these have enormous impact on main social and economic indicators in the
country.
Afghanistan’s GDP in 2014/2015 was estimated by the Afghanistan Central Statistics Office (CSO) at
1,209,178 millions Afs (18,940 millions USD), resulting in GDP per capita of 747 USD, 25 USD
decrease comparing to year 2013. The economic growth also slowed down dramatically from 10.9%
in 2012/2013 to 2.1% in 2014/201539. The World Bank statistics, which to the contrary to the CSO




34 “Afghanistan Statistical Yearbook 2014-2014” (Kabul: Central Statistics Office, 2015), 3.
35 Ibid., 1.
36 “Afghanistan Initial National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate

Change” (Kabul: National Environmental Protection Agency [NEPA], 2012), 14.
37 Ibid., 14-15.
38 Ibid., 13.
39 “Afghanistan Statistical Yearbook 2014-2015” (Kabul: Central Statistics Office, 2015), 131.




                                                    36
work with non-opium GDP, were also observing the decrease in Afghanistan real GDP from 14.4% in
2012 to 3.7% in 2013, while this trend continued in 201440.
Two biggest sectors - services and agriculture - have experienced decrease or slow down. Although
agriculture sector, where approximately 49% of Afghan labor force acquires their living 41, increased
by 3.7% in 2014, its share in national GDP decreased42. The CSO cites the water shortages as the
main reason for this trend 43 . Growth in service sector, constituting 51,33% of national GDP 44 ,
increased by 2.2% in 2014/2015. However this constitutes slowing down of the service sector
growth by 4.2% in comparison to year 2013/201445.
According to the National Risk and Vulnerability Survey (NRVA) approximately 36% of people in
Afghanistan find themselves below poverty line, with great disparities between rural and urban
areas and among different ethnicities. In rural areas the incidence of poverty is by 9% higher than
in the urban areas, while the Kuchi population is the most vulnerable to absolute poverty 46.
Migration constitutes another major problem exhibiting very complex patterns. According to the
NRVA 2011-2012 approximately 16% Afghans are born in a different district than they currently
reside in, 6% was born in another province and 3% in another country, while the urban population
migration is significantly higher than the rural. The majority of Afghan and international migrants
are migrating to Kabul. Out of 4.2 million inhabitants, around 360,000 people were born abroad and
1.9 million in other provinces in Afghanistan 47.
The issue of migration is closely linked with the urbanization. Following the US-led military
intervention in 2001, a massive influx of refugee-returnees has started to urban centers. Displaced
families, who lost vested investment in their local communities, became accustomed to a relatively
urban life while in refuge and feared the growth of counterinsurgency in rural areas, often decided
to return not to their original villages or provinces but to urban centers (and, in particular, Kabul)
in search for safety and employment opportunities. While population growth rate for the nation is
steady at 2.6%, it is only 2.3% in rural areas whereas it is 4.7% in urban areas. Today, approximately
a quarter of Afghans live in urban areas, rendering the topic of urbanization at the core of
Afghanistan48.
Poverty and rapid urbanization contributes to the fact that the housing conditions of Afghan
population are considered to be poor, with large differences between urban and rural areas. One
issue is the remoteness of Afghanistan with 14% of households located more than 6 km from the
nearest drivable road. Only 14% of Afghan population, out of which 45% is urban and 5% rural, live
in a dwelling that can be considered durable and approximately 37% of Afghans live in overcrowded
dwellings. The rapid urbanization has contributed to the situation, where 87% of urban Afghan
population (5.3 million people) live in slum-like conditions49.
Finally, the specificity of life of women in Afghanistan is important to note. There were major
improvements since 2001 in women access to justice and education, their political participation
and cultural acceptance. Nevertheless the disparities between women and men in Afghanistan still
exist mostly in rural areas and vary from province to province 50. According to the Asia Foundation
survey in 2014, a major improvement can be seen in the likelihood of women to take the dispute to
either formal or informal justice system. In 2013 women were significantly less likely to approach
either Huqooq department or shuras/jirgas (not the courts), whereas in 2014 this gap seem to have

40 “Afghanistan Economic Update, October 2014” (Kabul: The World Bank, 2014), 2.
41 “National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment 2011-12. Afghanistan Living Condition Survey” (Kabul: Central
Statistics Organization, 2014), 35.
42 “Afghanistan Statistical Yearbook 2014-2015,” 132.
43 Ibid., and “National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment 2011 -12,” 35.
44 “Afghanistan Statistical Yearbook 2014-2015,” 139.
45 Ibid., 133.
46 “National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment 2011-12,” 45-46.
47 Ibid., xvi.
48    “Kabul’s     Hidden     Crisis”   (London:      Overseas    Development       Institute     [ODI],     2012),
http://www.odi.org/comment/6688-kabul-refugee-idp-displacement-urban-afghanistan                 (accessed        2
September 2015).
49 “National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment 2011-12,” 83.
50 It is important to note here that the nationwide statistics experience various factors that can influence the

final numbers such as the inability or unwillingness of women to say the truth, respondents stating what the
surveyors want to hear, major regional disparities that get “buried in” the overall n ational statistics, etc.



                                                        37
disappeared 51 . In 2015, 47% of Afghan population thinks that courts treat women and men
equally.52, while the women political participation improved in last years as well. 69.7% of women
stated that they have voted in the runoff presidential election in 2014, whereas in 2009 it was only
43.4%. Nevertheless, women still face major barriers to their political participation such as lack of
voting cards (32.3%, resistance from the family (24.6%) and insecurity (11.1%) 53. In terms of women
education, despite the major improvements in last decade, not all Afghans agree with the equal
access to education for women. Islamic madrasa education is a most accepted type of education for
women in Afghanistan (93.6%). Even though the percentage of women contributing to household
income increased since 2009, only 64% of Afghans agree with women working outside the home
compared to 70.1% in 200654. In terms of the customs and cultural practices, most Afghans prefer
the burqa as the most appropriate women attire, with only 1.2% reported that they agree with
women not covering their head at all55.
Political System and Administrative Structure
Afghanistan is an Islamic republic led by president with great executive powers is. After a major
political crisis, which resulted from the contested run off presidential elections in 2014, two
presidential candidates agreed to sign a deal and a National Unity Government (NUG) was formed
with Ashraf Ghani as a President and Abdullah Abdullah as CEO. The position of CEO shall be further
changed to the post of Prime Minister through the amendment of the constitution. This led to
numerous questions among Afghan and international legal experts on the constitutionality of such
move. Inability to form a new government, limited willingness of the members of both camps to
cooperate and disagreements between the President and CEO on important political issues such as
the electoral reform did not help to raise the hopes of ordinary Afghan citizens for better
functioning state.
Afghanistan is a presidential democracy with bi-cameral parliamentary system. President is elected
every 5 years through the direct vote. Until now three presidential elections were organized in
Afghanistan in 2004, 2009 (President Hamid Karzai) and 2014 (President Ashraf Ghani). Government
of Afghanistan is the main executive organ with the ministers working under the chairmanship of
the President. As mentioned above, after the contested presidential runoff elections in 2014
followed by the political crisis and the audit of all ballots, the National Unity Government was
formed and the new post of CEO with vaguely defined responsibilities was created. Parliament, the
main legislative organ is comprised of House of People ( Wolesi Jirga) and House of Elders
(Mesherano Jirga). According to the Afghan Constitution, Wolesi Jirga is elected by the people in
free, general, secret and direct vote every 5 years. Until now only two parliamentary elections took
place in Afghanistan in 2005 and 2010.
The Afghan judiciary is an independent organ of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan comprised of
Islamic, statutory and common law. No law should contravene the tenets and provisions of Islam 56.
The courts are the primary organs for addressing disputes, however the majority of people refer
their disputes to informal justice system of shuras, jirgas or other ad hoc dispute resolution bodies.
The court system consists of primary courts in each district or municipality, provincial courts of
appeal in each province, and the National Supreme Court including courts with specialized
jurisdiction whose organization and authority are regulated by the law 57 .The key role of the
Supreme Court is dispute resolution as it is the highest judicial organ of the state. However, it
carries out certain administrative roles such as land registration, land transfer and issuing title
deeds, which among certain experts is considered as creating a conflict of interest in terms of
Supreme Court’s judicial role.



51
   Zach Warren, “Afghanistan in 2014. A Survey of Afghan People” (Kabul: The Asian Foundation, 2014 ),   125 –
143.
52 Zachary Warren and Nancy Hopkins, “Afghanistan in 2015. A Survey of Afghan People” (Kabul: The        Asian
Foundation, 2015), 131.
53
   Zach Warren, “Afghanistan in 2014. A Survey of Afghan People” (Kabul: The Asian Foundation, 2014 ),   125 –
143.
54
   Zachary Warren and Nancy Hopkins, “Afghanistan in 2015. A Survey of Afghan People” (Kabul: The        Asian
Foundation, 2015), 140
55 Ibid. 132.
56 Constitution of Afghanistan, Article 3, 2004 (SY 1382).
57 Constitution of Afghanistan, Article 16, 2004 (SY 1382).




                                                    38
Organs of the formal justice system are rarely connected to the informal justice system bodies and
while informal dispute resolution mechanism are into certain extent legally recognized in
Afghanistan, due to the lack of clear legislation on the linkages between the formal and informal
justice system, major regional variations exist in Afghanistan in relation to the recognition of the
informal justice system. Finally, in the areas under control of armed opposition groups, Taliban
courts or other form of justice is served.
Afghanistan is divided into 34 provinces and 368 districts. Provinces are the primary administrative
divisions led by the Governor. However due to the fact that the Afghanistan is a highly centralized
state with majority of executive powers vested in the hand of the President, the Governors have
limited powers 58. The provincial governors are appointed by the President and each province is
represented in Afghan Parliament by two members in the House of Elders ( Mesherano Jirga). One
representative is elected by the Provincial Council for four years and another one by the District
Councils for three years. Three provincial council elections were held until now in 2005, 2009 and
2014.
No district council elections were organized in Afghanistan since 2001. This creates major
difficulties particularly now, when the question of amending the constitution aiming to create a
new post of a Prime Minister was open as a part of the deal between Ashraf Ghani and Abdullah
Abdullah to end the political crisis after 2014 presidential runoff elections. The amendment of the
constitution requires the conduction of LoyaJirga, “the highest manifestation of the will of the
people of Afghanistan” 59 . The LoyaJirga consists of the members of the National Assembly and
Presidents of the provincial as well as district assemblies. Without the district council elections,
the           LoyaJirga         seems            highly         unlikely          to        happen.




58 The relative power of each governor varies considerably across provinces as a result of historical
circumstances, ethnical allegiances and military strengths of respective governors.
59 Constitution of Afghanistan, Article 110, 2004 (SY 1382).




                                                 39
9. Land Tenure System, Tenure Typology, Institutional Organigram
Legal Framework
The Afghan Constitution of 2004 established a legal framework for property rights safeguarding the
right of individuals to own property, stating property shall be safe from violation, no one shall be
forbidden from owning and acquiring property, except by law, and private property can only be
confiscated by legal order (article 40).
Legislation for classification of land tenure is comprised of over 30 laws and decrees including the
following: Civil Code, Presidential Decree 83 of 2003, Presidential Decree 99 of 2002, Land
Expropriation Law of 2000, Survey and Cadastre Law of 1988, The Law on Pastures and Mara’a of
2000, Forest Law of 2012, Municipal Law 2000, Mineral Law 2015, Land Tax Law of 1976 and Income
Tax Law 2007. The Land Management Law (LML) of 2008, which is currently before the Ministry of
Justice for further amendments, is probably the most comprehensive one dealing with range of
land issues. Afghan land laws, however, sometimes contradict each other on the classification of
state, public and private land and various other issues.
National Land Policy (NLP) was adopted in 2007 containing international best practices and
constituted a major improvement in Afghan land administration if implemented. Unfortunately, the
LML of 2008 nor any other laws were enacted after 2007 which would take the NLP into account
leaving the operalisation of different provisions an unfulfilled promise.
Evolution of land governance in Afghanistan
Afghanistan has had four major periods of land administration throughout its history: traditional
(until 1933); moderate (1933- 1978), radical (1978-2001) and modern (2001 to present). 60 The
moderate period saw concrete efforts to survey land, document land rights, and unify land
administration systems. However, ensuing years of conflict disrupted many of the gains made, and
each successive regime sought to reform land relations in Afghanistan. The post 2001 era, known
as the modern era has seen significant constitutional, legal, and policy reforms that sought to
strengthen land management and administration. However, despite these gains, significant legal
ambiguities and gaps, as well as practical challenges in-terms of lack of resources and enforcement
capacity remain.
Afghanistan started its first formal recording of properties towards the end of the ‘traditional
period’. During this period land was passed on as entitlements from Kings to private individuals,
mostly to clan heads. From the early 1930s, largely for the purpose of collecting tax revenues, the
Ministry of Finance began to keep a record of private properties.
During the Moderate Land Administration Period (1933- 1978), the Courts and the Ministry of
Interior began to play a key role in land administration. This period saw a relative modernization in
land management and land administration. A dedicated land administration authority, named
AMLAK was established within the Ministry of Finance. Efforts were made to modernize land
administration by mainstreaming documentation of property rights. AMLAK was given the main
tasks of managing state lands and recording the allocation of state lands to private persons. 61 In
part this was motivated by a desire to improve collection of taxes, centralize land use planning,
and facilitate private investment.62 These goals continue inform land administration in the present
context. To this end “Land books” were created so that official records could be kept.
This period also saw a greater western influence in land administration in Afghanistan. Under
USAID funding a Directorate of Cadastre Survey was established within AMLAK. USAID also funded
a survey institute in Kandahar, and 640 surveyors graduated from the institute. 63 In 1965 a Survey
and Statistics Law was passed with a view to move Afghanistan closer to a title system. Under the
new regime, a title deed would be issued to the owner, and future transactions would only be legal
if they were recorded by a court, against a file specifically created for that property. 64



60 Peikar Jawad, “Historic and Current Institutional Developments in Afghanistan’s Land Sector” (presentation,
CEO of ARAZI, Housing Land Property Task Force, Kabul, 22 April 2014).
61 Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 19.
62 Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 2, 19.
63 Ibid.
64 Ibid.




                                                     40
Under USAID initiative, an ambitious program to survey land in Afghanistan was commenced.
Between 1965 and 1978 approximately 34% of the country was surveyed. 65 However, as funding
diminished the cadastral survey was reduced to a mere record of owners and the location of their
lands.66
However, much of these gains to centralize and mainstream land administration were disrupted
during the period known as ‘radical administration’. Key developments during this period included
land ceilings and redistribution policies. For example, President Daoud introduced land ceilings
where farm sizes were prescribed at 20 hectares, and additional land had to be sold privately or
passed over to the Afghan government. 67 The Communists radically reduced this ceiling from
twenty to six hectares. The Communist regime also established a policy of acquiring land without
compensation, and re-distributing land among the landless, poor farmers and nomads.
Over the years of conflict, each regime attempted to change land ownership schemes and their
systems of administration. During 1992- 96, under the Mujahedeen era land ownership became
particularly problematic as property rights in urban and rural districts became dependent on which
commanders controlled the area. In 1996, after the Taliban came into power, they sought to
reform land laws; however many of their initiatives were mere replicas of laws from the past. 68
During this ‘radical period’ many land records, including Ownership and Taxation books, taxation
receipts, as well as municipals records were lost and or destroyed. At the time of the Bonn
agreement in 2001 court prepared documents were believed to cover approximately 10% of rural
properties and 30% of urban properties. 69 The private land sector was reduced to 5-12% of the
country. 70 Multiple legal frameworks applied to property transactions including customary,
religious, civil, statutory and constitutional law.
Since 2001 Afghanistan has seen several major policy initiatives in the land sector. The 2004
Constitution inter alia provided for protection of private property, right to settle in any part of the
country and just compensation where land rights are acquired for public purposes. 71 In 2007
Afghanistan adopted its first National Land Policy providing for a strategic outlook for the land
sector. The latest iteration of the Land Management Law was adopted in 2008.             Some of these
initiatives, have been criticized for returning Afghanistan back to the pre-1964 Constitution
position, ‘as if forty years of land reform had never happened.’ 72 In particular the Land
Management Law was criticized for instituting a strong bias towards owners with documentation
even though ‘up to 90% of Afghans have no documentation over their holdings’. 73
In terms of land institutions, AMLAK was re-structured and renamed as the Afghanistan Independent
Land Authority (ARAZI). It is now an independent agency and reports to an inter-ministerial board.
ARAZI has ambitious plans to adhere to international best practice and become a ‘one -stop shop’
for land administration.74 Though its goals of following international best practice is commendable,
serious concerns remain about its lack of technical capacity and financial viability of its long term
plans.
Despite these significant legal and policy advances serious practical challenges remain to
administering and managing land in Afghanistan. Land grabbing in both the urban and rural sector
remain a serious challenge. Land grabbing under the ‘colour of the law’, by returnees, armed
actors, and powerful elites even within government remain largely unaddressed. Informal
settlements especially in urban areas are widespread without any concerted efforts to formalise or
upgrade them. Additionally, land related conflicts, including involving armed actors are continuing
and in some cases increasing.
Tenure Typology


65   Jawad, “Historic and Current Institutional Developments,” 1.
66   Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 2, 19.
67   Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 1, 26.
68   Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 1, 22.
69   Ibid.
70   Ibid.
71   Constitution of Afghanistan, Articles 9, 10, 14, 15, 32, 38, 39, 40 and 41, 2004 (SY 1382)
72   Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 1, 18.
73   Ibid.
74   ARAZI Operational Strategy (2014).



                                                         41
 “Land tenure refers to the legal regime in which rights in land are exclusively assigned to and
individual, or entity, who is said to “hold” the land. A land tenure system refers to the regulations
for the allocation of rights in land, transactions of property, [and] the management and
adjudication of disputes regarding rights and property boundaries.”
The situation of land tenure in Afghanistan remains opaque, with an ill-suited legal framework,
inconsistent legislation, unclear delimitation of boundaries and conflicting definitions of property,
including between the State and private entities (individuals and communities) contesting the
State’s presumption of ownership over land.
Legislation for classification of land tenure primarily stems from four sources of law: the Civil Code,
Presidential Decree 83 of 2003, the Land Management Law (LML) of 2008, currently under revision,
and the Shari’a. These however, sometimes contradict each other on the classification of state,
public and private land. The presence of what may be considered residual legislation, such as the
Taliban-era Rangelands Law, along with non-legal government documents which proffer land
classifications, such as the Ministry of Agriculture Master Plan, further exacerbates this lack of
clarity.
A minority of landholders in Afghanistan appear to possess any form of land document from the
Afghan State. The lack of statutory process legalizing the rights of those who possess land, but do
not own formal deeds 75 places them in an ambiguous legal position. Moreover, land documents,
especially those dating from previous regimes, have often been lost following decades of conflict
and displacement.
There is general agreement among authors of studies on land tenure in Afghanistan that the current
legal framework is both incoherent and unsuitable to the reality of land tenure and land use in the
country.76
Various historic, demographic, and social realities have contributed to the current incoherent land
regime in Afghanistan.
•    Ancestral customary rights of ownership and land use of communities are currently (though not
     for the first time) in conflict with the State’s definition of tenure. This discrepancy has become
     more pronounced with the increasing attempts to capture land by the State in the past decade,
     notably through presidential decrees (Decree 83 of 2003).
•    Return from displacement of communities and individuals who find their land has been
     occupied in their absence, and are sometimes unable to reclaim their rights over land in their
     place of return. Though no precise records exist, in some areas nearly 100% of the local
     population appears to have been displaced at some point during the last thirty years.
•    Ongoing conflict-induced, disaster-induced and/or economic migration and subsequent informal
     occupation of land by communities. This phenomenon has notably become prominent in urban
     and peri-urban areas with rural exodus and rapid urbanization.
•    Land grabbing (as perceived by communities) and/or unregulated acquisition of land by wealthy
     well-connected individuals and power holders.
Patterns of land tenure in Afghanistan further present significant regional variations, calling for a
context specific analysis.
As such, in order to capture the existing forms of land tenure in the country, the following typology
will focus on observations stemming from existing field research on land issues in Afghanistan, and
not primarily on land-related legislation. Further specific research will be needed in order to assess
precisely the reality of tenure holdings in Afghanistan, across regions, and diverse rural/ urban
realities.
With these points in mind, research to this point suggests three types of collectively-held land
tenure (at 1-3 below); four types of individual land tenure (at 4-7 below); and one type of state
land (at 8 below). No conclusions have been drawn on the “validity” or “invalidity” of holdings
under each tenure type. Each tenure type below probably exists throughout the country, and, more
often than not, each exists under a cloud of dubious legality or significant community resentment.
     1. Collectively held land without documentation


76See, for instance, Yohannes Gebremedhin, “Legal issues in Afghanistan’s land titling and registration”
(Kabul: USAID, Emerging Markets Group, 2005); Wily “Land, People and the State.”



                                                  42
In the framework of this report, collectively-held land refers to off-farm barren land, rangeland,
and mountain/forest land. Based on the Pasture Law 2000, it can be considered as specific pasture
(Art. 3 (2)) located in the proximity of the village. However, in the past, various tribes were not
only given the land in the proximity of the village, therefore for the purposes of this report,
collectively-held land does not equal only to specific pasture land, but includes all the lands
irrespective of their proximity to the village that is collectively held. Collective ownership of land
constitutes a major pattern of land holding across the country (in all likelihood encompassing the
majority of land in Afghanistan). However, this type of land ownership is not recognized under
Afghan law.
One noteworthy example of the prominence of collective holding is Afghanistan’s Southeast region
(Khost, Paktia, and Paktika provinces) 77 , where much land is perceived as commonly owned by
tribes and other groups. As such, in virtue of (perceived) ancestral norms of land holding, entire
areas are considered to be under the control of a single tribe or group, who then regulates use of
the land and its resources based on custom, including resource division based on the number of
members within each group (with this being calculated in various ways).
For the great majority of the Southeastern collective holdings at issue here, delimitations of
boundaries are based on oral tradition passed on from father to son and physical markers such as
rock formations, and are not documented, whether by legally recognized documentation, or
customary documents. Nevertheless, at least when discussing the issue with outsiders, these groups
present the ownership and boundaries of such land as being well-established, and there is
significant resistance to “outsiders” claiming ownership or management rights of the land.
It cannot be confirmed that collective land holdings in other parts of the country exactly fit these
patterns. However, the Southeast is used here as an example, and it is likely that undocumented
collectively held land in other areas also displays at least some of these characteristics.
Afghan state law contests the ownership of off-farm barren land, rangeland and forest land,
creating a notable discrepancy between de facto and de jure ownership and administration.
Afghanistan’s legal framework also remains internally inconsistent as to the sta tus of these lands –
certain paragraphs of the law consider these lands public land, some state land. This notably
creates a situation of uncertainty surrounding which land is destined to public use and to benefit
the public, and which land, owned by the state, can be made available for private investment or
other non-public use.
Finally, proposed amendments to the LML by ARAZI in 2012 could formalise some community claims
by introducing a new type of land called “Special village land.” 78 This proposed classification of
land might ameliorate some of the challenges of the existing state/ private land dichotomy which
denies rights to community ownership. Circulated drafts of the revised Forest Law and Rangeland
Law would also recognize some forms of community management, if not ownership, based upon the
community’s geographical proximity to the resource.
     2. Collectively held land with customary documentation
At least in part in order to address disputes arising between communities over the boundaries of
their land, or their extensions due to demographic pressure and economic motivations, Afghanistan
has witnessed the development of customary written documentation for the collective types of
holdings described above. That being said, there is no precise information on the extent to which
this documentation is used, and it appears to stem mainly from non-state processes of dispute
resolution, in order to forestall the reignition of conflicts.
     3. Collectively held land with title issued by a previous government regimes
Past regimes, including that of Abdurrahman Khan for the resettlement of naqilin in various parts
of Afghanistan, and Nader Shah and Zahir Khan in the Southeast, as a reward for the support of the
region’s tribes in the reestablishment of the Durrani monarchy, have granted, by decree, entire
areas to specific tribes or groups. Documents provided at the time have often been safeguarded
and kept by the concerned groups, who consider them as a valid, if not indubitable evidence of
their prerogatives over the land. Current Afghan law, however, remains silent over this matter. As
mentioned above, only individual property is recognized by the state and all land for which


77 On patterns of land holding in Khost province, see “Major Land Disputes and Land Titling Systems in Khost
Province, Implications for a Collaboration between Traditional Dispute Resolution Mechanisms and ARAZI,”
(Kabul: The Liaison Office/United States Institute of Peace, October 2014).
78 Wily, “Land, People and the State.”




                                                      43
individual, legally valid proof of ownership cannot be provided is considered as state land as per
Afghan legal framework.
     4. Individually held land without any title
As just noted, the Afghan state recognizes land ownership only in cases where individuals possess
legally valid title documents. However, after various sorts of collectively-held land, individually
held land with no documentation might constitute the most common sort of land tenure in the
country. As with collectively-held land, many local populations consider the ownership of this land
as uncontested – as it has passed from owner to owner via family inheritance, without contestation
outside the family, but also without recording of any kind.
     5. Individually held land with non-recognized title
There is no precise information on the date of introduction of customary land documents for
individuals. The phenomenon, however, seems to have gained momentum, as the production of
written documentation has reportedly increased over the past decade to avoid competing claims
over a parcel of land following transfer, or memorializing the resolution of a dispute over
individually held land. Informal deeds’ relatively widespread use also stems from the need to adapt
to an evolving situation where land is less often transmitted via non-commercial processes (e.g.
inheritance), but increasingly sold and purchased. Written customary land documentation thus
compensates for the presence of “new” parties outside of traditional ownership structures, and fills
in the gaps left open by nonexistent or poorly maintained government registration.
Individual customary documents, however, in most cases appear to not meet the conditions
regarding legally valid documentation for ownership and their owners are thus not legally entitled
to own the land they exploit. Indeed, as laid out by the LML 2008, customary deeds are
theoretically recognized as valid documentation if they were prepared before August 6 th, 1975, and
either recorded in the Books of Ownership and Taxation of 1977-1978; or, in areas where these
books were never prepared or have been lost, if all neighbours to the land attest to its ownership. 79
Much of the existing customary documentation, however, was produced after 1975. For the
minority of citizens owning customary land titles from that era, let alone titles recorded by the
administration, synchronizing these records with what in many cases is a highly complex record of
land transfer and occupation may be close to impossible.
     6. Individually held land with state title from a pre-Karzai regime
In the majority of cases when formal documentation is present, some research indicates tax
documents (maylati) prior to 1975 are used to evidence ownership. With that said, these only
contain a limited amount of relevant information: they do specify the amount of the land on which
tax was paid, but do not specify its boundaries. What is more, in order to avoid heavy taxes, many
land holders only partially recorded their land, leading, for example, to a complex situation where
land was transferred between two private parties but only part of it is legally recognized as
property of its holder.
Royal-era land documents are another somewhat common form of government-issued land
documentation. These were mainly issued under Nader Shah and Zahir Khan, at the demand of
individuals who had either settled a dispute over purchased land and obtained informal
documentation which they could convert into formal titles with the royal administration; had
settled their dispute in a government court; or were members of tribes with connections to the
royal family (particularly in Afghanistan’s South). However, these documents are rarely sufficient
to delineate the precise boundaries of a parcel, which are sometimes barely decipherable, and
were often lost during Afghanistan’s protracted conflict, though copies of some are reportedly kept
in provincial administrations. Even when the documents remain intact, they often do not record
transfers by inheritance, or other forms of transfer.
     7. Individually held land with title from the Karzai and Ghani regime
There are no comprehensive data on the extent of land registration under the current government,
but it appears to be a minority phenomenon. In some areas, no official land registration since 2001

79Given the ambiguous wording of the LML, the possibility remains that the “pre-1975” requirement does not
apply to areas where registration books were not prepared. However, this reading raises the question of why
post-1975 land transactions would be treated so much more favourably in areas without recordation than in
areas with recordation. And, in any event, research by TLO and others suggests that courts actually treating
any customary deed as valid is exceptionally rare.



                                                    44
seems to have taken place at all. In those areas where registration has occurred, the process seems
to take place over a period of months, and to involve a large number of steps. If the applicant
completes the process, he or she then receives a land title from the local court. In many cases,
persons seem to seek government land title pursuant to a commercial land transaction, or where
receipt of the land is tied to a government distribution scheme. However, as regards commercial
land transactions (let alone more small-scale or “ordinary” transactions), one cannot assume that
most parties, most of the time, apply to a Court or to a State agency to register a transaction. .
Factors impeding registration and the provision of legal title documents include lack of capacity for
land management on behalf of the state, the complexity of the titling or formalization process,
repeatedly modified80, fear of tax payment81, negative perceptions of the court (responsible for
issuance of land title), general wariness of government involvement in land affairs, and widespread
corruption of the administration (at the least exacerbating the other mentioned difficulties). Many
purchasers/ owners of land have thus not fulfilled the legal formalities required for the competent
court to formalize ownership, and, assuming any deed exists, consider a customary deed, deed
from a pre-Karzai administration, or other form as attestation as sufficient proof of their
ownership.
Conversely, and particularly in peri-urban areas which have witnessed increased settlement in the
past decade, there are indications that some dwellers have sought formalization of their titles
through the court, in order to secure their rights to tenure. That being said, the registration
process in practice remains quite unclear as research uncovered repeated mentions of fraud by the
administration itself across several regions of Afghanistan. This can take the form of bribes paid to
the court to obtain the required document, or pressures exerted by power-holders and their
connections in the government. This has added complexity to the tenure landscape, with,
occasionally, competing claims over land between holders of pre-Karzai documentation, which
seems to have been issued by regular processes, and holders of newly acquired court
documentation, which might have been procured fraudulently.
     8. Land owned by the State (versus public land)
As mentioned previously, inconsistencies in the legal framework for tenure rights and its
discrepancy with the reality of urban and, especially, rural tenure in Afghanistan render the
practical status of state-owned land opaque. On the one hand, the Land Management Law of
200882, supplemented by Presidential Decree 83, has set up a system where, in the absence of
legally recognized documentation, ownership of land reverts to the state. On the other, research
indicates the majority of Afghans do not hold valid documentation for land ownership. Most
landholders especially in rural areas have no documents at all. As such, informal documentation,
unrecognized by the state, often fills some of the gaps left open by absent state documentation.
Especially given the lack of recognition for group ownership in Afghan law, the state is the de jure
owner of an estimated 80% of land in Afghanistan. However, the state has the capacity to
administer only a small fraction of that land – either due to a general lack of human and technical
capacity, or because many of these areas remain outside of State control or even legitimate state
ownership.
The current framework also does not provide for specific and clear distinctions between state and
public land. It notably remains vague on the status of mara’a land83, waqfi land (endowment land),
and the case of land owned by Government agencies which appear in practice to be owners of the
land they control or manage, with the capacity to rent or lease it, albeit without clear legal
authorization for doing so.

80 Under the Land Management Law, holders of land under customary systems may in theory “convert” their
customary ownership to state-recognized (“formal”) ownership. However, this process requires both parties
producing highly detailed customary ownership documents prepared before 1975, and accompanied by ample
attestations of the habitation of the use and land since that time – along with procedural steps that many
parties will find burdensome.
81 Though the Afghan government does not at present assess land tax, persons seem to fear the assessment of

pre-Communist back taxes, and the future re-imposition of a land tax, should their holdings be known to the
state.
82 According to the LML of 2008, state land includes:

“1. Plot or plots of land containing bogi, abi, lalmi, tapaha, chamani, jabazar, jungalzar, alafchar, naizar and
other lands that have been officially registered by the government in its principal registry.
2. Lands that are deemed malkiat-i-auma, but that have not been officially registered by the government in
its principal registry.
83 The term roughly equates with pasture land, but is used in Afghan law without being precisely defined.




                                                      45
As mentioned above the realities in Afghanistan differ substantively from the legal framework.
Whereas we have listed at least 8 types of land based on field research, the legal experts agree on
three primary types of ownership based on Afghan legal framework, with different outcomes for
their                                                                                transferability:




                                                 46
Type of   Legal basis   Sub-categories               Type of rights          Ownership          and    Key challenges
land                                                                         responsible
                                                                             organization
Private   Legal code    •   Collectively held land   •   Sold, transferred   Individual   or   legal   •   Limited possibilities for tenure
land                        without                      inherited           persons                       formalization
                            documentation, with      •   Compulsory          (ARAZI)                   •   Formerly displaced people and
                            customary                    acquisition                                       refugees who find their lands
                            documentation      and       possible only for                                 occupied are unable to reclaim them
                            with documentation           public    welfare                                 back
                            issued by previous           projects                                      •   High number of informal settlements
                            government regimes                                                             in urban settings
                        •   Individually held land                                                     •   Some privatised land is perceived as
                            without title                                                                  having been acquired by “grabbing”
                        •   Individually held land                                                         state or public land
                            with non-recognized
                            title (customary title
                            deeds     and    other
                            informal records)
                        •   Individually held land
                            with state formal
                            title (from various
                            regimes)




                                                                 47
Public   No clear definition in   •   Pastures - allocated      •   Cannot be sold      Municipalities (within     •   Includes lands under ancestral
land     Afghan law                   for     public      use       nor       leased,   the     Master    Plan),       customary rights incl. pastures/
                                      (collective       held)       transferred    or   Ministries and ARAZI           forests – ownership is contested
                                      (MAIL)                        exchanged           (manages     all   lands       between either state or public
                                  •   Forests (MAIL)                                    outside of Master plan )   •   Art. 3(8) of LML 2008 and Decree 83
                                  •   Graveyards,                                                                      blur boundaries between state and
                                      entertainment parks,                                                             public land by putting emphasis on
                                      roads, green areas,                                                              formal documentary proofs of
                                      playgrounds                                                                      ownership
                                      (Municipalities)                                                             •   Law does not define public land has
                                  •   Schools          (MoE);                                                          and has no provisions on registering
                                      universities (MoHE);                                                             “public land” reason why public land
                                      hospitals (MoPH)                                                                 is easily claimed as state property
                                                                                                                       and reassigned subsequently to
                                                                                                                       private parties



State    Registered as state      •   Forests (MAIL)            Only arid and virgin    Governmental               •   Lack of adequate mapping
land     land and any land        •   Protected land            land can be leased      institutions        and    •   Some privatised land is perceived as
         that    is  deemed       •   Arid and virgin land      or sold provided        ministries                     having been acquired by “grabbing”
         public but is not                                      certain    conditions   (ARAZI)                        state or public land
         registered in the                                      (forests          and
         book of government                                     protected        land
         lands                                                  cannot             be
                                                                transferred)




                                                                            48
Institutional Organigram

The detailed information on various institutions, their interaction and possible overlap are explained in the section 9.9. This organigram aims to identify
the main actors in Afghan land governance in terms of policy formulation, implementation and adjudication and their interaction with each other (for
detailed institutional map, please see the Annex VII.)



                               POLICY FORMULATION                                                                                   LAW PROMULGATION

        President, CEO, Council of Ministers, High Council on Water and Land                                                             Parliament




                                               POLICY FORMULATION, IMPLEMENTATION,                                      ADJUDICATION (POLICY IMPLEMENTATION)
                                                          ADJUDICATION
                                                                                                                            Courts (incl. land registration), MoJ –
                                                      ARAZI (incl. Cadastral Dept.)                                                     Huqooq Dept.




                            POLICY FORMULATION, IMPLEMENTATION                                                                          MONITORING

           MoF, MAIL, MRRD, MUDA, Ministry of Mines and Petroleum, IDLG, AISA, NEPA,                                                     AIHRC, HOO
                     Municipalities, Independent Directorate of Kuchi Affairs


                                                                                                       PRIVATE SECTOR:


NON-GOVERNMENTAL SECTOR:
                                                                 Property dealers, CRA, ALCO



                                           MEC, Provincial Commissions on Conflict Mediation, Shuras/Jirgas, IGOs,
                                                                    INGOs, Afghan NGOs

                                                                            49
    10. Presentations of substantive findings per topic
    9.1.         Land Rights Recognition


                                                                                                       Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                              Topic                                     A   B C     D
PANEL 1: Land Rights Recognition
LGI 1: Recognition of a continuum of rights
             Individuals' rural land tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in
1 1 1
             practice.
1 1 2 Customary tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in practice.
             Indigenous rights to land and forest are legally recognized and protected in
1 1 3
             practice.
1 1 4 Urban land tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in practice.
LGI 2: Respect for and enforcement of rights
1 2 1 Accessible opportunities for tenure individualization exist.
1 2 2 Individual land in rural areas is recorded and mapped.
1 2 3 Individual land in urban areas is recorded and mapped.
1 2 4 The number of illegal land sales is low.
1 2 5 The number of illegal lease transactions is low.
1 2 6 Women's property rights in lands as accrued by relevant laws are recorded.
1 2 7 Women’s property rights to land are equal to those by men.

                                        Recognition of a Continuum of Land Rights
    The LML provides for a variety of ways to establish legal ownership, based upon possession of
    documents, or long-term actual occupancy. However, in practice, only the former method of
    establishing ownership appears secure.
    According to Art. 5 of the LML, valid recorded deeds include:
           8. Documents issued by a legally recognized court, such as, title deeds, donation deeds, bequest,
                 division, and the decision, which is made by court.
           9. Presidential decree, government degree (council of ministers) (and a land purchase document
               from government’s properties)
           10. Tax payment documents (maylati)
           11. Water rights documents (haqaba)
           12. Customary deeds (asnad-e orfi)
           13. Official ownership deed (sanad rasmee mulkyet) – during democratic republic Afghanistan 1978
               - 79
           14. Official deed for land ownership issued after a legal settlement of the land (qabala-e qatae)
    Land tenure rights recognition in rural areas (incl. customary tenure rights recognition)
    As mentioned above, one of the main challenges concerning the recognition of rights of the majority of
    Afghans include the discrepancy between the existing legal framework and the reality of land tenure in
    the country which is overwhelmingly informal, and inconsistent within the legal framework itself.
    In terms of undocumented rights84, long term unchallenged possession is ensured in Art. 8 of LML 2008.
    However the article stipulates that in order to prove the ownership the land must be cultivated and a
    proof of continued ownership since 1973 is required as testified by the neighbors, de facto limiting
    claims to land acquired after that date. Considering the occurrence of wars in the period after 1973,
    this article is in reality of limited usage.
    In terms of customary tenure rights, their recognition has been at the heart of debates concerning the

    84   Which will be further discussed in the next sections of the report.


                                                                50
discrepancy of the statutory land law with the reality of practices in rural Afghanistan, primarily based
on customary norms. Though the Constitution is silent on the authority of customary law, it is de facto
recognized so long as it perceived not to interfere with Shari’a, which permits the practice of
customary law, and is embedded in the Constitution.85
Article 5 of the LML of 2008 recognizes the validity of customary deeds under the condition that it was
prepared and submitted before August 1975. In location where declaration forms were not distributed
or the registration book was lost, the LML provides a customary deed may be recognized if there are no
claims to the land, and the land purchase and the possession by the buyer has been confirmed by the
landowners holding lands next to the plot, as well as by the inhabitants of the locality where the land
is situated. Additionally, it is only recognized only under condition that the land seller owns the valid
deed.
At the local level, and despite the absence of formal legal recognition, ownership is often well
recognized and accepted by communities. However, while within the community this system is often
well functioning and recognized, it is not always accepted by the “outsider(s)” (members of other
community, government officials etc.). Local residents are mainly relying on customary documentation
(urfi) developed by informal justice forums such as jirgas and tribal shuras, which are not legally
recognized, except under very stringent (generally unrealistic) conditions (see above). Most of these
customary documents take the form of bilateral agreement between the two transaction parties, in the
presence of local leaders and witnesses. Current grey literature suggests that informal deeds generally
tend to include the following information: name and address of the transferor and transferee, a
description of the boundaries of the land, the price of the transaction, and fingerprints or signatures of
two or more witnesses. 86 Often, however, they lack all the necessary information such as dates,
signs/fingerprints or exact land boundaries.
Though in some instance, court documents have formalized customary rights of tenure, there remain
some significant gaps and contradictions between statutory law and customary practices as related to
land rights. An employee of the Municipality in Kandahar, for instance, reported: “Individuals and
communities can claim a land only if they have legal documents. Some communities think that the
lands near them belong to them. ARAZI never accepts this. According to laws, communities do not have
the right to possess lands.”87 This statement underlines, as above, the existing discrepancy between
communal perceptions of land holding and the legal framework, which refuses to recognize them.
Second major problem in the recognition of rural tenure rights in Afghanistan is that Afghan land laws
do not protect collective ownership, very commonly used in Afghanistan 88. Particularly in the rural
context, where due to the historical, tribal and ethnical linkages most of the lands are held collectively
without any or only a customary documentation, according to the World Bank assessment, there were
“weak or no real provisions” to protect collectively owned lands. In Herat, for instance, respondents
spontaneously mentioned land commonly held by tribes and subdivided according to availability of
water among tribal members. This reality was observed in other areas of Afghanistan, and is notably
widespread in the Southeast – though different practices of land repartition are in use. When recorded
(which represents only a minority of cases), these lands are usually either in the name of a single tribal
leader, or under the name of the head of a family. This issue will be explained in more details in the
section 9.2 Rural group rights, their mapping, recording and boundary demarcation of communal
lands.
The fact that most properties in rural areas are neither evidenced by formal deeds (it was assessed
that at the time of the Bonn Agreement in 2001, court-prepared documents were believed to cover 10%
85 E.g.,at Art.130 (specifying that, if there is no superseding legal source, Afghan judges shall rely on Hanafi
Sharia).
86 The Liaison Office, “Major Land Disputes and Land Titling Systems of Khost Province Implications for

Collaboration between Traditional Dispute Resolution Mechanisms and ARAZI” (Kabul: The Liaison Office, 2014), 38
87 Interview with municipality employee, Kandahar, 9 July 2014.
88
   To explain as to why a collective ownership is not provided for in Afghan legal framework was not part of the
scope of this study. However the existence of various regimes in Afghanistan in the course of its modern history,
which each time brought different and at times contradictory approaches to land governance, can be one factor
why the collective ownership did not find its place in the current Afghan body of law.


                                                       51
of rural properties and 30% of urban properties 89, nor recorded (there has been no systematic update of
records since 1978) has direct implications on the effective rights of rural residents. A Social Impact
Assessment conducted by the World Bank on the LML noted that the law demonstrated “strong
orientation towards those with formal documentation” when 90% of Afghans have no documentation at
all.90 It further noted that the LML, despite provisions such as article 8, failed to adequately spell out
instances where undocumented rights could be protected.
According to the Presidential Decree 83, which supersedes all previous laws relevant to establishing
ownership property rights including through customary documents, all land whose ownership cannot be
proven shall be considered under the ownership of the State. Given a) the conditions tied to the
recognition of customary documentation in the LML 2008, and the difficulty to comply with those in
practice; b) the absence of any type of documents for the majority of rural Afghans; and c) the non-
recognition of collective tenure, representing a significant portion of customary tenure; the legal
framework for customary land tenure rights appears disconnected from the reality of the majority of
rural Afghans.
It is unknown how much land automatically fell back to the State. Based on the figures estimated by
AREU’s earlier research, the figure could potentially be as high as 90% for rural lands (70% for urban
lands). Further even with the existence of the LML law, a recent report by UNAMA Rule of Law notes
that it is “unknown how many individuals have successfully asserted ownership and obtained land title s
pursuant to the LML”, and that “it is unknown how much untitled land is being used by the government
or is part of a government development project, or is otherwise claimed by the government, any of
which could negate a customary claim by those individuals who occupy or use the land”.91
Echoing a similar sentiment, an ARAZI official in Balkh province assessed that approximately 90% of
rural villages in Afghanistan are thus considered to be illegal, as they have been built over land
considered as government land92. Though this figure has not been verified, it is further indicative of the
discrepancy between the reality of land holdings in Afghanistan, and the legal framework for its
recognition – leading to the consideration that most rural land has been illegally occupied. This was a
recurrent comment by land administration officials in all four provinces where interviews were
conducted for this study. As reported by an ARAZI official in Khaki Jabbar district of Kabul: “Most of
the land is government land. But from a customary perspective, people consider these land as much
theirs as government property. People actually use government land according to customary rights. But
this is not a legal right.”93
Indigenous rights recognition
In the Afghan context, the definition of indigenous group may apply to much of the rural population,
particularly in some tribal areas (mainly Pashtun, but not only) where customary principles and tribal
mechanisms remain strong, tribes retain a strong sense of identity, and the relationship to land and the
resources available on it are governed by customary principles perceived as ancestral. There are no
castes or legally recognized ethnic groups in the Afghan Law. That being said, the existence of the
Independent Directorate of Kuchi Affairs and the recognition of a separate political constituency for
Kuchi groups within the Parliament indicate that there is a formal recognition of their distinct identity.
In order not to create an overlap with the previous indicator concerning cust omary rights, “indigenous
rights to land” will therefore here apply to nomadic, semi -nomadic and recently settled nomadic tribes
(Kuchis and Jat communities).
The definition of Kuchi, however, is contested, but appears to involve both considerations of lifestyle
and ethnicity. Indeed, in the past decades, many Kuchis have settled, adopted a sedentary lifestyle,
and acquired land, facing similar problems as other sedentary groups.
Article 14 of the 2004 Afghan Constitution provides for “improving … the settl ement and living

89Wily, “Land, People and the State,” 22.
90Wily, “Land, People and the State,” 44.
91“The Stolen Lands of Afghanistan,” 5.
92 Interview with ARAZI official, Mazar-e Sharif, Balkh, 30 June 2014.
93 Interview with ARAZI official, Khaki Jabbar, Kabul, 5 June 2014.




                                                         52
conditions of nomads”. In practice, this mostly translated into state policies of settlement of nomadic
tribes and land distribution plans often met with the resistance of local populations. The Environment
Law (2007) requires demarcation of “areas appropriate for use of pastoralists” (rangeland), including
migration corridors, and consultation with nomadic communities in land use and resource management
plans (Ch. 194). According to Art. 495 of Forest Law, management and custody of the forests are with
MAIL. According to article 7 of the Forest Law all products of the forest belong to the state; individuals
and private organizations can use the products from the forest, provided a fee is paid to MAIL.
However, in practice local tribes and villages use jungle resources according to their own established
procedures. In turn, the new Rangeland law, meant to clarify the conditions of use of rangeland (which
represent 80% of Afghanistan’s rural land) is still under draft.
However, the reality in Afghanistan is different from the prescriptions of the legal framework. In most
cases, conflicts over land involving Kuchis occur over public or state land. This maybe either on their
traditional mena, or in peri-urban areas where services and livelihood opportunities are perceived as
more accessible. By laying claim to rangeland, Kuchis may be able to settle informally and
provisionally, but their tenure is necessarily among the least secure, because of rival claims by other
communities or the risk that the state decides to uphold its right to its ownership. Thus, even when
Kuchis try and permanently settle on lands they have been using for generations as temporary winter
abodes, they are often technically landless in what they consider ‘their place of origin’.”96Throughout
research conducted for this study, the settlement of Kuchis was mentioned as particularly problematic
in Gozara, Pashtun Zargun and Enjil districts of Herat, where respondents denied nomadic Kuchis had
any right to settle. The settlement of Kuchis in Arghandab district of Kandahar and in the suburbs of
Kandahar city was also reported to create tensions with already settled communities. Another example
from more recent times 2010 and 2012, when Presidential Decrees, providing for the settlement of
5000 Kuchi families in Logar, Laghman and Nangarhar were perceived by some as the use of a legal
instrument to provide land privileges to a certain group based on proto-ethnic considerations, and
resisted by local residents.
The violent conflict over land use rights between Kuchi nomads and local population in Hazarajat can
serve as another example for the limited recognition of nomadic tribes in Afghanistan. Historically,
from 1892 onwards, Amir Abdul Rahman Khan issued a series of decrees, according to which pastures
and vast swathes of agricultural land was taken away from the local Hazara people and were allocated
(ownership rights) to certain Pashtun and Kuchi ethnic groups as rewards for their co-operation in the
war and/or to appease them. 97 These lands were converted into settlements, residential houses
and/or agricultural lands, downsizing rangeland in the process. This situation persisted until the time
of Amir Amanullah Khan, who issued a decree, according to which arable lands were restored to the
Hazaras and upstream lands remained as pastures for Kuchis. During the rule of Nader Khan and Zaher
Khan, instructions were issued to provincial governors in the north and in the centre that pasture use
98documents be given to Kuchis99, which continue to be held by them until now. Relying on these
decrees, the Kuchis claim their usage rights over these lands (at times special pasture lands that are
located in close proximity of the village), causing conflicts with the agriculturalist local people
claiming their usage rights as well.100.
The conflicts are less intense in the winter times. Field observations in the South East further indicate
that, customarily, nomads’ rights to temporary settlement in the cold season are to an extent
recognized by communities on specific parcels of land (mena). These are notably often currently-fallow
land where they are temporarily allowed to settle until the start of the agricultural season.


94Environment  Law, Government of Afghanistan, 2007 (SY 1386).
95Forest Law of Afghanistan, (Official Gazette no. 795), Article 4, 2012.
96 Fabrizio Foschini, “The Social Wandering of the Afghan Kuchis”(Kabul: Afghan Analysts Network, Thematic

Report, 2013), 16.
97 Gholam Mohammad Ghobar, afghanestan dar masir-e tarikh (Afghanistan in the Course of History), Jomhuri

Publications, 1st edition, SY1384 (2005).
98 Government only gave the right of usage to Kuchis, not the ownership rights
99 Based on Pasture Law, Art. 3 – pastures cannot be sold, bought or leased, they can be only used.
100 Based on the author’s experience and analysis




                                                   53
That being said, the violent Kuchi-Hazara conflict in the Hazarjat over the use of pasture land (by
Kuchis for grazing their herds and local residents for either grazing their livestock, or as zaminelalmi
(non-irrigated agricultural land) indicates that land-related conflicts involving Kuchis are not simply
related to their permanent settlement, but also imply complex considerations of access to summer
pastures and the recognition (or non-recognition) of communities’ rights to access and exploit them 101.
To this end, ARAZI suggested the establishment of technical working group comprised of MAIL, MRRD,
MEW, Independent Directorate of Kuchi Affairs and members of the Commission for Dispute Resolution
for Kuchi and Nomad Affairs, the parliament and ARAZI to provide technical inputs on adequate
solutions to the issues of Kuchi communities in Afghanistan. This effort has yet to materialize.
The situation of Jat communities is distinct from that of Kuchis 102. Composed of an estimate 20,000 to
30,000 individuals who have recently settled in peri urban areas, mainly surrounding Kabul and Mazar-e
Sharif, these communities are notably characterized by social, economic, and political marginalization,
political exclusion, as well as a distinct lifestyle, including nomadic practices distinct from other
nomadic groups103. Considered as stateless, most are refused citizenship by the Afghan authorities. As
such, studies indicate approximately 80% of households are not registered and do not hold any form of
identification document, inhibiting, among other things, their legal access to land ownership.
Land tenure rights recognition in urban areas
The difficulties for land tenure recognition in rural areas are similar to those of urban areas, however
due to different reasons. In urban areas it is a rapid urbanization, extensive land grabbing and large
informal settlements being established that create serious problems for urban land tenure recognition.
It was assessed that at the time of the Bonn Agreement in 2001, court-prepared documents were
believed to cover only 30% of urban properties. 104 Based on AREU’s earlier research, due to the
tendency of Afghan legal framework to prioritize state ownership over any other, it is estimated that
approximately 70% urban lands fell back to state due to the inability of the potential owners to prove
their rights.
There are a number of legal and policy provisions that aim to provide urban land tenure security. The
Presidential 104 enacted in 2005 puts the provisions in place on the distribution of land for housing to
eligible returnees and IDPs. The National Policy on Internal Displacement, approved in November 2013
addresses the right to adequate housing and access to land (Article 7.1.3). It notably urges the Afghan
Government to take measures to ensure that IDPs and returnees 105 are permitted to upgrade their
settlements, explore community-level initiatives to lend, rent or sell land in IDP settlements, and
identify possibilities to grant IDPs security of tenure. This includes the identification of available land,
the clarification arrangements with landowners and hosting communities, and usufruct schemes.
However in practice, urban tenure security has been severely impacted by a drastic increase in
urbanization in the past decade, with a rate of urbanization close to 5% per year, one of the highest in
the world106. Additionally, internal displaced persons (IDPs) and returnees in the past decade, most of
which are settling in cities in search of livelihood opportunities and greater access to services, further
remains one of the major challenges in terms of urban tenure security in the country. Finally, land
grabbing is another major issue that prevents urban population to secure their tenure rights. All the
above mentioned issues will be discusses in more detail in the section 9.3.
                                      Respect for Enforcement of Rights
Opportunities for tenure individualization

101Foschini,“Social Wandering,” 17-21.
102 The categorization of Jats (also known as Jogi and Chori Frush) in an ethnic category is also contested, and the
denominations “jat,” “Jogi” and “Chori Frush” are exogenous to the communities themselves. Cf. “Assessment of
Out of School Children and Jogi communities,” Samuel Hall, UNICEF, 2011.
103“Assessment of Out of School Children and Jogi communities”, Samuel Hall, UNICEF, 2011.
104Wily, “Land, People and the State,” 22.
105 Returnees are persons who return to Afghanistan after they were compelled to leave the country due to

persecution or a situation of generalized violence, including returning asylum seekers and refugees: See Howard
and Madzarevic, “Security of Tenure,” 7.
106 Shobha Rao and Jan Trustka, “Enhancing Security of Land Tenure for IDPs” (Kabul: U N-HABITAT, 2014).




                                                        54
As mentioned above, it is common (however not legally recognized) in Afghanistan, that piece of land
is used and/or collectively held by more than two parties, with one original document in the name of a
village, or most commonly in the name of an ancestor whose descendants share the use of the land.
Requests for tenure individualization mainly come from heirs aspiring to divide inherited land among
themselves. Art. 25 of the LML of 2008 provides for formalization of individual tenure recognition,
which were recorded collectively under the name of an elder or a community through the settlement.
According to ARAZI officials, there are currently two types of individualization procedures:
       1. Through the court
       2. Through land clearance (Tasfiya), the responsibility of ARAZI.
The land clearance process Tasfiya covers only land legally held under the LML. It includes the
mobilization of a land clearance delegation (composed of MoF, MAIL, Cadaster – each 2 members; and
ARAZI - 3 members), in charge of verifying the original document and proceeding to the division of the
land based on the information available.
The process through the courts is reportedly similar, following a petition to the court by the parties,
who are provided with a “document of division” ( Taraka Khatt), considered as a valid formal deed as
per Art. 5 of the LML.If none of the documents specified in Art. 5 of the LML are available, the process
is done according to article 8 of the LML, which can recognize the tenure of a person if he has been
holding the land in question for 35 years or more.
In reality, however, a major issue concerning the opportunities for tenure individualization is the
general absence of legal documentation by landholders across the country, and difficulties for land
holders to comply with Art. 8 of the LML, given both high trends of displacement, and the extent of
land holding by the government mentioned above. Moreover, dispositions in the existing LML for land
clearance remain insufficiently descriptive concerning the set of procedures and mechanisms to be
used.
That being said, the opportunities for the tenure individualization remain limited in Afghanistan.
Additionally, due to the unclear process of the tenure individualization, high corruption of public
institutions, in reality uncontested customary ownership rights mainly in rural areas and fear from
paying taxes, the motivation for the collectively held areas to be individually registered is very low.
Nevertheless, there have further been scattered reports of formalization of traditionally distributed
lands – usually government land - in some provinces (such as the southeastern province of Khost), with
communities registering individual ownership of their various members within the court. That being
said, these practices have been reported to have been conducted through substantive use of corruption
and bribes.107
Recording and mapping of rural and urban land
Before engaging in the discussion on recording of the land, it is important to clarify the terminology
used for the purposes of this report based on Afghan context. Recognition of rights, as discussed above,
talks about how the rights are recognized legally based on various land related laws and decrees.
Registration is an act of writing down the information about ones land in the Principal Books of ARAZI
or courts’ Register of Title Deeds (Kondas). The rights in Afghanistan can be recorded in Land Statistics
Registration book of the Cadastral Department, which serves as a “probable” ownership record in
Afghanistan.
The majority of Afghan land remains unrecorded and unmapped with considerable regional variations.
Even in the areas, however, where the rights are into various extent documented, the records have not
been updated. Based on different accounts, reportedly only 33-36% of the land in the country has been
formally registered, with latest records dating back to the regime of Daud Khan (1973-1978).
Additionally, the last nation-wide cadastral land survey, which covered only 34% of mostly rural and




107   “Major Land Disputes.”


                                                     55
peri-urban private land of the country before it was stopped, 108 was conducted between 1970 and 1978,
and has not been updated since109.
Because with each regime change, the policy on how to improve land governance has changed, there
are various, and not always interlinked, ways how to record and/or register land in Afghanistan. Based
on the experience of the experts interviewed for this study, the registration through ARAZI’s land
clearance and the court registration through acquiring of a formal title deed are only uncontested
mechanism              of             registering          land             in            Afghanistan:




108There is no data available on the types of lands that were surveyed. According to the Expert’s anecdotal
understanding, all types of land were surveyed.




                                                    56
                    Formal                                                         Customary                                                     Non-documentary
                                                                                                                                                 evidence
Registration        Land registration at ARAZI is probably most valid              A customary deed document has to be prepared                  Tasfia delegation conducts
at ARAZI –          proof of ownership in Afghanistan because, when                before 1975 and the seller has to possess original            their investigation on long
land                transacting the land through court registration, the           legal deed for it to be considered as legal. The              term           unchallenged
clearance           validation of the registration in Principal Books of           buyer and seller invite two to three persons as               possession.    Long    term
(Tasfia)            ARAZI is needed. However, this is possible only                elders, Arbab/Malek (Head of Village) in rural areas          unchallenged possession is
                    through land clearance process (Tasfia).                       and Wakil-e- Gozar (representative of the                     recognized when proven
                                                                                   community) in urban areas and the Mullah in their             through the testimonies of
                    Tasfia is a process, when a team (currently including
                                                                                   house or the local mosque. The Mullah or one of the           neighbors that the person
                    members of Cadastral Department) goes to the field
                                                                                   participants writes the details on a piece of blank           lived on land for more than
                    and through the usage of different measuring
                                                                                   paper which includes the date, name, father’s                 35 years, cultivated it and
                    techniques establishes the boundaries of the land,
                                                                                   name, grand father’s name of the buyer(s) and                 there are no other claims
                    water rights, taxation status and the legitimate
                                                                                   seller(s), the size of the property, boundary, the            over it.
                    owner based valid legal documents (all legally valid
                                                                                   cost according to the market value and a statement
                    documents proving the ownership of a land as set by                                                                          However, to prove long
                                                                                   of agreement by both sides. The buyer and the
                    the LML 2008)110.                                                                                                            term          unchallenged
                                                                                   seller sign and put a fingerprint at the bottom of
                                                                                                                                                 possession is problematic
                    However, currently Tasfia is conducted only in cases           the deed. The elders, the Mullah and Arbab or
                                                                                                                                                 in Afghanistan, taking into
                    when a major dispute over land exists, a big                   Wakil-i-Gozaral sign the deed as witnesses. This is
                                                                                                                                                 account the decades of
                    development or mining project is planned to be                 prepared in two copies, one for the buyer and one
                                                                                                                                                 war and internal and cross
                    implemented, when land is located near the state               for the seller.
                                                                                                                                                 border migration.
                    land or specific cases when powerful people are
                                                                                   Tasfia team accepts the customary deed documents
                    involved. It is very difficult for ordinary Afghan
                                                                                   provided they fulfill the above mentioned
                    citizens to get his/her land cleared by ARAZI, hence
                                                                                   requirements. If the rights holder does not have a
                    to be registered in Principal Books of ARAZI.
                                                                                   copy of the original valid title deed, he/she has to
                                                                                   seek the validation from the court against their
                                                                                   archives (makhzans).
                                                                                   However, the majority of Afghans do not possess the
                                                                                   original valid title deed. Due to the wars many legal
                                                                                   documents have been destroyed. Additionally the
                                                                                   condition stipulating that only the customary deeds
                                                                                   prepared after 1975 are considered valid, excludes
                                                                                   the holders who acquired their rights after that
                                                                                   year.
Court               Courts in Afghanistan do not equally weight the                Customary deed documents are accepted in theory               The       long       term
registration –      various forms of government documentation listed in            as long as they meet al the above mentioned                   unchallenged possession is

      110Tasfia   form has 57 columns to be filled in by the team, such as if the land is shared, inherited, if there are any encumbrances such as loans etc.


                                                                                        57
acquiring      of   the LML as valid evidence of ownership.                       requirements. Often, however, the required                  accepted in theory by the
title deed                                                                        information such as signatures or fingerprints of the       court as long as all the
                    Objective of the acquiring of a title deed is to
                                                                                  witnesses on the customary deed is missing,                 requirements as per Art. 8
                    formalize land ownership after the transaction
                                                                                  therefore these cannot be accepted by the courts.           LML are met, taking into
                    (buying) of the land. This type of recording of rights
                                                                                                                                              account the difficulty to
                    can only happen when doing a transaction.                     It is important to note, that it is not possible to
                                                                                                                                              prove      long      term
                                                                                  formalize customary title deed without actually
                    Although the courts are legally bound to accept all                                                                       unchallenged possession in
                                                                                  transacting (selling) the land. In other words, there
                    the seven legal documents proving the ownership as                                                                        praxis.
                                                                                  is no mechanism established in Afghanistan, where
                    listed in LML 2008, in current Afghan realities, often
                                                                                  one could go and after meeting all the necessary            The process of formalizing
                    the judges refuse to accept the tax and water
                                                                                  requirements, the customary deed document will be           the long term possession
                    payment receipts, as well as sanad rasmee mulkyet –
                                                                                  turned to formal title deed. Only the buyer, buying         based on non-documentary
                    documents proving the ownership during the period
                                                                                  the land based on the customary deed document of            evidence does not exist in
                    of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (1978 – 79)
                                                                                  the seller (as explained above), after going through        Afghanistan. Similarly to
                    fearing the acceptance of forged documents 111.
                                                                                  the court registration will get formal title deed.          the     customary    deed
                                                                                  There were efforts by the Judicial Reform                   documents, one has to
                                                                                  Commission to push for an approval of a Customary           transact the land in order
                                                                                  Deed Registration Law in 2005, however this draft           for the buyer to acquire
                                                                                  law was not enacted until now.                              formal title deed.
Cadastral           The entry of an owner’s name on the forms of the              Customary deeds are accepted, taking into account           Long term unchallenged
recording and       Cadastral Survey (ownership list and ownership card)          that the cadastral department does not have the             possession based on all
mapping             does not necessarily represent an official                    responsibility to find the rightful owner. The word         required non-documentary
                    confirmation of ownership. It is rather a statement           “customary” is written on ownership list and in the         evidence is accepted. The
                    of “probable ownership” based on the field data that          cadastral records.                                          words “under claim” is
                    the survey teams collected about each parcel they                                                                         written on the ownership
                    surveyed. The main reason for this is the fact that                                                                       list and into the cadastral
                    the Cadastral team does not have the responsibility                                                                       records.
                    to investigate who is the rightful owner.
                    a) National Cadastral Survey – started in 1964. Its
                    objective is to provide maps and spacial information
                    about the land and linking it to other information
                    land in other land registries. Last survey was
                    conducted between 1970-78, while only 30% of land
                    was surveyed. The records were not updated since




      111   After 1979, Afghanistan’s three decades of war started and the judges, out of fear of accepting forged documents, often do not accept any.


                                                                                      58
           then, except for additionally 4% of land surveyed in
           last 5 years, based on various presidential decrees 112.
           The cadastral map is the most valuable output that
           can be obtained only through this process. The
           outcomes of the cadastral mapping are sent to ARAZI
           for their recording.
           b) National Inventory Survey (Mowzeyee survey) – the
           methodology from the cadastral to inventory survey
           was changed to accelerate mapping process 113. This
           shorter and simpler methodology is used until now,
           although in rare cases as mentioned above.
           It is possible for the individual to have his/her land
           surveyed on demand; however the approval of the
           ARAZI CEO is needed. In cases of large tracts of land
           such as whole villages, the approval of the President
           has to be sought. This is done by submitting a letter
           of request to the Administrative Office of the
           President. However, in reality the land inventory
           happens rarely for ordinary citizens in Afghanistan.




112 After 1978, the National Cadastral Survey was halted by a Presidential Decree and only upon his approval can the Cadastral department conduct further
surveys.
113Change of the equipment, avoiding of an astronomical observation, triangulation, and measurement by steel tape, etc.




                                                                           59
Though some geographical variations were observed 114 , as mentioned above, only a minority of
landholders in Afghanistan register their land, hence lacking any form of land document from the
Afghan State, while informal documents still appear to be the most widespread form of
documentation (if the documentation exists at all).
The possession of formal land documentation varies considerably in Afghanistan from province to
province. In Balkh province, for instance, reportedly 80% of the land has been surveyed (though, as
above, the records have not been updated since). In this part of Afghanistan, where documentation
appears to be overall more available than in other provinces researched, only the district of Shur
Tapa was reported to be under-documented, as compared to those of Khulm, where a majority of
people were mentioned to hold formal land documents. Similar variations were observed in rural
areas of Kabul province, where less than 20% of landholders allegedly have formal documents in
Khaki Jabbar and Surobi, whereas this proportion rises to a reported 70% in Shakardara.

One of the reasons mentioned for low registration and formalization is reportedly the widespread
corruption of government institutions, which require the payment of bribes. According to agencies
involved in addressing land issues, most rural residents prefer the use of customary deeds as the
process for formalization and registration requires the payment of informal fees. Customary deeds
are thus considered cheaper, do not require travelling to the nearest centre, and include little or
no payment of debts.115
Another reason mentioned was the perceived complexity of the administrative process. According
to the World Bank Doing Business in Afghanistan report of 2015 it takes approximately 250-360
working days for the completion of land tenure recognition in Afghanistan 116. Therefore, most of
the people prefer directly deal with community representatives to divide land among heirs,
distribute land among tribe members or sell parcels. There were further mentions of individual
parties documenting transfers “themselves” – e.g. concluding bilateral agreement without the
assistance of a judicial forum (formal or informal). Officials, despite usually tolerating customary
forms of land ownership, do not regard these documents as having any legal value 117.
Paying taxes also deter people from registering their property, in particular when adding the
informal fees, which often have to be paid in addition to regular land taxes fees. People try to
avoid paying taxes due to the lack of financial resources or because they do not believe that the
government will spent the money to their benefit. Some high-ranking officials and rich people do
not pay taxes knowing they will not be pursued.
Illegal land transactions
Due to the largely customary tenure of Afghan land with only minimal portion being recorded or
mapped, the opportunities for illegal land transactions are enormous.
Illegal land sales are more broadly known in Afghanistan as ‘land grabbing’ or ‘land usurpation’. It
occurs more in urban areas than rural because the value of land in urban areas is higher, while all
types of land (private, public, state) are being usurped. The term has been defined as “use,
control, occupation or ownership of land by one without a bona fide right.” 118 This definition

114 These variations were not so much observed on a regional basis but within small pockets of districts. For
instance, though landholders in Balkh province appeared to by and large hold more formal documentation than
in the other three provinces, the Balkh district of Shur Tapa was reportedly deprived of formal deeds. Similar
variations were observed within Kabul province, with relatively more documentation in Shakardara than in
Surobi or Khaki Jabbar, and between districts within Kabul City, with less than 1% of PD 13 residents holding
formal documentation.
115 A development worker interviewed in Balkh province provided the following anecdotal evidence: “In Sari -

Pol, you have to pay at 6000 Afghanis when you want to register your land if you refer it to the courts. And
they see the size of your land and based on that, they ask for additional bribes to give a Qabala-e Shariayi.
And it gets delayed. This is a chronic issue.” Interview with a development worker, Mazar-e Sharif, 30 June
2014.
116             “Registering              property,              “World                Bank              Group,
http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/afghanistan/#registering-property            (accessed     4
September 2015).
117 Interview with community leader and district administration officer, Zendan, Khaki Jabbar, 7 June 2014.
118“Stolen Lands,” 38. This definition was also used in the Draft Policy Paper titled “Addressing land grabbing

through the criminal justice system,” prepared by the Policy Advisory Group on Land, convened by UNAMA
Rule of Law.



                                                      60
captures many forms of illegal land transactions including the following instances: “the use of
physical force, intimidation or violence by powerful people to remove others from land; individuals
occupy and improve empty land; individuals obtain title through a land allocation scheme that feels
to meet legal requirements; individuals obtain title through fraud.” 119
Presidential Decree 45 on grabbed land policy requested the mapping of all land grabbed across
Afghanistan. According to this decree, the list of land grabbers was to be compiled by all ministries
from which land had been grabbed, and submitted to ARAZI. Statistics compiled by ARAZI indicate
that more than 1.2 million jeribs of land have been usurped over the past decade. 120 A special
Parliamentary Committee created to align a list of land grabbers with the list already drafted by
ARAZI includes over 15,000 individuals, who had allegedly participated in land grabbing.121
A recent report by Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation Committee
identified that one of the most common means of land usurpation is forgery of documents. 122 During
the registration process documents and deeds are being removed or replaced with fake deeds in
court archives (Makhzans). Land is also being usurped through forged powers of attorney,
customary deeds and inheritance. Additionally documents that are stored in poor quality conditions
have made them vulnerable to deterioration. In particular, forgeries carried out by court
employees have been identified as one of the main forms of land usurpation. The report also notes
that there have even been instances of deliberately destroying existing records. 123
Additionally, field data collected for this report showed that illegal land transactions are a
widespread practice across the country. It was notably mentioned as a serious problem by local
ARAZI offices. The district ARAZI of Balkh District for instance, mentioned land grabbing was the
main challenge he was faced with, and insisted most land grabbers had not been identified by the
government124. In Balkh in general, but also in Herat Province, land grabbing by local power holders
and former jihadi commanders, who then illegally sell the parcels they have appropriated, was
notably mentioned as a widespread phenomena by several interviewees. Most parks within Mazar
have similarly been grabbed by local power holders, allegedly with the tacit support of government
employees125. In other areas, such as Kandahar city, illegal land sales by land grabbers was reported
to occur on a “huge scale”126ARAZI officials, despite mentioning the wide scale occurrence of illegal
land sales, reported they had no precise information concerning the extent of these practices in
their areas. Others provided approximate figures concerning illegal land sales in their area. In
Guzara district of Herat province for instance, illegal land sales reportedly reach 35% of
transactions – mostly through the use of fake documentation. In Pashtun Zarghun district of the
same province, 10% of sale transactions are reportedly considered illegal. The proportion
reportedly raises to 60% in Spin Boldak district of Kandahar.No information, however, was provided
concerning the criteria used to define “illegal land sales”, which, as above may cover different
realities
However, despite the extensive nature of the problem, the current legal framework does not
adequately address the crime of land grabbing. 127 The LML contains a criminal provision relating to
land grabbing; however, this provision has been criticised as it does not define the act of land
grabbing or set out elements of land grabbing or provide for any penalties. 128 Similarly land
grabbing is not separately criminalised in the Penal Code. There are possibilities to prosecute the
crime of land grabbing as “theft” under the Penal Code. However, it has been argued that the
Penal Code’s theft provisions only cover moveable property.
Given the limited reach of government authorities in most of the country, and the widespread
occupation of government land under customary norms unrecognized by the state, transactions
over land legally state-owned but customarily or de facto occupied by communities who consider it

119 “Draft Policy Paper on Addressing Land Grabbing through the Criminal Justice System” ( Policy Advisory
Group on Land, 2014).
120“Public Inquiry into Land Usurpation,” 9.
121“Stolen Lands,” Note 184.
122“Public Inquiry into Land Usurpation,” 9.
123“Public Inquiry into Land Usurpation,” 10.
124 Interview with District ARAZI, Balkh district, 3 July 2014.
125 Field research, Balkh and Herat provinces, June-July 2014.
126 Interview with Provincial ARAZI, Kandahar, 9 July 2014.
127 See “Stolen Lands of Afghanistan,” 9.
128 Ibid.




                                                   61
as their rightful holding might also be considered illegal.
Another form of illegal land sales includes the sales of state land or public land, which is not
allowed under Afghan law, sales of the leased land or sales of land with partially forged document.
Illegal private land leases as opposed to illegal land sales, were mentioned to be scarce, allegedly
due to low revenue drawn from leases as compared to sales. Given the high proportion of
unrecorded land and potential inter-personal lease transactions between individuals, one cannot
exclude, however, that the practice does exist129.
Illegal state land leases, according to the Art. 19 of the ARAZI Land Lease Procedure are:
•      Leasing a state land for agriculture purposes and use it for business purposes because the price
       of leasing of land for agriculture purposes is lower than for business purposes.
•      Further lease of already leased government land for higher price than original lease (sub-
       leasing).
•      Leasing of a state land for business purposes with harmful effects to environment.
•      Leasing of a state land for a specific purpose without using it
The procedures of leasing the state land and the issues connected to it will be explained in more
details later in this report. At this stage it is, however, important to note, that illegal state land
leases happen in Afghanistan. One example of a state land in Ade Torkhum in Jalalabad can serve
as an example. The land was leased for agriculture purposes by two businessmen, which was later
turned to residential area, where the plots are being sold to third parties.
Women’s formal rights
Women’s rights to ownership and acquiring of land are embedded in the Afghan Constitution
particularly in Art. 40 similarly to those of any other Afghan citizen. It provides tha t “no one shall
be forbidden from owning property and acquiring it.” Art. 22 further mentions: “The citizens of
Afghanistan, man and woman, have equal rights and duties before the law.” Additionally, the Art.
34 of the Elimination of Violence Against Women Law (EVAW) of 2009 establishes a short term
imprisonment for those who prevent a woman from possessing or acquiring personal property, such
as her salary, house, and other goods. According the Shari’a, law firmly embedded in the Afghan
Constitution and other statutory law, there is no prohibition on women obtaining equal property
rights to those of men. Daughters and wives are thus entitled to a share of their brothers and
husbands inheritance.
Despite formal legal provisions that allow women to own land, few women actually do. Daughters
tend to abandon their inherited land rights in favor of their brothers, and widows, who inherit land,
commonly transfer it to their sons (this is known as the practice of renunciation ( tanazul). The rare
cases where women retain control of inherited land are those when women have no brothers and
are not married, keeping the land due to the lack of support from their brothers and husbands.
Widows and female heads of households are sometimes recognized at the local level as the owners
of a parcel, but rarely register their rights in their own name, preferring to register them in that of
a male member of the family (son, nephew, etc).
Studies thus found almost all land is registered in the name of the male head of household: less
than 2% of women own land and most of those women are widows 130 . Field research largely
confirmed the above findings, though slight geographical variations were observed – with a reported
10% of women owning land in several Balkh districts, though it remains unclear if the land is
effectively recorded in their name or in that of their late father, husband, or son, which appears to
be the case in most areas across Afghanistan.
The reasons for this trend are strong social and customary barriers to property ownership by
women, where patriarchal structures remain prevalent. Women in Afghanistan often believe that it
is not appropriate for them to inherit from their parents because they will have right on their
husband’s property after marriage. In practice, this is not applicable most of time, particularly in
cases, when a woman is divorced. In this case it barely happens that women inherit property from
her husband. Similarly, when a woman is widowed and doesn’t have children, she often does not
inherit property due to the popular belief in Afghanistan that as long as a woman does not have
children, she will re-marry again and inherited land would end up in hands of her new husband. To

129   More on state land leases will be discussed later in the report.
130Wily,  Land and the Constitution”



                                                          62
the contrary, when a woman has children, often the inheritance rights are granted to her.
Moreover, the complexity of the formal process of registration deters many women, who lack
knowledge and access to these institutions, to register their rights. In urban settings, where female
heads of household and widows are increasingly asserting their rights to land, they are still unlikely
to try to register their rights formally because the process is time consuming and costly, but also
because due to social pressure, women are less familiar with administrative processes. 131




131Ibid.




                                                 63
    9.2. Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations


                                                                                                            Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                              Topic                                          A   B C     D
PANEL 2: Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations
LGI 1: Rights to Forest and Common Lands
              Forests and common lands are clearly identified in law and responsibility for use is
2 1 1
              clearly assigned.
2 1 2 Rural group rights are formally recognized and can be enforced.
              Users' rights to key natural resources on land (incl. fisheries) are legally recognized
2 1 3
              and protected in practice.
              Multiple rights over common land and natural resources on these lands can legally
2 1 4
              coexist.
              Multiple rights over the same plot of land and its resources (e.g. trees) can legally
2 1 5
              coexist.
              Multiple rights over land and mining/other sub-soil resources located on the same
2 1 6
              plot can legally coexist.
2 1 7 Accessible opportunities exist for mapping and recording of group rights.
2 1 8 Boundary demarcation of communal land.
LGI 2: Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
2 2 1 Restrictions regarding rural land use are justified and enforced.
2 2 2 Restrictions on rural land transferability effectively serve public policy objectives.
              Rural land use plans are elaborated/changed via public process and resulting
2 2 3
              burdens are shared.
              Rural lands, the use of which is changed, are swiftly transferred to the destined
2 2 4
              use.
2 2 5 Rezoning of rural land use follows a public process that safeguards existing rights.
              For protected rural land use (forest, pastures, wetlands, national parks, etc.) plans
2 2 6
              correspond to actual use.
              Rural lands, the use of which is identified for rehabilitation, are swiftly transferred
2 2 7
              to the destined use.

    Introduction
    Approximately, 80 % of rural Afghan population depends on land to secure their day-to-day livelihoods.
    The country’s future stability and economic development is also dependent on the management of
    natural resources including forests, common lands and pastures (rangelands).
    Currently, pasturelands comprise 30.1 million hectares of land, constituting around 45% of the
    country’s overall area132 excluding the vast swathes of land that are considered ‘non -arable lands’ or
    ‘arid lands’, which are used for grazing in winter. Therefore the total area used for grazing in
    Afghanistan constitutes 70 – 80%. These pasturelands can provide habitat and fodder for around 35
    million of livestock as well as wildlife. Pasturelands constitute major sources of revenue for the rural
    population who use these lands to make livestock by-products and herbs.133
    Forests are one of Afghanistan’s most important national assets, which play a significant role in
    supplying construction timber, fuelwood and industrial timber. Forests are crucial in protecting the
    environment, mitigating floods, and preventing soil erosion. In the mid-twentieth century, Afghanistan
    had 3.1 to 3.4 million hectares of forestland, however the recent reports and surveys have estimated
    the current area of forestland to less than 1 – 1.3 million hectares.134 If deforestation continues at the

    132“National Plan for Sustainable Rangeland Management,” fourth draft (Kabul: MAIL, 2012).
    133 “Afghanistan Initial National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change”
    (Kabul: UNEP, 2012), 16.
    134 “Afghanistan Initial National Communication,” 4.




                                                         64
same rate, the total degradation of the country’s forests in the next 20 -25 years will not be far from
reality and the country will face an absolute loss of construction timber and fuelwood as well as the
devastating repercussions of floods and excessive soil erosion.
Afghanistan’s natural resources have been severely destroyed by natural factors such as droughts and
floods, as well as hand-made disasters such as wars, weak management and lack of rule of law the
recent past. Increasing population, climate change, deforestation, overgrazing, degradation of water
reservoirs and reduction of water, salinization, soil degradation and loss of biodiversity have, all in all
resulted in desertification in many parts of the country. 135
Concept definitions:
Rural lands are lands located in rural areas such as pasturelands (including deserts, cemeteries,
mountains and hills and river banks), forests, protected areas, agricultural, arid and virgin land, rain-
fed lands and chermanjay – a special field for cultivating wheat.
Common lands are viewed as equal to public lands in Afghanistan and they can include pasturelands
and forests. Public lands are not adequately defined in current Afghan statutory law. Given that the
Art. 3(8) of LML 2008 stipulates that any land, which is deemed public and is not registered in the book
of government lands, is considered state land, the blurred definition of public and state land resulting
from the Presidential Decree 83 and the fact, that registration of land occurs rarely in rural areas,
public (and also private) land can be easily interchanged for the state land. Hence, in some cases,
public lands have been given away by the state to other private owners 136.
Pasturelands are the “entire land stretches, including wastelands, hillock and the meadows, marshy
lands on both sides of a river and woodlands covered with herbaceous plants and natural shrubs and
bushes and which can be used as animal fodder” according t o the Pasture Law (2000). However, the
definition itself and the ownership rights over pasturelands in Afghanistan are not clear. According to
the Art. 3(9) of LML 2008, the grazing land, which is a sub-group of pastureland is unprecisely defined
as “if a person having loud voice and standing at the last home of village or town calls loudly, this land
up to the place where the voice of the loud voice having person is heard, is considered to be grazing
land.“ In relation to the ownership rights, according to the LML (2008), Art. 3 (8), pastures have been
included in the government land, whereas paragraph 9 of the same article and Art. 82 (1) explain that
the pasturelands are “those virgin and arid lands, on which state and individual possession has not been
proved legally and they are deemed public property. An individual or the State can not possess pasture
lands, unless otherwise stipulated by the Shari’a.” Taking into account the traditional customary claims
on pastures prevalent in Afghanistan such as in the example of the local communities in Hazarajat,
Central Highlands, concurrent understanding of the land ownership over these lands by the Kuchi tribes
and local communities, and most importantly continuing claims on both sides stemming from different
regimes’ allocations of land, where the lands has gone from Kuchi tribes and communities back and
forth the conflicts over pastures in Afghanistan are numerous. Additionally, the ambiguity on the land
tenure of the pasturelands leads to the various interpretation on the use of these lands. Art. 3 of the
Pasture Law (2000) divided the pastureland into 2 types: specific and communal pasture. It stipulates,
“The right to use a pasture shall confine to cattle grazing. Only the cattle of the nearby villages can be
grazed on the specific pasture and the communal pasture can be used for grazing cattle belonging to
the communities137.” However, coming to the example of the conflict over pastures in Hazarajat, the
interpretation of the Kuchi communities that the pastures are state lands hence can be used by all and
the local communities cannot restrict their usage, creates major conflicts in this area.


135 “Afghanistan’s Environmental Recovery: A post-conflict plan for people and their natural resources,”(Kabul:
UNEP Post-Conflict Branch, 2006).
136 Liz Alden Wily, “Land Governance at the Crossroads: A Review of Afghanistan’s Proposed New Land Management

Law” (Kabul: AREU, 2012).
137Also LML 2008, Art. 82(2) stipulates that the pastures shall be used by the local villagers.




                                                      65
Based on the definition in Forest Management Law (FML) 2012, Art. 22 (5), “forest includes at least
half a hectare of land with surface coverage of at least 10 per cent of fertile and infertile trees”.
Forests are considered a government (state) land (LML, 2008, Art. 3(8)) and can be used by all the
citizens of the country (FML 2012, Art. 5). According to Art. 4138 of Forest Law, management and
custody of the forests are with MAIL. According to article 7 of the Forest Law all products of the forest
belong to the state; individuals and private organizations can use the products from the forest,
provided a fee is paid to MAIL. However, in practice local tribes and villages use forest resources
according to their own established procedures. Although no such statutory law ambiguity exists in the
definition, ownership and usage rights in relation to forests, the customary claims over some parts of
Afghanistan forest area exist, creating conflict over the usage of the forests.
                                     Rights to Forest and Common Lands
Definition of Forests and Common Lands
The legal codes of the country provide a clear definition of forests, as mentioned above. There are
various types of forests. Based on Art 3. (11) a “state forest” is a forest that belongs to the government
and is utilised and protected by the state organisations. Art 3 (9) defines “city forest” as a forest,
which is created on state land inside a city for its produce, housing animals, protecting water,
recreational and educational purposes. Art. 3 (12) stipulate private forest as a forest that is created by
people in their private or leased land. Art. 3 (13) defines “protected forests” as forests that are
announced as protected forests because of environmental reasons.
User rights are also stipulated in the legal code. As mentioned above, the citizens of the country can
use the state forests based on the MAIL’s regulatio ns. In Arts. 25 and 26, the Forest Law provides the
provisions for “the arbitrary and unlicensed utilisation, exploitation, transportation and processing of
forest products”. The illegal use of forests can to criminal penalties.“
The Department of Forests within MAIL is responsible for management of the forests. 139 Art. 17 of the
Forest Law (2012) also stipulates that the responsibility of protecting and maintaining the forests falls
within the citizens and the government organisations.
As mentioned in the introduction, common lands are considered equal to public lands in Afghanistan.
However, the current body of laws does not provide a clear definition of public lands (the issues with
the unclear definition of public lands will be explained in more detail in the section 9.4.).
The contradicting articles in LML along with the fact that the most of the land in particularly rural
Afghanistan is not registered, nor surveyed, creates major problems in terms of the identification of
public land ownership and usage rights. Weak legal understanding of common property particularly
undermines the interests of those who own small farms or no farms at all. The rights of this group of
people are endangered by people with influence and that legal standards are not able to protect their
rights. Disputes over outlying lands such as rain-fed agricultural lands and pasturelands are
commonplace, putting into conflict the rights of individuals versus the local population as well as the
interests of different ethnic groups.140
Rural group rights, their mapping, recording and boundary demarcation of communal lands
Rural groups in Afghanistan hold themselves to be a number of families living in the same rural area,
sharing the same traditions, culture, who have approximately same standards of living and have
created certain bonds between each. In the context of Afghanistan it is a plethora of tribes, clans and
sub-clans or qawms 141 that can be considered a rural group. A group right is a right that is shared
between two or more persons in a manner that each member of the group has certain user rights in
each portion of the commonly held land (as opposed to the land being divided into number of smaller

138Forest  Law(Official Gazette no. 795), 2012(SY 1391), Article 4.
139See  Art. 4 of FML 2012.
140
   Liz Alden Wily, “Looking for Peace on the Pastures,”(Kabul: AREU, 2004).
141
   This term more precisely means “solidarity group”, and can be used to refer to small entities an individual’s
family, or large groups such as clan and tribe.



                                                         66
parcels depending on the number of members of the group). However, as mentioned above the
collective property rights are not provided for in the current body of laws in Afghanistan, therefore no
mapping nor recording of group rights is happening in Afghanistan.
The collective property rights are not provided for in the current body of laws in Afghanistan. Even
though the National Land Policy (2007) defines the term “community land”, this term is not embedded
in any other existing laws in relation to land management. The Draft Rangeland Law, currently being
prepared by MAIL, provides the framework for management of private, community and public
rangeland. It is currently under revision, however has not been approved yet. Under this draft,
nomadic or semi-nomadic people may acquire pastureland for grazing their livestock through
application to the local authorities stating the need for land, and through the identification of vacant
land (mawat)142.
Additionally, considering the public ownership as a group right, as mentioned above, Afghanistan did
not establish the process of legal recognition of the public as an owner of public lands. This means that
even though the general understanding is that the public lands (although not properly defined in
Afghan laws) are owned by the public, there is not legal way to prove that during Tasfia (land
clearance) processes. Therefore according to the Art.2(8) LML 2008, stipulating that all the lands,
which ownership cannot be legally proven, belong to state, all these lands legally belong to the state.
Even though in Afghan statutory law the group ownership rights are not formally recognized, in the
customary law, the tribes, villages, clans and families can in reality be perceived by others and hold
themselves out as owning pieces of land that they exercise user rights over. The rights are usually
recorded in the name of one person of the village/tribe/clan and are customarily considered as group
rights. On paper, there is no difference between the land owned by a group and land owned by one
individual, who could use that registration to exclude other persons from the land. This leads to a real
legal vulnerability for the rest of the group. However through the witnesses (the process used often in
rural Afghanistan) is possible to find out it the land belongs to one individual or a group.

Additionally, in the past, the legal concept of collectively held lands existed and at times they were
allocated to different tribes or clans. Such examples can be found in Shewa, Badakhsnah, where in
times of Zahir Shah, the Kuchi tribes were allocated land to use it every summer for 3 months. The
reminiscence of collectively held lands exists until today, with majority of Afghan rural land being
collectively held. However, as mentioned above, the current body of law is silent on the status of
collectively held lands from the past giving no possibility of legal recognition. These lands are also not
properly mapped.
The definition of communal land is not provided for in Afghan body of law. Communal lands in
Afghanistan can be considered as a public land, taking the issues with their definition and communities’
rights recognition mentioned in the previous parts. Nevertheless, the Pasture Law 2000 mentions the
communal pastures 143. Art. 2(2) provides the definition of communal pastures: “Communal pasture:
Arid land which, in accordance with section (9) of the land management law does not fall within
bounds of villages or towns.” According to Art. 3 of the same law, “the communal pasture can be used
for grazing cattle belonging to the communities” and it cannot be brought, sold or leased (Art.6).
This concept exist until now and people distinguish between special and communal pasture. However,
the boundaries of communal pastures are not demarcated.
Recognition of user rights to key national resources
For the purposes of this study the key natural resources are forests and its products, pastures, water
and other natural resources like wood. There are multiple articles within the laws covering users’
rights. According to Art. 5 of the FML 2012 the citizens of the country can use the state forests based
on the MAIL’s regulations. Art. 22 of the same law stipulate that “the lice nse to use and exploit state

142DraftRangeland Law.
143Art. 82 of LML, Dari version: pasturelands are translated as mara’a land, meaning it can be grazing land,
graveyard, hills, etc. Therefore, the common pasture can be certainly considered as mara’a land.


                                                    67
forests is awarded by the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock at the request of forestry
associations”. The Pasture Law (2000) Art.3 clearly states that pastures can be used by communities for
grazing cattle. The Water Law enacted in 2009, stipulates in its Art. 2 that the water is owned by
public and it should be managed and protected by the government.
Even though the Afghan legal code provides certain clarity in the relation to key natural resources, in
reality there were and still are numerous conflicts over the usage of pasture and forest lands in
Afghanistan such as already mentioned conflict between Hazaras and Kuchi communities and conflicts
over water rights, particularly during dry seasons such as in Ghazi in Sarab district and Gedargu144.
In addition to insecure user rights, the communities suffer from the illegal use of natural resources.
Lack of security and the inability of the government to implement the rule of law throughout the
country often leads to the destruction of the forests, cutting down the trees and smuggling. Other
violations include converting forestland to residential areas and using forestland for private purposes.
From 1992 onwards, forests have been, contrary to the law, converted into farmlands, orchards and
unplanned settlements in Balkh, Samangan, Baghlan, Kunduz and Takhar provinces. This trend has
taken place as a result of the lack of law enforcement in these provinces and has continued up to the
present day. Furthermore, in Samangan, Ghor and Badghis provinces, pistachio forests that constitute
large parts of the income of the residents of this province have been cut down to trade and use as
firewood, leading to widespread deforestation. In Kabul, Zabul, Kandahar, Helmand, Farah and Nimruz,
the usage of the forests for timber smuggling persisted at least for the last three decades and
continues to the present day. A prominent example is firewood markets in Kabul and its neighbouring
provinces, where the timber is usually illegally provided. 145 Even though the state and the international
community have made an investment on reforestation starting in 2002, the redevelopment of these
forests has not yet been completed.
Another recent example for no respect of the community rights, as well as lack of rule of law and good
governance is the area around Amu Darya river. Around 1,560 jeribs of public pasturelands and forests,
located adjacent to the Amu Darya, were leased by the local ARAZI department in Imam Saheb district
and the Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI) to some 31 people in Qaraqarawal, Shalbafi,
Barzangi Arabia and Hajji Talab areas of Imam Saheb district of Kunduz province. However, these lands
were converted into arable lands after cutting down forests and destroying pasturelands. As a result,
around 1,600 families were deprived of the right to use these pasturelands, in contravention to the
Pasture Law, Article 3. Also, around 1,000 jeribs of lands – recently protected from the Amu Darya
floods and having a vegetation surface were converted into arable lands and leased afterwards.
Furthermore, around 500 families have lived in Imam Saheb’s public forest for years. However, this
forest and pasturelands converted into arable lands, destroying the largest natural and biological
sources in the process.146 It is correct to think that the state should be employing measures to prevent
the conversion and unsustainable land use, however it the process needs to start with the recognition
of rights of the local communities to these pastures and forests.
Multiple rights over common and private lands and their natural resources
Multiple rights over common (public) land and its natural resources can coexist in Afghanistan. The
prominent examples would be the Kuchi and local communities using the pastures in summer time,
when the Kuchi communities have right to use certain pastures otherwise used by the local
communities. In some areas this arrangement is well functioning, in other areas the sharing of the
summer pastures can lead to conflicts between Kuchis and local communities over usage rights. Even
though the Afghan laws and practices provide the venues for the dispute resolution, in praxis, as
already mentioned, there are examples of lengthy and complicated unresolved disputes. Taking into
account the slow and costly court proceedings in Afghanistan, even this possibility is not effective to

144 For further information please read Vincent Thomas, “Unpacking the Complexities of Water Conflicts Resolution
Processes in Afghanistan” (September 2014); “Water Rights and Conflict Resolution Processes in Afghanistan: The
Case of the Sar-i-Pul Sub-basin” (December 2013), “’Good’ Water Governance Models in Afghanistan: Gaps and
Opportunities” (March 2013).
145Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 27 March 2015.
146Author’s personal experience




                                                       68
swiftly resolve the disputes arising from the multiple rights over the common lands and their natural
resources.
Multiple rights over the same plot of land and its resources can legally coexist in Afghanistan. One
prominent example is share-cropping, very often used in rural Afghanistan. Share-cropping is a system
of agriculture, in which the land owner allows a tenant to use the land in return for a share of the
crops produced on the land. Another example, when the municipality decides to plant the trees on the
side of the road on the plots that belong to individuals, they conclude contracts with them where all
the provisions, rights and duties are stipulated and can vary from contract to contract.
Multiple rights over land and mining resources located on the same plot
Art. 38 of the Minerals Law 2015 stipulates the rights and obligations of the surface owner and the
license holder:
“A landowner may not use the surface of land which is within an Area subject to a License for the
purpose of cultivation, planting trees, waterway, grazing livestock, constructing buildings or
infrastructures, except with written agreement of the Holder”.
“The Holder of a License shall conduct Mineral Activities in accordance with the provisions of this Law
and avoid any unsafe [unprotected] activities, which may create hazardous waste dumps or other
hazards likely to endanger the livestock, crops or any lawful activity of the landowner or local
residents.”
Art. 39 stipulates that the violations of the above mentioned provisions result in fines and
compensations. Art. 93 of the Mineral Law clarifies, in case a dispute arises between a License Holder
and State entities or between a License Holder and non-State actors, the parties may settle the dispute
by mutual agreement or the authority defined in the contract for dispute resolutions. Where such
authorities are not defined in the contract the parties may refer to one of the following:
•   Arbitration by an expert upon the agreement of the parties
•   Assignment of a Dispute Resolution Panel of independent experts, selected by the Commission, that
    shall be comprised of not less than three (3) and more than five (5) members
Whenever the party or parties do not consent to a decision made by experts, the parties may, within
thirty (30) days of such determination, refer the dispute to one of the following for final resolution:
•   The Financial Dispute Resolution Commission as stipulated in the Da Afghanistan Bank Law
•   The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)
•   Arbitration under the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
Whether or not the government is able to implement the Minerals Law 2015 remains to be seen. Past
experience illustrate that the government is not able to monitor the application of the mining
contracts. Recently the Minister of Mines, Minerals and Petroleum stated that security issues and
corruption have impeded transparency and accountability both in terms of bidding of the contracts and
implementation of these contracts.
In addition to the venues for dispute resolution in the Mining Law, other dispute mechanism exist to
resolve the conflicts between the parties ranging from the informal consultations between the
ministries involved, through the involvement of the Parliament or President of the republic, to the
courtin case of the conflicts of more complicated nature.
                        Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
Restrictions on rural land use
Rural lands, which have been allocated for specific use in Afghanistan, include pasturelands,
forestlands, agricultural land and protected areas. None of these can be used for other purposes than
specified by the law. Agricultural land (private or state) cannot be changed to residential land, nor the
roads and highways can be built on agricultural land, pastures can be only used for grazing animals and



                                                   69
graveyards, forests for harvesting products and hunting animals, protected areas limit the usage of the
land to prevent its degradation because of its value to the whole nation. Having said that, all of these
restrictions serve the public purpose. To the contrary, based on the Art. 46 – 49, arid and virgin land
can be transferred, sold or leased proving certain conditions are met; hence its usage can be changed.
Although the restrictions on rural land use are stipulated in the Afghan legal codes, in praxis at times
these lands are not used for the purposes specified by the law. The United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) conducted a survey in 2003 and reported an estimated 50-70% of land is being used
for unspecified purposes in Afghanistan.147
Together with previous examples, another example would be the Jamal Mina suburb of Kabul, where
people build the houses on steep hills. Hills are considered pastures according to the Pasture Law,
defining pasture in part as “hillocks and meadows”, therefore cannot be used for residential
purposes148. However, around 20%, or one million, of Kabulis live in these hills surrounding the city 149.
Restrictions on rural land transferability
Pasture and forest lands, together with other public land 150 in rural areas is prohibited to be
transferred, leased or sold. Art. 6 of Pasture law prohibit selling lease or buying the pastureland.
General understanding of public land stipulates that the public land can only serve the public purpose;
hence it cannot be sold nor leased to private interests.
Privately owned agricultural land can, in the contrary, be sold or leased, as well as arid and virgin
land. Article 46(3) and 48 of LML 2008 addresses the transfer of virgin and arid lands and it stipulates:
“Selling of virgin and arid lands to individuals , agriculture & livestock institutions, private and joint
domestic companies by Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock shall take place on the basis of
auction after being approved by the president of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan .” Additionally,
“sale of virgin and arid lands for the sake of establishing agriculture farms, to domestic private and
joint-stock companies shall take place upon considering the volume of capital.”
Due to the unclear definitions of pastureland and public land in general, as well as often illegal usage
of these lands including the forests, the transferability restrictions are not always enforced and
followed.
Below is the table summarizing the rural land use and transferability restrictions:




147“Afghanistan  Post-Conflict Environmental Assessment” (Geneva: UNEP, 2003).
148
    It is important to note that this provision of Pasture Law is somewhat absurd considering Afghanistan is a
largely mountainous country.
149“Living in the 'burbs, Kabul style: The human wave of homes for one million people sweeping up the steep hills

around            Afghan           capital.”         Daily         Mail,       10         October          2012,
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2215793/Poverty-Kabul-style-One-million-residents-populate-steep-
hills-Afghan-capital--long-way-high-life.html.
150 Please note the unclear definition of public lands explained before.




                                                       70
Type of land     Legal Basis        Type of land          Legal restrictions         Legal restrictions on        Legal restrictions on use (land use change)
                                    (based on tenure      on ownership               transferability
                                    typology)
Pastureland      Pastureland        Discussion on         Discussion on              Cannot be leased, sold       Only for grazing animals and as graveyards (no
(incl. hills,    law 2000, LML      either state or       either state or            nor bought, transferred      land use change allowed)
mountains and    2008               public ownership      public ownership           nor exchanged
river banks)                                                                                                      State can implement development projects
                                                                                                                  based on LEL Art. 3(3), which requires an
                                                                                                                  exception of Council of Ministers
Forest           Forest Law         State land            State owned only           Cannot be leased, sold       Harvesting products and hunting animals (no
                                                                                     nor bought, transferred      land use change allowed)
                                                                                     nor exchanged
Protected        Environmental      State land            State owned only           Cannot be leased, sold       Limited usage of the land to prevent its
areas            Law, Law on                                                         nor bought, transferred      degradation (no land use change allowed)
                 the                                                                 nor exchanged                including protective measures. The process of
                 Preservation                                                                                     transforming the land to protected areas
                 of                                                                                               follows complicated procedure and takes
                 Afghanistan’s                                                                                    months or even years.
                 Historical and
                 Cultural
                 Artifacts
Arid & virgin    LML 2008 (Art.     State land            State owned                Can be leased or sold        No restrictions, land can be changed to
land             46-49)             (discussion if arid   (discussion if arid        provided           certain   residential area and to agricultural land (no
                                    and virgin land       and virgin land            conditions 151        (the   concrete mechanism developed for this
                                    can’t be              can’t be                   concurrent texts of the      purpose)
                                    pastureland)          pastureland)               Presidential Decree 83
                                                                                     and LML 2008 create
                                                                                     ambiguity     in     legal
                                                                                     framework regarding the
                                                                                     possibility of selling of
                                                                                     state land).
Agricultural     LML Art. 90        Private and state     No restrictions            No restrictions152           Land cannot be changed to residential area,

  151PresidentKarzai already enabled the foreign investors to lease the government land for 30 years in 2002 by his Decree No. 134, and then in 2003 through his
  Decree No. 89 he made the surplus government land available to the High Commission for Investment for allocation to investors.151 The Private Investment Law
  2003 enabled the leases for up to 50 years (Article 21).
  152Same as above.




                                                                                71
land                             land        nor public infrastructure such as roads cannot
                                             be built unless the approval of ARAZI CEO and
                                             the President
Disaster prone   Municipality                Residential buildings cannot be built in these
areas            Law, LML Art.               areas. The state land cleared by Tasfia gives a
                 46                          report about the feasibility of the
                                             development of the residential area, it is a
                                             responsibility of the concrete government
                                             entity to which the land is transferred to
                                             inform people .If the land is private, Tasfia
                                             team makes the recommendations, however
                                             the monitoring of compliance is not available.




                                        72
Rural land use plans and mechanisms for land use change
There are no rural land use plans existing in Afghanistan. Over certain rural lands such as pastures,
forests, agricultural land, protected areas and other public land 153 the restrictions over change of land
use exist. In fact, the changes are not allowed in most of the cases according to the Afghan law (please
see the table above). Nor the rural land in general cannot be converted to urban, unless the proper
acquisition procedure is followed 154. It is only arid and virgin land that can encounter the land use
change together with the conversion of rural lands to protected areas155.
When changing the usage of the land, the acquisition processes are used in the most of the cases
without any public consultations. Due to the absence of data on number of land use changes and the
time needed to perform the land use change, it is difficult to estimate the duration of land use changes
in Afghanistan.
Protected rural areas and rural lands identified for rehabilitation
As mentioned in the previous sections, certain rural lands such as pastures, forests etc. are protected
in terms of their transferability, as well as their usage. There are only two national parks in
Afghanistan – Band-amir in Bamyan, which is Afghanistan’s first National Park established in 2010 and
Wakhan corridor in Badakhshan, established in 2014. Other protected areas exist such as Nawor
Dessert, Big Pamir, standing waters of Ghazni, Aajar valley and under-water lake of Hashmad Khan.
The lack of enforcement of the protective regulations was also explained in the previous sections,
which leads to the degradation of protected rural lands. The United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) conducted a survey in 2003 and reported an estimated 50-70% of land is being used for
unspecified purposes in Afghanistan. 156 Additionally, the suggestions for creation of more protected
areas such as in Nuristan province, Badghis Forest and Budha Monuments in Bamyan were put forth to
NEPA in 2002, however these are still pending.
As mentioned above, Afghanistan’s natural resources have been severely degraded in the last several
decades due to factors such as overgrazing, collection of surface vegetation for fuel, conversion of
forest and pastureland into arable land, cutting down of forests157 and the smuggling of the timber by
the timber mafia, war, decreased rainfall and climate change.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock has launched a natural resources management
programme in 2006 in order to effectively rehabilitate and protect forests, pastures and protected
areas by constructing water reservoirs, reconstructing and building new irrigation canals and managing
water for the farmland. The overall objective of this programme is to ensure the sustainable
exploitation of existing water and renewable energy resources and the enhancement of livelihoods in
the rural areas. These programmes pursue the following objectives:
      •   To improve irrigation systems in order to protect water, develop agriculture and increase
          access to potable water
      •   To motivate the local communities to protect forests, pastures and water and offer technical
          assistance on the renewability of these resources
The purpose of the natural resources management programme is to rehabilitate natural resources for
effective use by the rural people. To fulfil this purpose, the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and
Livestock has developed policy framework. The Ministry’s natural resources management strategy is
based on an effective and sustainable regime, aimed at using pastures, forests, wildlife, protected

153 Please note the unclear definition of public land.
154 Discussed in Panel 4.
155 Please consult the LML 2008, Art. 46 – 49 for the rezoning of arid and virgin land, as well as the Environment

Law for the rezoning of rural areas to protected areas.
156 “Afghanistan: Post-Conflict.”
157“Afghanistan’s Environmental Recovery: A Post-Conflict Plan for People and their Natural Resources,”(Kabul:

UNEP Post-Conflict Branch, 2006).


                                                       73
areas, herbs and water resources, including water infrastructures, in such a way that the use and the
right to access natural resources are regulated. Afghanistan’s environment is an inseparable part of the
comprehensive agricultural development strategy and a major component of the natural resources
management programme. Activities to manage natural resources focus three areas:
       1) Surveying and planning natural resources
       2) Managing and protecting natural resources with the participation of people
       3) Developing and modernising irrigation systems
Nevertheless, natural resources including forests, pastures and protected areas are affected by the
lack of a comprehensive mechanism for effective and sustainable use of natural resources. For this
purpose, programmes have been developed in 2014 to manage and protect natural resources in co-
operation with the public so as to build community capacity in the area of sustainable utilisation,
promote a sense of ownership among the people and motivate people to contribute to the survival of
these resources. The following are the purposes of this procedure:
       •   To build the capacity of associations and local communities to develop plans for the
           rehabilitation and regulation of natural resources such as forests, pastures and protected areas
       •   To develop projects from the development budget by social forestry associations in accordance
           with contracts
       •   To mobilise forestry associations and to increase public participation in the regulation of
           forests, pastures and protected areas
Additionally, the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) has also a major rural
rehabilitation strategy in its portfolio, particularly through its flagship rural development programme –
the National Solidarity Programme (NSP). NSP aims to empower the rural communities to be able to
make decisions that are affecting their own lives and livelihoods through various participatory
mechanisms that promote local governance and aim to reduce poverty. Having said that the NSP is
implemented through four main activities:
       •   Establishing a national network of Community Development Councils (CDCs) that empower
           communities to make decisions;
       •   Funding priority subprojects that improve access to infrastructure, markets, and services;
       •   Strengthening community capacities through participatory processes and training;
       •   Promoting accountability and wise use of public and private resources.

Finally, forest and pasture associations exist in Afghanistan, that are accountable to all members of the
society. These associations develop rules and regulations on the management and regulation of social
natural resources and the way these resources can be used, on pricing, and on participatory benefits;
assign responsibilities for and prepare the budget of natural resources; and supervise external
assistance. Associations are created as per Forest Management Law in order to administer, survey,
research, protect, rehabilitate, construct, reform, use, exploit and operationalize forestry-related
scientific, technical and economic concepts and applications in various provinces of the country. The
method of operation, obligations, powers and other affairs related to the forestry associations are
regulated by a bylaw. The legal personality of a forest association is established after its bylaw is
registered and licensed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock. 158The Department of
Natural Resources allows public partnerships to protect and sustainably use lands, pastures, forests and
water resources; meet their daily needs in a safe environment by using the scientific and community
knowledge of natural resources; and help solve problems related to people’s fr ee access to natural
resource




158   Forest Law, article 6, 1391.


                                                     74
    9.3. Urban Land Use, Planning and Development
                                                                                                       Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                               Topic                                    A   B C D
PANEL 3: Urban Land Use, Planning, and Development
LGI 1: Restrictions on Rights
               Restrictions on urban land ownership/transfer effectively serve public policy
 3    1 1
               objectives.
               Restrictions on urban land use (disaster risk) effectively serve public policy
 3    1 2
               objectives.
LGI 2: Transparency of Land Use Restrictions
               Process of urban expansion/infrastructure development process is transparent and
 3    2 1
               respects existing rights.
               Changes in urban land use plans are based on a clear public process and input by
 3    2 2
               all stakeholders.
               Approved requests for change in urban land use are swiftly followed by
 3    2 3
               development on these parcels of land.
LGI 3: Efficiency in the Urban Land Use Planning Process
               Policy to ensure delivery of low-cost housing and services exists and is
 3    3 1
               progressively implemented.
 3    3 2 Land use planning effectively guides urban spatial expansion in the largest city.
               Land use planning effectively guides urban development in the four next largest
 3    3 3
               cities.
 3    3 4 Planning processes are able to cope with urban growth.
LGI 4: Speed and Predictability of Enforcement of Restricted Land Uses
               Provisions for residential building permits are appropriate, affordable and
 3    4 1
               complied with.
               A building permit for a residential dwelling can be obtained quickly and at a low
 3    4 2
               cost.
LGI 5: Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
 3    5 1 Formalization of urban residential housing is feasible and affordable.
               In cities with informal tenure, a viable strategy exists for tenure security,
 3    5 2
               infrastructure, and housing.
               A condominium regime allows effective management and recording of urban
 3    5 3
               property.




                                                       75
Introduction
Following the commencement of the internationally backed war in Afghanistan in 2001, Afghanistan’s
urban land use has undergone significant changes due to, most notably, a massive influx of refugee-
returnees to urban centers throughout the country and extensive rural-urban migrants searching for
security and/or employment opportunities. An estimated 20% of Afghanistan’s total population
(6,110,00 individuals of the total 30,550,000 population) are classified by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees as returnees from Pakistan, Iran and other countries 159. These returnees,
primarily displaced through a series of conflicts beginning with the 1979 Soviet-Afghan War, often
moved to the cities. Easy access and focus of international aid in the early 2000s in the urban centers
of Kabul, Kandahar, Jalalabad, Herat and Mazar e Sharif resulted in extensive international presence in
the country’s cities. Displaced families - sometimes not having been back to Afghanistan for nearly
three decades, often lost vested investment in their local communities, became accustomed to a
relatively urban life while in refuge and feared the growth of counterinsurgency in rural areas – often
decided to return not to their original villages or provinces but to urban centers (and, in particular,
Kabul) in search for safety and employment opportunities. While population growth rate for the nation
is steady at 2.6%, it is only 2.3% in rural areas whereas it is 4.7% in urban areas160.
Today, approximately a quarter of Afghans live in urban areas, rendering the topic of urbanization at
the core of Afghanistan161. A total of 31% of the country’s population is estimated to live in cities in
Afghanistan by 2025, jumping to 50% by 2060162. This is a massive increase from 1979, when the census
indicated that about 85% of the population lived in rural areas; those living in urban areas primarily
settled in Kabul163. These demographic shifts have altered the map of urban areas, rendering previous
urban and development plans and regulations outdated.
It is important to further emphasize the lack of reliable figures related to urban land use in
Afghanistan, even for basic matters such as the population of Kabul, which remains contested. As noted
by the UN-Habitat in its Discussion Paper on ‘Understanding Urbanization’, a ‘lack of clarity
characterizes all other Afghan cities’ rendering evidenced -based policy and programme planning
difficult if reliant on quantitative data 164. Data that is available is typically ‘not urban disaggregated,
or not done in a way that makes it clear what is rural and what is urban’, and ‘city-specific data is very
limited, which makes city comparisons nearly impossible’ 165 . Given that ‘no systematic urban
monitoring systems exist’ 166 and data is weak or non-existent, this panel focuses on the qualitative
material and experience available to the expert instead of relying on disputed quantitative
information.
At the heart of urban planning issues in Afghanistan exists the issue of informal settlements. The issue
is most contentious and visible in Kabul. Kabul’s population today is estimated at hovering between 5
and 5.5 million today. “It is estimated that at least 70% of the population of Kabul is currently res iding
in property which has not been formally registered or that falls outside the formally planned parts of
the city. This percentage represents an approximate number of 2.5 million people. Although many of
these residences are legitimate occupiers, they have no security of tenure and no means by which to
formalize and register their rights of tenure”(Emphasis added, MUDA White Paper, 4).




159“2015  UNHCR Country Operations Profile – Afghanistan,”(United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 2015).
160 “Kabul’shidden crisis”(London: Overseas Development Institute, 2014), http://www.odi.org/comment/6688-
kabul-refugee-idp-displacement-urban-afghanistan.
161 Ibid.
162“Afghanistan’s Urban Future,” Discussion Paper #1, State of Afghan Cities, UN-Habitat, 2013.
163 Ibid.
164 “Understanding    Urbanization: Monitoring Urban Dynamics in a Fragile and Resource-Constrained
Context,”Discussion Paper #9, UN-Habitat, March 2015.
165 Ibid.
166 Ibid.




                                                      76
Of particular issue is a specific set of informal settlements in Kabul, which consist of approximately
40,000 individuals in about 51 Kabul Informal Settlements 167 . Families are primarily returnees,
internally displaced peoples and some economic migrants. They not only lack tenure security, but also
have poor levels of health, education, and safety, lacking protection from the local police forces or
powerful brokers. Nearly every national-level legislation dealing with urban land use over the past ten
years makes mention of the informal settlements, emphasizing its importance in the realm of urban
development in the country. Fundamentally, there exists a fierce internal debate within the Afghan
government about the future of the informal settlements: Should they remain and be ‘formalized’, or
should they be destroyed? Similar issues exist in Kandahar city, for instance, where some more
government collaboration and internal agreements have resulted in efforts to upgrade the
infrastructure of the settlements, thereby beginning the ‘formalization’ process.
                                            Restrictions on rights
Ownership and Transferability
The Land Management Law 2008 forms the backbone of restrictions on urban land ownership and
transfer. There are several common types of rights of ownership in urban areas:
1. Private ownership - Legal title deed (Qabele Sharayee): “Those who acquired their land legally
   from the government (through a grant or a rightful purchase) typically have a sharayee title deed
   that certifies their ownership of the land. Those who inherit the land or buy it also acquire a legal
   title, provided they go through the required legal process to transfer the title to their name.”168.
2. Private ownership - Customary deed (Urfi): “This is the type of document that most informal
   settlement dwellers and some property owners in the formally developed parts of the city (those
   who purchased the land from a rightful owner but failed to complete the ownership transfer
   process) hold. In settlements built on former agricultural land, the urfi title is often based on a
   legal sharayee original (given that the initial landlord of the un‐subdivided land ha s in many cases a
   legal sharayee title).”169
3. Privately registered lease: possession of title for a specified period (for instance, wedding halls on
   airport road in Kabul city)
4. Private ownership - No title: “This situation usually pertains to the first generation of squatters on
   confiscated public or private land. Although with time the possession of an Safayi book can
   reportedly strengthen the hand of squatters in the face of possible eviction.” (Kabul Urbanization
   and Development Challenges: A Synthesis Report, 2011)
5. State ownership – within the Master Plan: The lands that are not private land and which are
   included in the city Master Plan belong to the Municipality which ultimately decides the
   usage/ownership of that land. These lands can be roads, parks, public schools, hospitals etc.
   However, the ownership of these lands is contested due to the unclear definition of public land in
   current Afghan legal framework. This will be explained in the next section of the report.
6. State/ ownership – outside of the Master Plan: The lands that are not private lands and which are
   located within the boundaries of the city, however are not included in the city Master Plan, belong
   to the state (or concrete state institution)
7. Private ownership - Endowed land (Waqf):In addition to the lands owned by ministries and other
   offices, waqf land is land for specific public use by people and is under the technical ownership of
   the government (but for the people).
8. Public ownership –this type is disputed due to unclear legal framework stipulating the ownership
   rights between state and public land. Roads, green areas, parks, playgrounds, cemeteries and other
   infrastructure is generally considered as public land.




167
    “Winter Assistance to the Kabul Informal Settlements 2014/2015 - Report on the Post-Distribution Monitoring
Survey” (Kabul: Task Force on the Kabul Informal Settlements, 2015).
168“Kabul Urbanization and Development Challenges: A Synthesis Report” (Kabul: Aga Khan Trust for Culture, 2011).
169 Ibid.




                                                      77
There are not any land ownership, owner type, size or price restrictions in Afghanistan. The objective
included in the LML 2008 to create “a favorable environment for private sector investment in land” 170
and all the amendments done to the LML in 2008, aimed to serve this purpose by facilitating the wide
variety of persons to have access to land including foreigners. President Karzai already enabled the
foreign investors to lease the government land for 30 years in 2002 by his Decree No. 134 and in 2003
through his Decree No. 89 he made the surplus government land available to the High Commission for
Investment for allocation to investors.171 The Private Investment Law 2003 enabled the leases for up to
50 years (Article 21).
However, there are certain restrictions on transferability of public land i.e. public land cannot be
transferred (sold and bought) to private interests. Taking into account an unclear definition of public
and state land in Afghan legal framework, public land can be easily interchanged with state land, thus
allowing the transactions of the land that would otherwise be illegal.
In practice, the lack of clear delineations of responsibility render the ownership and transfer of land a
game of power-brokers, not serving public interest. The regulations themselves are generally justified
and aimed towards the benefit of the public good. However, because the of the government’s
unwillingness or inability to enforce the regulations under question, the regulations’ usefulness is
limited.
Urban land use
The primary reference for regulations on urban land use can be found in the Land Management Law of
2008, which outlines the various types of land ownership, and outlines the types of possible land use
(i.e. agricultural land, private residential land, etc.). Additionally, there are certain land use
restrictions defined in the original Kabul Master Plan such as one cannot buy a piece of land in
residential area for industrial purposes.




Master plans in Afghanistan date back to times of Doud Khan and enjoy continuity to this date.
Although most of the Afghan cities’ Master Plans are outdate d (as will be discussed below), they serve
important functions. Firstly they are maps, pictures of the city of how the planners think the city
should look like, therefore they control the urban development by clearly stating what is and what is
not in the map. The map approach, however, does not allow the urban planners to promote
development or mobilize resources, it rather brings their focus on mere monitoring and checking of the
urban growth172. Secondly, the urban planning in Afghanistan is considered as an important part of
actual state-building, where the municipality is only recognized, when it has the ability to implement
the Master Plan. Therefore the entities responsible for urban planning are given a special identity role
in Afghanistan173.




170Land Management Law, 2008, Article 2(8).
171Law on Domestic and Foreign Private Investment in Afghanistan, Decree No. 134 (Official Gazette no. 803) and
Decree on the Transfer of Government Property, Decree no. 89, 2013 (SY 1392).
172
    Giovacchini, Tommaso. “Governance and Representation in the Afghan Urban Transition.” Kabul: Afghanistan
Research and Evaluation Unit, 2011, 9.
173
      Ibid. 9


                                                      78
However, in most of the cases the restrictions on the land use prescribed by Master Plans, including
Kabul Master Plan are not enforced. The rampant corruption in the ranks of government and land
management authorities allows for the uncontrolled usage of the land irrespective of the residential
areas. The example of the informal settlements built on the mountain slopes within and at the
outskirts of the cities such as Kabul is another example of the friction with urban use restrictions.
Mountains and hills are considered pastureland meaning for the usage of the public. By appropriating
technically public land to private interests deprives other people from using the mountain for pastures.
The fact that the Third Master Plan for Kabul was abandoned on the request of the Ministry of Urban
Development by the Karzai administration rendering the urban planning in Kabul irregularised 174, only
enhances the possibilities for corruption.
Additionally, President Ghani enacted the decree allowing no construction on arable land. However
certain arable lands are included in the city Master Plans dating sometimes 50 years back, creating the
issues of their implementation. Additionally, LML 2008, Art. 90 stipulates that the “construction of
roads, buildings and establishments and non-agriculture activities are not allowed on agriculture
lands”. It is possible in exceptional cases, when an approval from MAIL a nd the President of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan is needed. In reality, the restrictions on agricultural land use change are not
respected in practise. Particularly in peri-urban areas such as Bagrami in Kabul or Behsud in Nangarhar,
the arable land is being converted to urban use at a rapid pace, where sellers are often transferring
the land as agricultural land to facilitate a lower price to attract buyers, while having full knowledge
that construction will then occur on it 175.


Further reference should be given to the National Disaster Management Law of 2012, developed to
‘regulate activities related to disaster response, preparedness and risk reduction’ and which
established the National Disaster Management Commission as a step following the adoption of the
Strategic National Action Plan (SNAP). SNAP aimed to reduce the risk of disaster as well as the severity
of disaster as experienced by the public through the establishment of a National Disaster Risk
Reduction Platform that prioritized local solutions to disaster risk. The final reference point is the
National Disaster Management plan of 2010, a chief component of which involved the assessment and
reduction of disaster risk in both rural and urban settings, referring to the Afghanistan National Disaster
Management Authority as the primary source of response. Based on these policies and regulation, the
government has a right to specify an area as being prone to natural disasters and place a restriction on
building residential houses. These regulations are, however, not specific to Kabul Municipality. The
Municipality stated that efforts are currently underway to develop a policy on land use for disaster risk
without providing any further information.
Legal frameworks also exist for land that is under risk from non-disasters. In 2004, the Government of
Afghanistan adopted a Law on the Preservation of Afghanistan’s Historical and Cultural Artifacts
building upon the 2002 and 2003 inscriptions of the Minaret and Archaeological Remains of Jam and
Cultural Landscape and Archaeological Remains of the Bamiyan Valley, respectively, to the UNESCO
World Heritage List. The Law lays out definitions of historical and cultural artifacts (Article 3) and
specifies the legal requirement to protect such artifacts and monuments. Similarly, natural heritage is
recognized under the law, and resulted in the declaration of two national parks in the country: Band e
Amir in 2009 and the Wakhan National Park in 2014. A thriving black market for looted historical and
cultural artifacts coupled with generally poor enforcement of protection measures, much of
Afghanistan’s physical cultural heritage can be considered at risk. Such legal measures are key in
providing a legal foundation for heritage protection.




174   Please see more detailed explanation in the section 3.3.2.
175
      Personal communication with USIP land expert, October 7, 2015.


                                                        79
While the legal framework has been well-developed to serve the needs of the Afghan public, the
government has been unable to enforce the regulations and practices put in place in urban areas.
While disaster risk and natural heritage regulations exists in Afghanistan’s urban a reas, little focus has
been put by the main urban actors – namely, the respective municipalities and representatives of the
Ministry of Urban Development and the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock – towards the
actual implementation of disaster risk regulations due to a presumed lack of resources, high rates of
corruption, focus on other issues (such as the lack of sufficient urban infrastructure) and so on.
                                  Transparency of land use restrictions
Urban expansion/infrastructure development process

The process of urban expansion and infrastructure development is shared between local urban
municipalities (Kabul, Jalalabad, Kandahar, etc.) as well as the Ministry of Urban Development,
formally tasked with developing urban policy for the country. Actual collaboration has developed
informally and depends heavily on the individual municipal and ministerial objectives and ideologies.
When shared ideology and objective is weak, urban expansion and infrastructure development remains
primarily outside of the formal realm. Planning objectives differ by municipality and the Ministry of
Urban Development, with no specific planning objective existing across the board in either group.
Objectives remain overly individualized and often in conflict with one another, resulting in numerous
stalemates in policy planning.
In Kabul city, for instance, the responsibility is shared with the Municipality’s Plan Implementation
Office and the Ministry of Urban Development 176 . Due to a fundamental disagreement in the
implementation of the third and final Master Plan of Kabul between the Office and the Ministry,
partially upheld by the formal suspension of the Master Plan in 2005 through a presidential decree,
clear information about planned urban expansion often does not reach the public. Despite efforts to
develop a fourth plan, no plan for the urban space inside Kabul’s city limits has been established 177.
Focus has instead been placed on developing legal mechanisms to change the urban landscape of
Kabul, with a 2009 plan for urban expansion outside of the city (‘Kabul Jadid’ – New Kabul City)
attempting to incentive Kabul residents to move outside of the city in hopes of reducing the population
of the city to a more manageable amount. The lack of a legal framework has resulted in a process that
lacks transparency and can be dismissive of the facts on the ground.
Formal planning mechanisms from the Ministry are to be shared with the public through official
announcements, and through local authorities such as the municipality, respecting all citizen rights
outlined in the Land Management Law of 2008, Constitution of Afghanistan and relevant articles in the
Civil Code. However, the information is not always shared with public in consistent manner. While
occasional announcements about urban expansion exist, these are limited to major urban changes (i.e.
the release of the plans for the new Kabul city) and are generally not detailed. The public is generally
unable to obtain more information about planned urban expansion without previously established social
networks with individuals working in relevant municipal or ministerial departments. Most discussion on
expansion and development thus remain inaccessible to the public.




176 Pietro A. Calogero, “Planning Kabul: The Politics of Urbanization in Afghanistan,”(doctoral dissertation,
University of California, Berkeley, 2011, 79.
177 Calogero, “Planning Kabul,” 80.




                                                     80
What is important to note is that the withholding of the information is allegedly sometimes used to
prevent illegal and corrupt behavior of the citizens 178 . Based on the example of “New Kabul City”
project, where the information was publicly available in the media and reports of MUDA, people
realizing the increase of the value of the land after the construction is finished, have begun to make
claims over the lands based on forged documentation. On the other hand, when people are not
informed about the planned urban expansion, those landless, returnees, IDPs or rural migrants are
considerably more tempted to build informal settlements outside of the Master Plan, as if the
information was available. Finally, with the absence of the publicly available information on planned
urban expansion, the oversight in form of public scrutiny is missing when planning and implementing
urban expansion projects.
Changes in urban land use plans
The decisions on changes in urban land use plans do not involve the public in Afghanistan. Construction
projects are developed based on the legal documents giving permission to the particular organ for
changing urban land use. The uncertain status of the Land Management Law of 2008 179, coupled with
disputes over the implementation of the Third Master Plan, and relatively weak authority of the
government has rendered the legal framework for changes in urban land use convoluted, under-
developed and disregarded by enforcement authorities. While exact figures of land use change and
requests are not possible to obtain180, requests for change in land use do not have a process to be
followed, nor has the proper land use changes mechanism or database been developed. Disputes
between the Ministry of Urban Development and local municipalities make it difficult to distinguish the
appropriate authority for such requests.
Additionally, the lack of public involvement in the decisions about land use change often renders the
implementation of the project impossible, due to the lack of ownership among original landowners to
allow the implementation.
The poor legal framework is matched by unprecedented flows of refugee- returnees into urban areas in
Afghanistan (most notably, Kabul, Herat and Jalalabad) and rural to urban migration. Urban land use
changes are most commonly visible through informal processes, with formal requests hardly being the
case in Afghanistan. Requests for changes in urban land use rarely come from the public, and are
typically put forth only by power-brokers who are able to manipulate or better navigate the request
process. Such changes thus provide little benefit to society in general.
Please see the table below with possible land use changes in Afghan cities:




178 Based on accounts of a number of land experts participating at our discussions.
179
    The President has powers to enact laws in Afghanistan, which should be brought in front of parliament for
approval. Often this does not happen, e.g. with the adoption of the LML 2008, where the approval of the
Parliament was not sought.
180Please see the explanation for the lack of data in the introduction.




                                                     81
Type of land                 Legal Basis     Type of land       Restrictions      on   Restrictions        on    Restrictions on usage
                                             (based    on       ownership              transferability
                                             tenure
                                             typology)
Residential           area   Municipal       Private     and    No restrictions        No       restrictions     Cannot be changed to industrial area,
(within   the       Master   Law     2000,   state                                     (ambiguities about        however can be changed to commercial
Plan)                        Presidential                                              selling state land)       area (administrative process to follow
                             Decree    83,                                                                       unclear)
                             LML 2008
Residential        area      No     policy   Private     and    No restrictions        No       restrictions     No policy has been adopted yet to
(outside    of   Master      adopted yet     state                                     (ambiguities about        upgrade informal settlements.
Plan)    –     informal                                                                selling state land)
settlements181
Agricultural land            LML Art. 90     Private     and    No restrictions        No restrictions           Land cannot be changed to residential
                                             state                                                               area, nor public infrastructure such as
                                                                                                                 roads cannot be built unless the approval
                                                                                                                 of ARAZI CEO and the President (in reality
                                                                                                                 changes happen without the presidential
                                                                                                                 approval illegally)
Roads and other public       Municipal       Ambiguity          Ambiguity       over   Cannot be         sold,   Cannot be changed to anything other
infrastructure, green        Law 2000        over public or     public or      state   leased              nor   than their original purpose (in reality
areas, etc.                                  state              ownership              transferred               changes happen without the presidential
                                             ownership                                                           approval illegally)




181All the residential areas that are outside of the Master Plan are considered as informal settlements in Afghanistan. Considering the fact that the urban
expansion often does not follow the city’s Master Plan, most of the residential settlements in Afghan cities are considered informal.


                                                                            82
                            Efficiency in the urban land use planning process
Policy on low-cost housing and services
Policies for low-cost housing and services remain tenuous. While efforts in the 1970s aimed to shift
government-owned land to the poor, provisions have since decreased, with significant shifts in the
requirements of the state to the poor. Namely, as noted by Wily, “firstly, allocation of lands to
needy persons is not longer an obligation; secondly, the definition of eligible recipients has been
broadened to include any person in the district (Article 35[2]), which could include large
landowners; and thirdly, the proposed amendments (to the Land Management Law) are silent on
the need to include urban dwellers in need of housing in its purview ”182. Current provisions do not
specify low-cost housing offers to the poor, but instead rely on instalment schemes that typically
amount to the normal (not low) cost of the land. Lack of payment can result in evictions (see
Article 99, Chapter 11: Penalties, Land Management Law). Focus has instead been placed on
providing incentives for families living in informal urban settlements to move outside of urban
centers and into semi-urban areas, rural lands or ‘new towns’ (such as the new Kabul city) or ‘small
towns’ near urban centers (locally known as sharaks).
Additionally, state land distribution schemes were developed by the government through the
Presidential Decrees 104 and 1091 during President Karzai regime to allocate state land to
teachers, low ranking public employees and returnees and IDPs. However, these are rather an
exception from the general policy of not distributing the state land (based on ARAZI and MoE
records, 154,000 jeribs of land have been distributed to afghan returnees coming from Iran or
Pakistan until now). Additionally, the implementation of the distribution policies, mirrored with
rampant corruption and conflicts caused by unclear ownership claims of distributed land, does not
serve the interests of poor Afghan population. Based on a research by UNAMA for example, a
governmental settlement town Sare Dowra, which should have been distributed to low-income
government employees, was actually grabbed by high-ranking officials and then sold on to others
for high prices. No land was allocated for ordinary landless people 183 . For what is worse, the
implementation of the Presidential Decree 104, allowing for the distribution of land to returnees
and IDPs has been paused in recent years.
There were also initiatives to introduce the mortgage system in Afghanistan to allow people acquire
proper housing through borrowing the money from the bank and paying back through instalments.
However due to the high levels of poverty and unstable security situation rendering the livelihoods
of Afghans insecure, the mortgage system idea was left behind. The new National Unity
Government Minister of MUDA stated that the focus of his term in the office will be to provide
adequate low- cost housing for people, the outcomes of this statement, however, still remain to be
seen.
Having that said, the responsibility to provide low-cost services to households in urban centers has
been adopted by international organizations and NGOs such as the NRC (providing basic shelter
services and assistance to IDP and refugee returnee households in urban area), UNHCR and so on.
Adequate shelter and associated services are, in practice, dismissed by the Afghan government and
shifted onto international organizations and NGOs. With a per capita GDP of only 662 USD184, the
need for low-cost housing is visibly high. While no government or large-scale NGO projects
allocating low-cost (not free) housing exists in urban areas, banks such as the First Microfinance
Bank of Afghanistan began as early as 2005 offering housing microfinance loans to Afghans. Thus
while low-cost housing itself does not exist in urban areas due to a highly competitive market
fueled by international aid and military intervention funds, some limited opportunities exist to
support those searching for a new home.
Urban spatial expansion in the largest city
Land use planning in urban areas of Afghanistan formally began in the 1923, with King Amanullah
Khan attempting to establish a ‘New Kabul’ with the creation of the Kabul City government tasked
with the area’s urbanization. It was during this time that, for instance, the Daruloman Palace and
its radial avenues to Chihilsitoon Palace and Tapa-e Taj Beg were constructed, creating the

182
   Wily, Liz Alden. “Land Governance at the Crossroads: A Review of Afghanistan’s Proposed New Land
Management Law.” Kabul: Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2012, 18.
183   “Stolen Lands,” 31-32.
184“Fact-sheet   on GDP per Capita,” World Bank, 2013, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD.



                                                     83
appearance authoritative grandeur, along with the gridded districts (Karteh-3 and -4 included). By
the reign of King Nadir Shah in 1930, Amanullah’s projects were abandoned until later revived by
King Zahir Shah who focused on transforming the ‘urban core’ through ‘state -led development’ and
‘major, planned urban expansions’185. It was under the reign of King Zahir Shah that the country
developed, for instance, the First and Second Master Plans of Kabul in 1964 and 1970,
respectively.186 The last Master Plan was established under the reign of Daoud Khan in the 1970s,
and envisioned an expanded Kabul housing 2 million residents.
Decades of conflict and associated migration revamped the urban fabric of Afghanistan, resulting in
quickly growing cities (as Afghans searched for safety and employment opportunities) that were
unable to handle the mass in flow of residents into the cities. The latest Master Plan – developed in
1978 – was created by the City Plan-Making Office of Kabul, with support from the United Nations
and other international support. Analysis of the three Master Plans indicates an awareness of an
expanding population (the First Master Plan of 1964 was designed for 800,000 residents, the Second
Master Plan of 1970 was designed for 1,200,00 residents and enforced a 6-floor limit, and the Third
Master Plan of 1978 projected the existence of 2,000,000 residences with a 16-floor limit)187. Kabul
Municipality currently employs a 2011 Master Plan developed by JICA in partnership with the Afghan
government related to the New City Development Area (in Deh Sabz) as well as to the current
boundaries of Kabul city. The status of this plan, however, remains tenuous and is not implemented
by the MUDA. Given the reality of Kabul’s population today (with estimated hovering between 5
and 5.5 million), it is reasonable to note that there does not exist effective urban spatial expansion
in the country’s largest city, Kabul.
Due to rampant corruption, extensive land grabbing and a great influx of refugees, IDPs and rural to
urban migrants, building in Kabul throughout the 1990s and, more recently, the 2000s largely
remain outside of the Third Master Plan, and are thus considered ‘informal’ in nature 188. Indeed,
with the suspension of the Third Master Plan by then-President Karzai at the request of the Minister
of Urban Development Affairs, the city has no clear functioning reference for planning purposes.
Similar, though less contentious, issues remain in other major urban areas where recent urban
building and planning have been largely outside of original plans and occupy a gray space of
legality. The lack of an updated framework for regulating the urban expansion of the largest city,
Kabul, is complemented with little coordination between responsible government bodies (such as
the Municipality and Ministry of Urban Development). The carrying capacity of infrastructure has
been long overloaded, and the plan for land use has not been updated since 1978. While proposals
for piecemeal infrastructure development have been proposed internally to the Government and by
INGOs, no comprehensive strategy for the provision of new infrastructure and services has been
adopted or considered by the government primarily due to the unresolved issue of the Kabul
informal settlements. The question also poses itself, if the development of new Master Plan for
Kabul would be something preferable and effective, or rather new ways should be evaluated on
how to use a community-based approaches (for example through the development of community
action plans) to get the cooperation of people aiming to upgrade the informal settlements and
provide them with safe homes189.
Urban development in the four largest cities




185 Calogero, “Planning Kabul,” 85.
186 Ibid.
187 Calogero, “Planning Kabul,” 105.
188
    The distinction has to be made here between Kabul Informal Settlements (KIS), pursued often by Afghan
poor, and informal construction in the richest areas of Kabul city.
189
    Suggestion made by David Stanfield, land governance expert with extensive experience in Afghanistan and
other countries, currently serving as Professor Emeritus at Land Tenure Center, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, USA.



                                                    84
Kandahar, Herat, Jalalabad and Mazar e Sharif, four largest cities in Afghanistan, suffer from an
outdated urban plan. Still in use in Jalalabad, it is a 50-year-old plan no longer in line with the
present landscape of the city190 with ‘local authorities [unable] to guide urban growth and control
land use’ 191 . Data on the current status of the city of Herat was previously collected in 2011
through a joint conference held by the University of Florence and Herat University entitled ‘Herat:
a city quickly growing’ 192 . The conference resulted in a provision of socio-demographic data of
Herat, providing useful information about the demographics associated with current land use. The
conference also sparked interest from the local Department for Urban Development regarding a
draft of a ‘new urban master plan for managing the city’s rapid expansion’; as of yet, no updated
plan has been developed for Herat 193. As is the case for other cities, Mazar and Kandahar’s plans
are severely outdated, with the former’s plan ‘designed for a population probably a fifth of its
current size’ and continued weak ‘investment in service provision’ 194.
In all four cities, government officials have been unable to maintain a clear hierarchy of land use
plans and responsibility, resulting in vulnerabilities to extensive land grabbing or seizing ‘by power
individuals for their own profit, or spontaneously occupied by economic migrants’ 195 . USAID
continues to work with the city authorities throughout in Afghanistan to map governmental and
non-governmental activity, attempting to understand ‘Who Does What, Where’ 196. Similar activities
are ongoing throughout major urban centers through the State of Afghan Cities Programme,
implemented by the Government of Afghanistan with technical support from UN-Habitat. The
Programme has held multiple city consultations throughout Afghanistan attempting to understand
the current status of urban land use in order to develop policy shaping with key stakeholders 197.
While the Ministry of Urban Development has committed to developing updated urban land use
plans that match the carrying capacity of infrastructure and acknowledges the present status of
cities as part of its ‘Big Cities Master Plan’ (for Kabul, Mazar, Herat, Kandahar, Bamyan, Jalalabad
and Kunduz), no plan has yet been updated for the cities in question.
However, with an ineffective urban planning, insufficient investment, poor coordination and lack of
adequate municipality and land management, the Afghan cities are not able to develop their full
potential in supporting social and economic development and state-building in Afghanistan 198 .
Additionally, a complicated web of corruption and political opportunity made it clear that the
‘Afghan master plans tend to be a map without a strategy’199. While, in practice, the responsibility
of master plans remains highly centralized with the MUDA, local municipalities exercise a
significant amount of control in actual enactment and coordination 200.The master plans are graphic
representations used as planning instruments, but are not regulations in themselves. This places
master planning in a gray area among policy makers, and its implementation ‘piecemeal and
fragmentary’201.
Most current infrastructure development in urban areas continues through either (1) international
aid organizations, donors, development corporations and so on, (2) private investors. In both
situations, bureaucratic processes can be considered expedited for these bodies compared to
ordinary citizens. Such building implies the continued piecemeal development of infrastructure that
lacks clear cohesion or place in the city. Most infrastructure development and expansion are not
implemented by either body with sufficient consideration to city’s ground realities or its
coherence, a characteristic activity that does not seem to have a visible end date in site.
Ability of planning processes to cope with urban growth

190“Mapping  a Future for Jalalabad,”(Kabul: USAID, 2012).
191 Ibid.
192“Cooperation: Herat, a database designing a future city ,”(Kabul: Farnesia, Ministero degli Affari Esteri e

della Cooperazion Internazionale, 2011), 1.
193 Ibid.
194 Stefan Schutte,“Poor, Poorer, Poorest: Urban Livelihoods and Vulnerability in Mazar-i-Sharif,” (Kabul: AREU

and European Commission, 2006), 4.
195 Ibid.
196
    Ibid.
197“Participatory City Workshop held in Herat City, Afghanistan”(Herat: UN-Habitat, 5 February 2015).
198
    “State of Afghan Cities 2015. Volume one.” (Kabul: MUDA, IDLG, Kabul Municipality, 2015), vii.
199Ibid, 23.
200Ibid, 14.
201Ibid, 29.




                                                      85
The Afghan government has little ability to cope with urban growth. As a result, most growth takes
place outside of formal planning processes. In 2005, an estimated 65% of the residents of Kabul city
lived in informal settlements, leaving urban planning authorities unable to cope with the increasing
demand for services units and land 202. The figure is believed to have increased with the rise in
population from 3.6 million to approximately 5-5.5 million, 70% of whom are believed to live in
informal settlements203. This is a marked shift from the city in the 1960s, during which time the
vast majority of residents were living in formal, ‘mapped’ settlements. Most new residential
building construction in Kabul today is, however, considered informal (constructed outside of the
Third Master Plan framework), a trend growing from 2001 onwards. A range of settlement types
reveals a complicated landscape with squatters on public land, informal homes on private land,
grabbed land and more. The wide range of possible classifications attempt to clarify the on-the-
ground situation but, instead, render the situation illegible. An informal settlement may, for
instance, qualify under more than one settlement type according to the legal typology, resulting in
a possibly contradictory range of regulations related to it. The legal framework, while attempting
to be sensitive to the ground realities through nuanced classification, fails to acknowledge the
similarities between categories that ultimately result in over-classification. Further regulation on
urban growth and required service provision can be found in the Land Management Law (see
Chapter 2 on Title Deeds, Chapter 3 on Settlement of Land and Chapter 4 on Restoration of
Appropriated Lands to their Owners).

The unregulated urban expansion, where people are building their houses without an official
building permit, is resulting in the decrease of available green spaces and agricultural land in
Afghan cities, myriad of informal land ownership claims and consequently a high number of land
disputes. Khushal-Khan Square in Kabul, for instance, according to the Master Plan should be a
green protected area. However, currently shops and other buildings are constructed in that area.
Some of the owners have customary legal documents proving their ownership, however these do
not correspond to the plans in urban Master Plan for the city. Therefore, when the government
decides to implement the project planned according to the Master Plan, citizens will claim the
ownership of the lands and obstruct the implementation.

 Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land uses - Residential building permits
Our research shows the following classification in relation to the requests of residential building
permits:


Applicant                                     Process
Individual        Within the Master Plan      Providing that the applicant is a holder of valid title deed,
                                              he/she sends the requests to the Municipal District Office
                                              (Nahyia) to verify alignment with the Master Plan.
                                              Further, the application goes to the Property Municipality
                                              Office, where the engineer section gives the approval of
                                              the design of the building. Since the designs have to be
                                              provided by the applicants, however the municipality does
                                              not provide such services, the applicant has to approach
                                              private companies to acquire the design. This process may
                                              prolong the application.
Individual        Outside of Master Plan      There are no procedures for acquiring of building permit
                                              in areas outside of Master Plan and in rural areas. People
                                              often proceed with building without any approval of
                                              Afghan authorities.
Construction      Less than 5 floors          A request letter is taken to the MUDA provincial office.
Company                                       After the verification of the location and design of the
                                              building and alignment with the Master Plan, the building

202 Yohannes Gebremedhin,“Preliminary Assessment of Informal Settlements in Kabul City”(Kabul: USAID,
Emerging Markets Group, 2005), 3.
203“KnowingKabul: A potential powerhouse of social and economic development, ”Discussion Paper #10, UN-

Habitat, March 2015.



                                                  86
                                              permit is issued. This process usually should take no more
                                              than 3 months.
Construction      More than 5 floors          When a building has more than 5 floors, a request letter is
company                                       submitted to the MUDA provincial office, however this
                                              request has to be approved at the Ministry headquarters in
                                              Kabul. Often the individual companies bring the letter to
                                              Kabul in person in order to prevent long delays. When
                                              sending the letter through the post office, the process can
                                              take up to 1-2 months to reach Kabul.


For the construction companies and big construction projects, there are certain conditions, based
on which MUDA provides building permits. The construction company must have a physical office in
the country and qualified engineers, architects and administrative employees, should possess
necessary construction equipment and supplies and needs to prove sufficient financial resources
when providing its bank statement. The ranking of the companies ranges from 1 to 5, 1 being the
highest given to companies able to build more than 10 floor buildings, while 5 is given to companies
newly established on the market. Each year two evaluation officers are sent to monitor and
evaluate construction companies achievements and provide the ranking. When licensing the
construction companies, the number of floors they are allowed to build is mentioned in the building
license of the company.
However, the current legal framework for building permits remains convoluted. While several
actors, including the government and the World Bank, aim to develop ‘a procedure for quickly
providing building permits…’204, no national-level policy has been identified for residential building
permits.
The convoluted legal framework related to building permits – legal text often littered with holes
and opportunities for bribery (including texts like the LML which outlines general requirements and
goals but lacks specific procedures for implementation) – renders it rare that building permits are
obtained in strict compliance to the regulations in place. Similarly, while costs of building permits
themselves may be considered affordable, the lack of compliance to actual permit costs by public
institutions and the need for informal fees renders the actual cost of permits expensive. Available
funds can also render the technical requirements of building irrelevant. Poor government resources
restrict the possibility of public audits for most building projects, and a lack of technical expertise
and a reputation of corruption render it all the more difficult to adhere to a set standard of
technical requirements for new construction or expansion.
As the regulations on residential building permits are not clear or unified, with several types of
valid ownership documents lacking a clear order of hierarchy or validity, it is established that the
requirements cannot be judged as complied with. Residential building permits often occur between
individual landowners in urban centers and buyers, or households who identify potential areas, and
cost 2000 Afs (compared to 5000 Afs for commercial building permits).Building permits are
generally granted in three months in corruption-free environments, but the on-the-ground realities
in Afghanistan render the process filtered with corruption and typically extend the required time.
                          Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
Formalization of urban residential housing
As mentioned above, the residential dwellings in Afghan cities are mostly informal while owners do
not have any legal documentation proving their ownership. According to the 2008 LML, if a
landowner does not own formal title deed or other documents demonstrating formal ownership to a
piece of land, he/she may make a claim ‘on the basis of his long term unchallenged possession “
(Article 8). Further details on the formalization of ownership of urban property is detailed in Article
10 (Granting the Document to the Seller). Efforts towards formalization remain limited, with the
Ministry of Urban Development noting in a 2006 White Paper that the 70% of informal settlements
which exist in Kabul lack tenure security (MoUD White Paper, 4). USAID supported MUDA in drafting
Policy on Upgrading Informal Settlements, however it has not yet been approved by the Cabinet.

204 “Kabul urban land crisis: A summary of issues and recommendations,”(Kabul: Kabul Urban Policy Notes
Series no. 1, World Bank, 2005), 4.



                                                  87
In advance of the White Paper, a conference was held in Kabul to, among other objectives, ‘draft
an action plan and proposal to the government on methodologies for the formalization of property
rights in informal settlements’ 205. The White Paper recommended a doctrine of adverse possession
based on Islamic jurisprudence be implemented to the formalization issue as well as an Informal
Property Formalization Law that should ‘formalize property in urban areas’ and ‘prevent expansion
of informal settlements in urban areas’ 206 . Recommendations towards formalization would
formalize informal settlements while requiring them to address construction issues. The proposals
have not yet gone forward, but their drafting remains an important step towards improved
formalization processes.
However in practice, urban tenure security has been severely impacted by a drastic increase in
urbanization in the past decade, with a rate of urbanization close to 5% per year, one of the
highest in the world207. A significant problem is the absence of title deeds for most urban residents,
and the absence of proper land records208. Indeed, studies209, consultations with NGOs and agencies
active in urban areas on land issues (UN-HABITAT, NRC, UNHCR), and government authorities
indicate the vast majority of urban landholdings remain informal in various forms (an approximate
70% of the urban space), insecure and the majority of dwellers do not hold legally recognized
documentation210.
Additionally, internal displaced persons (IDPs) and returnees in the past decade, most of which are
settling in cities in search of livelihood opportunities and greater access to services, further
remains one of the major challenges in terms of urban tenure security in the country. When they
settle on government owned land, economically disadvantaged IDPs notably face the reluctance of
authorities to consider them as permanent citizens of a city and prefer pushing for return of
displaced persons to their places of origin. This rapid and uncontrolled urbanization has created a
situation of increased vulnerability, especially for the recently displaced, who lack access to land
and adequate housing 211 . In some areas, however, municipalities are stating to consider local
integration, and potential upgrading and regularization of settlements.
Having said that, current requirements for formalizing housing in urban areas are not clear to the
public, and prone to power-brokering and corruption. Insecurity of tenure of urban dwellers has
drawn the attention of the international community in the past decade, and led to several
initiatives attempting at securing rights of land tenure in urban areas. These include the RAMP-up,
LTERA and LARA projects funded by USAID, UN-HABITAT programmes and shelter programmes
targeted at returnees and refugees settling in urban areas by NGOs and agencies such as UNHCR,
NRC, and GIZ, among others.
UN-HABITAT has notably been involved in initiatives to secure tenure and formalize rights in four
municipalities across Afghanistan (Herat, Kandahar, Mazar-e Sharif and Jalalabad), through land
records to improve property tax collection. Despite the absence of documentation, this initiative
notably contributed to de facto secure property rights for an approximate 80,000 households by
providing municipalities with records on land holding in the target areas 212. Similarly, in Mazar-e
Sharif, UNHCR and NRC intervened in Hamdard Shahrak, an informal settlement in the South of the
city, in order to urge the landlord to issue individual title deeds for households settled on his land.
Another significant initiative is the Maslakh informal settlement in Herat, where a joint UNHCR/UN-
HABITAT project carried out in 2013 aimed at the formalization of the settlement through provision
of basic services and support for livelihood opportunities, in close cooperation with local
authorities (the Municipality and the Governor of Herat, IDLG, MUDA, MAIL, and ARAZI) 213.
Both the LTERA and LARA Project, funded by USAID, engaged in supporting the Government of

205 “White  Paper on Tenure Security and Community Based Upgrading in Kabul, ”(Kabul: Ministry of Urban
Development Affairs, 2006), 4.
206“White Paper on Tenure Security”, 12.
207 Shobha Rao and Jan Trustka, “Enhancing Security of Land Tenure for IDPs” (Kabul: UN -HABITAT, 2014).
208Interview with UN-HABITAT, Kabul, 26 June 2014.
209Tommaso Giovacchini, “Jalalabad City Profile” (Kabul: LARA, USAID, 2013) .
210 See, for instance; Liz Alden Wily, “Land and the Constitution, Current Land Issues in Afghanistan”(Kabul:

AREU, 2003); AlecMcNewan &Sharna Nolan, “Water Management, Livestock and the Opium Economy Options
for Land Registration” (Kabul: AREU, 2007).
211Rao and Trustka, “Enhancing Security.”
212Interview with UN-HABITAT, Kabul, 26 June 2014.
213Rao and Trustka, “Enhancing Security.”




                                                     88
Afghanistan with “informal settlements upgrading, formalization, cadastral mapping, laws for urban
planning and land use regulation, and training in planning and enforcement strengthening of tenure
security by supporting the Supreme Court and communities with rights formalization and informal
dispute resolution214”. The USAID LARA project involved the development of a Policy on Upgrading
Informal Settlements, currently awaiting Cabinet approval. Facing lack of support from the Ministry
of Urban Development, UN-HABITAT has further been supporting the MUDA for its finalization of the
informal settlement upgrading policy, including improvements in terms of access to services and
transportation. Provided this policy is adopted, it could provide greater strategic direction to
facilitating improved access to basic services and tenure security.
The LARA project, launched in 2009 by USAID, had similar objectives of urban upgrading and
security of land tenure, including legal, urban development, and capacity building components.
Urban development initiatives were notably carried out as part of a pilot project in two locations in
Jalalabad, through the use of Safayi notebooks for recording of land holdings and provision of
services. LARA also included components for formalization of informal settlements, through
outreach to communities to raise awareness about their right to having their land holdings
formalized, capacity-building, and coordination with government authorities, including IDLG,
GDMA, MUDA, ARAZI and Municipal authorities.
Municipalities have also been engaged in upgrading programmes. The Kabul municipality, for
instance, has been involved in the upgrading of District 7 (Murad Khani area). As above when
addressing the issue of IDPs and returnees settling in the outskirts of the city, the prevailing
practices of authorities to address land tenure in urban areas is to focus on long-term settlements,
and there remains reluctance to consider newly settled areas in the outskirts of the city. As
explained by an employee of the Kabul municipality interviewed for this study: “Until now, we have
decided that the areas which have been recently settled on or constructed would not be addressed,
and that we would focus on the areas of old settlement, where people have been staying for years
or decades and can be considered as legitimate occupants of the land. We can intervene there
because then we can consider this land is not unduly occupied, grabbed or usurped215.” While such
efforts are a positive step towards strengthening the tenure rights of urban dwellers, this raises
concern about the rights of the increasing number of recently settled populations in urban areas,
most studies indicating that these are planning to settle permanently.
Despite these upgrading activities of INGO/NGO community and municipalities itself, the efforts are
not coordinated leading to a unclear picture of what has been done where, preventing to identify
best practices and develop more comprehensive policy on upgrading of informal settlements.
Strategy for tenure security, infrastructure, and housing
The unexpected rush of migration to Kabul city has resulted in a developing legal framework (led
by the MUDA, MAIL and MoJ (along with Kabul municipality) that aims to regulate the on-the-ground
situation of the capital primarily through the formalization of urban services, active debates on the
issue of Kabul informal settlements and streamlining of titles and other forms of ownership
documents. An impressive strategy mentioned above has been proposed by the MUDA for improved
tenure security and housing, with further regulations passed regarding infrastructure requirements
of buildings in urban areas (see White Paper on Tenure Security and Community Based Upgrading in
Kabul). Further recommendations are located in the Land Policy Draft of 2007 that aimed to offset
the ‘ongoing failure of the formal land allocation, adjudication and registration systems’ that have
‘caused uncontrolled informal developments in urban and rural areas’ (see Draft Land Policy,
2.1.1). Bertaud recommended the development of an urban development strategy addressing urban
tenure issues in Kabul city 216 and addressing what he termed the city’s ‘main problem’:
‘infrastructure and access to legally subdivided land’ 217. The growing acknowledgment of informal
tenure as a major problem that must be addressed, coupled with initial efforts towards developing
formal regulations and strategies, demonstrate progress towards sustainable resolution.
A condominium regime

214 Land Reform in Afghanistan (LARA): https://www.usaid.gov/news-information/fact-sheets/land-reform-
afghanistan-lara, accessed: 21 September 2015.
215Interview with Kabul Municipality employee, 08 July 2014.
216Alain Bertaud, “Kabul Urban Development: Current City Structure, Spatial Issues, Recommendation on Urban

Planning,” 2005, 16.
217Bertaud, “Kabul Urban Development,” 12.




                                                    89
Urban condominiums in Afghanistan take primarily two forms: (1) privately owned, publicly
managed apartment complexes such as the Macroyan neighborhoods, and (2) privately owned,
privately managed apartment complexes, un-developed plots of land, commercial areas and more
such as Sharak Haji Nabi that are monitored by government officials 218 . Further regulations on
common land are outlined in the Land Management Law, which provides a guideline for dispute
resolution of commonly land (in situations ‘[w]here the title deed belongs to various landowners
are prepared on the basis of common boundaries and where the areas of their lands are held in
common’219). Apart from limited references in the Land Management law, no regulations for the
specific classification or record-keeping, development or management of condominiums were
identified. Legal regulations fall short of detailed management guidelines, and are limited to the
recognition of common property under condominiums.
In practice, condominiums are growing in demand in places such as Kabul city where limited access
to land has resulted in a vertical expansion of the city and concerns about insecurity and cultural
values has prioritized the formation of smaller communities, whether like those existing in
Macroyan or in the small towns, or sharaks. Urban condominium property, particularly when
privately managed; involve a premium for improved management services that are often delivered
to                    families                    in                  the                    areas.




218 The status of some sharaks, including Sharak Haji Nabi, remains gray. While recognised by the Ministry of
Urban Development, the sharak is not recognized officially by Kabul Municipality. Monitoring of construction
and development in the area is thus not clear.
219Land Management Law, Article 28, 2008.




                                                     90
    9.4. Public Land Management
                                                                                                          Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                             Topic                                         A   B C     D
PANEL 4: Public Land Management
LGI 1: Identification of Public Land and Clear Management
              Criteria for public land ownership are clearly defined and assigned to the right
4    1 1
              level of government.
4    1 2 There is a complete recording of public land.
4    1 3 Information on public land is publicly accessible.
              The management responsibility for different types of public land is unambiguously
4    1 4
              assigned.
              Responsible public institutions have sufficient resources for their land
4    1 5
              management responsibilities.
              All essential information on public land allocations to private interests is publicly
4    1 6
              accessible.
LGI 2: Justification and Time-Efficiency of Acquisition Processes
4    2 1 There is minimal transfer of acquired land to private interests.
4    2 2 Acquired land is transferred to destined use in a timely manner.
              The threat of land acquisition does not lead to pre-emptive action by private
4    2 3
              parties.
LGI 3: Transparency and Fairness of Acquisition Procedures
              Compensation is provided for the acquisition of all rights regardless of their
4    3 1
              recording status.
4    3 2 Land use change resulting in selective loss of rights there is compensated for.
4    3 3 Acquired owners are compensated promptly.
4    3 4 There are independent and accessible avenues for appeal against acquisition.
4    3 5 Timely decisions are made regarding complaints about acquisition.


                      Identification of public land and clear management responsibilities
    There is no specific definition of public land in Afghan legal code. However the Afghan state does
    manage some lands, which would broadly meet potential definitions of public land. To explain the
    blurred boundaries of public and state land, the explanation of each category of land is needed:




                                                        91
Type of         Definition                                                                          Ownership       and      responsible    Restrictions              on
land                                                                                                organization                            transferability
Public          According to the broad definition, the lands that have been allocated for           Ownership is contested between          Cannot be sold nor leased,
land            public use and are neither the property of the state nor the property of            either state and public. The            transferred nor exchanged
                the individual are public lands. The issue arises with the Art. 3(8) of LML         responsibilities over public land,
                2008, which stipulates that any land that is deemed public but is not               although not stipulated clearly in
                registered in the book of government lands, is considered state land.               LML 2008 and scattered across other
                Additionally the Presidential Decree 83 further blurs the boundaries                laws such as Forest, Pastureland and
                between state and public land by putting emphasis on formal                         Municipality Law, are in praxis
                documentary proofs of ownership. The fact, that Afghan legal framework              divided as follows: MAIL – forests
                does not define public land and does not provide provisions on how to               and pastures ; Municipalities –
                register public land and the registration of land in general occurs rarely in       graveyards, entertainment parks,
                Afghanistan, public land can be easily interchanged for the state land. In          roads, green areas, playgrounds ;
                other words, land that is under public use and not registered can easily be         MoE – shools, MoHE – universities ;
                claimed by the state as its property and be reassigned subsequently.                MoPH – hospitals ; ARAZI – all lands
                                                                                                    outside of Master Plan




State           Mountains, hills, deserts, river banks, arid and virgin land, state-owned           State (can be also owned by             Cannot be sold 220 but
land            agricultural land pasture lands (with ambiguity) that are registered as             concrete                governmental    possible to lease, transfer
                state land in Principal Book of State Land in ARAZI are state lands. When           organizations and ministries with       or       exchange.       The
                an individual cannot prove the ownership of the land, the land falls under          land being registered in Principal      regulations     about    the
                the state land category when the land clearance (Tasfiya) is done or                Books of ARAZI as institutional land)   transferability      change,
                dispute is resolved in courts. Considering that a majority of Afghans do            with the responsibility of ARAZI over   when land is state or
                not possess formal documents proving their ownership, the difficulties to           state land.                             public, therefore the lack
                formalize customary deed documents and to prove unchallenged long                                                           of clear definition of public
                term possession according to Art. 8 or LML 2008, and most importantly,                                                      lands is problematic.
                inexistence of the possibility of public land to be registered as such, most
                of the land can be considered state land in Afghanistan.




         220   Taking into account the ambiguity of legal framework in relation to this question.


                                                                                          92
Public land can be easily interchanged for the state land. Hence, in some cases, public lands have been
given away by the state to other private owners 221. This is particularly problematic when it comes to
the ownership rights over virgin and arid lands. Virgin and arid land can be a pastureland 222, hence it
cannot be sold nor leased223. However, based on the concurrent articles 46 - 49 of LML 2008, the state,
providing certain conditions are met, can allocate and distribute arid and virgin land to individuals and
other legal persons. In the current body of laws, it is not clear, which arid and virgin land is considered
pastureland224, and often, visual characteristics are used to distinguish pastureland from arid and virgin
land. However, in extremely wet and similarly dry season for instance, arid and virgin land can look
similar to pastureland 225. In this case the testimonies of witnesses are used to distinguish between
these two types of land. However, the distinguishing factors being the visual characteristics and the
testimonies of witnesses, provides considerable room for corruption and creates a situation where,
although public land cannot be sold nor leased, it can indeed be distributed to individuals and other
legal persons.
Like this, the country’s best pastures that have historically been used for grazing are leased by the
Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI) to investors for agricultural and residential purposes
due to lack of irrigation, which turned these lands into arid and virgin lands. This leads to disputes
between livestock raisers and investors in number of areas in Afghanistan such as the conflict between
Kuchi Ibrahim Khail tribe and leasees in Dur Baba Plain (Laghman), lands around Amu Darya River etc.
Additionally, the long lasting conflict between Kuchi tribes and local communities in Central Highlands
is a prominent example of unclear identification and definition of public lands in Afghanistan.
Another important feature of the definition of public land is the fact that the public lands are allocated
only for public use to serve the common interests and welfare of the residents of a particular area.
Using public lands for purposes that have not been set out by the law is not permitted. For example,
pastures that have been allocated for the grazing of animals and to be used as graveyards must not be
used for a different purpose. However, the current body of laws (LML 2008, Land Acquisition Law (LAL)
of 2000 with its amendments) does not clearly define the terms “public interest”, “public need”,
“public purpose”, “public reasons” or “public welfare”. The law uses these terms interchangeably,
which leads to creating the space for numerous interpretations.
Paragraph 4, Article 5 of the newly proposed amended LML is trying to address the above mentioned
shortcomings of the public land definition by stating the public land as “a land that the public people
can commonly use for their interests such as mar’aa, cemetery and site for harvesting, and such land
is not owned by the state and the individual.”
The amended LML classifies four kinds of land:
    1.     Private land;
    2.     State land;
    3.     Land specific to village/villages; and
    4.     Public land.
Of these four categories of land, the last two comprise public lands with clear definition of “land
specific to village/villages”:
“Land that is managed by the Land Authority (ARAZI), is situated adjacent to one or more villages and
is commonly used by the residents of the village or villages as a legal entity in order to realise their
interests and fulfil their determined purposes; such lands are not the property of the state.”
Recording of public land

221Wily, “Land Governance at the Crossroads.”
222Based  on the definition of pastureland in Art. 3(9) LML 2008.
223LML 2008, Art. 82(1): “Pastures shall be kept unoccupied for the sake of public requirements of local villagers

(for cattle grazing, graveyard, threshing ground and etc.)” and Pasture Law 2000, Art. 6: “Buying, selling and
leasing a pasture is prohibited.”
224Hence the very unclear definition of the pastureland in Art 3 (9.2).
225 Arid and virgin land can grow plants in wet season, so as the pastureland can dry out significantly during the dry

season.


                                                         93
Between the years 1966 and 1977 a national cadastral survey was conducted which included 34% of all
the land in Afghanistan including arable and non-arable lands, forests and pasturelands. The remaining
66% of Afghanistan’s arable and non-arable lands have not been surveyed so far. It is not clear what
proportion of the un-surveyed land is public land. The Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI)
has a five-year strategic plan, according to which it intends to conduct a cadastral survey of the
remaining 66% of lands. The survey is set to start in Bamiyan province in 2015. 226
Additionally, let alone an unclear definition of the public lands itself, the classification of different
types of public lands in LML is not clear, making the identification on the ground impossible. The
problems with legal definition and visual identification of arid/virgin land and pastureland was already
mentioned above. The distinction between specific pasture, located close to the village, and communal
pasture (according to the Pasture Law 2000) is not developed in the body of the law at all 227 .
Furthermore, the limits of pastureland are established as follows in accordance with Article 3 (9) of the
LML: “Pastureland is land that extends as far as the human voice may be heard from the edge of the
village.” The determination of the limits and the understanding of pastureland based on the audibility
of the human voice are not compatible with present-day conditions, thus in Afghanistan the recording
of the public land is incomplete and virtually impossible.
Accessibility of information on public land
The information on public land in Afghanistan is not made public. Firstly, an unclear definition of
public lands and the fact that the public land cannot be registered as such based on current Afghan
framework renders access to information impossible. Secondly, the Presidential Decree 83, 2003 halted
survey and mapping of Afghan lands previously conducted by the Survey Department of the Afghan
Cadastre. President Karzai allowed the Survey Department to conduct surveys only on his request
and/or after his approval for the surveys done on demand (Article 15 (1)) and the Cadastre could not
make any survey information public (Article 15 (2)). This, however, led to the complaints that the
survey offices were making records available to elite persons who then used the information to change
the ownership in their favour. This practice did not necessarily stop until today, adding to the extreme
gathering of power over land matters in the hands of the President. 228
Management of public land
The government has entrusted the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL), Ministry of
Hajj and Endowment, Municipalities and ARAZI with the management of public lands. MAIL’s
Directorate of Natural Resources manages two major types of public lands, namely pasturelands and
forests. The third type of public lands, namely endowed lands, is administered by the Ministry of Hajj
and Endowment. The MUDA and respective municipalities are responsible for the management of the
public infrastructure, green areas, playgrounds, schools, hospitals, mosques, cemeteries and parks
within the Master Plan229. The rest of the public land is managed by ARAZI. Even though the level of
government including the provincial and district municipalities responsible for the public land seems to
be appropriate, the conflict between the ministries and other state agencies sometimes occur.
Firstly, unclear definition of public land and its different types render the clear delineation of
responsibilities almost impossible. Of particular importance is also the delineation of responsibilities
between MAIL and ARAZI. Based on the Decision 23 of the Council of Ministers of September 2009, the
land management authority AMLAK 230 was renamed ARAZI (Afghanistan Independent Land Authority)
and restructured within MAIL. ARAZI was the land affairs management authority that operated under
MAIL structure until September 2013, when its status was changed by the Council of Ministers
Resolution 11. Since then, ARAZI is an independent body. With the Presidential Decree 2200 of 2013, all
the land responsibilities formerly attributed to MAIL, have been transferred to ARAZI. However, since
ARAZI was established as an independent body only in 2013, its responsibilities are not outlined in
current LML of 2008.

226Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015.
227 Wily, “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 19.
228Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 33.
229
    Please see the activities of MUDA and municipalities in the institutional map in Annex VII.
230AMLAAK: Land affairs management authority that operated under MAIL structure until September 2009.




                                                     94
Additionally, the unclear division of responsibilities between MUDA and municipalities explained in the
previous section renders the management of (not only) public land ineffective and inequitable.
Finally, lack of professional land experts and financial resources in Afghan land administration for the
implementation of day-to-day activities are some of the challenges that make it difficult to put in
practice their strategic and action plans. In ARAZI, for instance, although merging the Department of
Cadastral Survey of the Directorate of Geodesy and Cartography with ARAZI strengthened the latter’s
professional capacity, ARAZI continues to lack a sufficient technical structure that can address
countrywide land affairs. In specific terms, ARAZI’s provincial capacity is limited in te rms of human
resources and integrated cadastral maps.231 Other problems facing ARAZI include the lack of modern
technical equipment for cadastral survey, insecurity in some provinces and the lack of provincial
departments of cadastral survey. For these reasons, the establishment of some new departments have
been proposed in ARAZI’s tashkil (organisational structure) for the coming year; these departments are
needed to effectively address land affairs in the country. 232
These problems are of greater severity in smaller provinces, compared to the capital and bigger
provinces; which in general makes land management (including public land management) in these
provinces unequal.
In certain provinces (mostly in rural areas), community based management of public land is very
common particularly in relation to the management of forests and specific pastures located in close
proximity of the village. Restrictions are placed on cutting the trees and collection of products unless
allowed by the community. The community also sets up the dates for harvesting, penalties for non
compliance etc. In somea areas, woodcutting is also regulated and monitored by the community and is
not allowed when the trees are still green. Specific pastures are monitored not to allow other
communities from neighbouring villages to graze animals on these pastures. In remote areas,
graveyards are also managed by the community.
Various national and international NGOs have developed projects to support the community-based
public land management, in particular in relation to pastures.
Public land allocations
Only state land can be allocated (leased) to private and public interest in Afghanistan or private land
can be acquired (through the acquisition) for public interest. Public lands, cannot be allocated (sold,
leased, transferred or exchanged) to private interests under any circumstances. However, the
ambiguity of the definition in particular of virgin and arid lands gives room for their illegal allocation to
private hands. According to the Article 46-49 of LML 2008, the state can allocate and distribute arid
and virgin land to individuals, while pasturelands can be arid and virgin lands at the same time without
any clear distinction between those two land types in Afghan legal code. The examples of ARAZI leasing
arid and virgin land in Dur Baba plain and along Amu Darya river mentioned earlier can serve as one
example of convoluted legal framework.
Consequently, since public land allocations to private interests are illegal in Afghanistan, there is no
information recorded on these transactions, although in reality public land is at times forcibly acquired
(grabbed) and transferred to private investors.
                        Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition processes




231 Strategy to promote the Afghanistan Independent Land Authority as a modern state institution in the field of
land services, Afghanistan Independent Land Authority, 1392, 6.
232Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015.




                                                      95
The purpose of land acquisition is that lands owned by individuals are appropriated by the state with
aim to be used for public benefit in return for just compensation. In other words, land is only acquired
for the execution of public welfare projects such as the construction of hydropower dams, airports,
roads and other infrastructure. Due to the lack of adequate monitoring mechanisms to verify the
authorized use of the land, it is not clear, how much land was acquired by state and then turned to the
project with private purpose. Having said that is important to note that from the limited field research
conducted for this study, people talked about illegal transfers of land after state acquisition processes.
The availability of qualitative evidence combined with lack of state monitoring mechanism might
suggest that the process of acquisition is at best highly imperfect where the illegal use of acquitted
land cannot be ruled out. Furthermore, no database of acquisition processes exist, therefore it is not
possible to estimate, how fast the acquired land is transferred to destined use in timely-manner.
Various state organisations such as municipalities and ministries can possibly be considered as
appropriating authorities and determine if a project is needed for public welfare. The current law is
not transparent as to which departments have powers of expropriation or the limits of the powers of
implementing officials. 233 This can encourage corrupt practices. Article 3 of the current Land
Expropriation Law (LEL) 2005 lists three different categories of public projects with examples for each.
If the project is on the list, they can move forward with the appropriation. The appropriating
authorities afterwards determine the land that needs to be appropriated. If the land is within the
master plan, municipalities and MUDA can acquire the land; if the land is outside the master plan, any
government institution can be an appropriating authority. The expropriating authority then creates a
land valuation committee234 to determine the value of the land.
The final price of the land produced by this commission requires the approval of the Council of
Ministers.235 According to Article 20 of LEL 2005, the owner is informed to vacate the land three months
prior to the start of the project. No independent third party institution is appointed to assess if a
project truly serves the public welfare. ARAZI is in theory the responsible institution to monitor the
leases and transfers of state land every six months to make sure that the land is used for the purpose it
was acquired. However, this creates conflict of interest since ARAZI is both the leasing and the
monitoring authority.236Nevertheless, no regular monitoring by ARAZI takes place due to the lack of
financial and human resources and limited security in certain areas of Afghanistan.
The proposed Land Acquisition Law (LAL), currently under review by the MoJ, is an improvement of the
LEL 2005. The proposed LAL lists 19 different categories of public projects with examples for each as
compared to LEL 2005. The land required for planned public welfare project is assessed and Article
7(3) of the proposed LAL requires the organisation to estimate the least amount of land required for
the project. This provision is absent from LEL 2005, where the law does not require the expropriating
authorities to estimate the least amount of land for their projects. According to the proposed LAL,
after the project is approved by ARAZI (when among the list of 19 types of public projects) or the
Council of Ministers (when not on the list), the state organisation which is implementing the project is
required to announce the implementation of project to all the local citizens who will be affected by
the project directly or indirectly. The announcement has to be done by the media nine months
(compared to three months in the LEL 2005) before the start of the project (Article 7(15)). The new
LAL also suggests a third party monitoring body, which can assess whether the leased and transferred
land is used for their destined purposes. If adopted and adequately implemented, this law would be
certainly an improvement in Afghanistan land acquisition practices.
Another issue worth mentioning in the length of acquisition processes.The length of the acquisitions
processes is often prolonged, due to the occasional resistence from landowners. This prolongs the
three-month period even further and delays the implementation of public welfare projects. This is
happening due to various reasons, one of them being the LEL 2005, which is currently in effect, does
not make any provisions for public consultation in regards to the public welfare projects. This can
undermine the principle of transparency and accountability as the local communities who are most

233Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 49.
234 The detailed process of land valuation will be explained later in this report.
235See Article 10 of LEL 2005.
236 Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015.




                                                          96
affected by the project, however, have no say in the process. Since acquisition of lands owned by
individuals for the implementation of public welfare projects is a compulsory process without any
possibility for appeal. When it is decided that the implementation of a project has a benefit for the
public, it is the duty of the state to implement it and the individual owner to give up the land needed
without any complaints or, at times, any compensation. However, the proposed LAL, currently under
review by the MoJ, makes provisions to ensure good governance through a process consultation with
local communities (See Art. 7 (10)).
Additionally, pre-emptive actions are taken when the acquisition process is announced, which usually
leads to the increase of the value of the land. Before the government determines the price of the land,
numerous land grabbings and land sales for minimum price take place just to be able to sell the lands
later for higher price. These pre-emptive actions slow down the development of the project because
when the acquisition is announced, the expropriating authorities have already received the budget for
this purpose. When the land valuation commission estimates already increased value of the land, the
budgets are risking not being sufficient for paying compensation and for other expenses.
Furthermore, when the owners are not satisfied with the compensation, the acquisition process can be
lengthy and complicated and can create many conflicts with evicted owners. In such cases, people try
to obstruct the implementation of development projects and at time the residents even refuse to
vacate their houses to put pressure on the government to reach an agreement on a better
compensation price. Nevertheless, the acquisition of lands owned by individuals for the
implementation of public projects can, in some cases, cause public dissatisfaction particularly when
people face losses as a result of acquisition, suggesting insufficient compensation being paid during
acquisition processes. Regardless, people are forced to give up their lands for the implementation of
these projects.237

Finally, there is no accurate statistical information on lands that have been acquired and whether or
not these acquired lands have been transferred to destined use in a timely manner. Various projects
are underway in various parts of the country and the lands acquired are recorded per project, but
there is no specific institution to gather and keep these records nation-wide.
                              Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedures
Compensation
Compensation is provided only to people holding the legal title deed document. Considering the
prevalence of informal land tenure in Afghanistan, a considerable number of Afghans are susceptible
for acquisition without any right for compensation. The legal code makes a number of provisions for
land acquisition. According to Article 6 (1) of LEL 2005, the rights to ownership and damages will be
compensated. Article 6 (2) and 8 of LEL 2005 allow (unless rapid evacuation is necessary) for the rights
to be compensated for the price of the land, residential houses, buildings and other constructions
located on the land and fruit bearing or ornamental trees, or other saplings set on the land 238. There is
no stipulation in the LEL about the unrecorded rights such as grazing, right of passage and gathering
forest products.
In terms of the responsibility for valuation of the land, residential buildings and products being
produced on the land for the purposes of compensation, according to Art. 69 of LML 2008, the land
price is determined by a special valuation committee consisting of:
    1.   The provincial governor or their representative as chairperson;
    2.   Competent representative of the local ARAZI as deputy chairperson;
    3.   Competent representative of the Department of Cadastral Survey of ARAZI as member;
    4.   Competent representative of the Promotion Department of MAIL as member;
    5.   Competent representative of the Ministry of Finance as member;

237Interview    with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015.
238Article   8 of the LEL 2005.




                                                         97
    6. Competent representative of the Ministry of Urban Development as member;
    7. Competent representative of the acquisition authority as member;
    8. The owner of the land to be acquired or their legal representative or, if there are several
        owners, their legal representative as member;
    9. Two informed people from private real estate agencies as members; and
    10. If necessary, representatives from other institutions as members.
Each of the members has clearly defined responsibilities. Art. 10 of LEL stipulates that “The price of
lands subject to expropriation shall be approved by the Council of Ministers and the grade [quality] and
location of the land shall be considered for determining the price of the land.”While Art. 11 of the
same law states: that “The price of residential houses, buildings and other constructions belonging to
the owner or user of the land shall be determined by a committee of Kabul Municipality, in accordance
with The Unified Table for Valuation.” Additionally, Art. 15 stipulates that “The price for fruit-bearing
or ornamental trees or other saplings set on a land subject to expropriation, which belong to the owner
and user of such land, shall be determined as decided by the municipality and the administration for
agriculture.”
Although the compensation for land, residential buildings and fruit-bearing trees and other samplings is
legally prescribed in Afghanistan, in the majority of cases, the paid compensation is not sufficient for
the individual whose land has been acquired to be able to maintain his/her previous status of life. 239
The cases when the acquired land has been located in a central part of the city, but the exchanged
land is situated on the outskirts can serve as an example of this.
Another problem in the applicable law is that there is no deadline for the payment of compensation for
land acquisition. Compensations may be made three or four years after the acquisition. When the land
prices go up in this time period, the landowner might find himself not being able to afford the same
standard of living as before. Additionally, the acquisition process is lengthy in itself. It can take up to
120 weeks until the completion of acquisition process. Since the actual payment of the compensation
requires the landowner(s) to have their land titles verified by court 240, it takes a few weeks to even call
up all price committee members and convene a meeting. Since the price is rarely set up during one
meeting and no clear method is prescribed for how the committee sets the prices 241 , the actual
payment can turn out to be inadequate and can come very late. This, in light of the Art. 40 of the
Afghan Constitution, which states that the private land can be expropriated only in exchange for a
prior and just compensation, it can be argued that most of the acquisition processes in Afghanistan are
unconstitutional.
Furthermore, if grazing land is (by mistake or illegally) used for a construction of a public project (i.e.,
an airport), people who have formerly used the land as grazing land cannot use it any more, however
no provisions in the current legislation stipulate the provision of compensation for the loss of the
grazing rights. Finally, an adequate resettlement policy has not been incorporated into the applicable
law and it does not have any provisions for providing clear and fair resettlement options for people
whose land has been appropriated.
The proposed LAL, Article 24 states that if the locals, such as the Kuchis (nomads) and villagers who
used the land for grazing incur losses, the organisation which has appropriated the land with
consultation with ARAZI shall compensate these communities by finding an alternative grazing land.
Additionally, LAL tries to compensate the shortcomings of the current LEL by stipulating in Art. 36, that
exchanges for the acquired land include the following:
    1. Land equivalent to the acquired land in terms of degree, type, location and commercial value;
    2. If sufficient land is non-existent, exchange in cash according to the requirements set out in
       paragraph 1 of this article;
    3. If land is completely non-existent, exchange in cash;

239Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015.
240 Jawad Peikar, Asta Olsen and Sanjay Upadhyay, “The Proposed Law on Land Acquisition and Just and Fair
Compensation in Afghanistan” (Annual World Bank Conference of Land and Poverty, Washington DC, March 23-27,
2015).
241
    Please see the detailed issues with the setting up the prices of land in the section 9.7.


                                                    98
      4. Other methods of exchange are regulated by a special bylaw.
Additionally, Art. 37 of the amended LAL law states: “Individuals who do not own lands in the project
implementation area but lose their professions, jobs and working opportunities as a result of project
implementation have priority in employment for the project.”
Also, the amended law has included provisions on resettlement of individuals who face losses as a
result of acquisition of their lands. Article 44 stipulates: “When residents of an area lose their
residential houses as a result of project implementation, the acquisition authority has the
responsibility to relocate and resettle them, so they can continue their living before the
commencement of project implementation.”
It is important to note, that none of the land related laws include any provisions that would stipulate
the right for compensation in the cases of the land use change outside of the acquisition process. For
example, issues such as conversion of rural land to urban land and how this would affect secondary
rights such as access to grazing are not considered in the laws. With more research conducted in peri-
urban areas242, little is known about how land use change influences the livelihood of citizens.
Only recently approved Minerals Law 2015, makes some provisions for land use change. Art 39
stipulates “If during the mineral activities, any damage is caused to the landowner’s properties, the
holder shall be required to pay compensation in accordance with the applicable Laws. If the Holder of
a License fails to pay compensation as demanded by the landowner, or if the owner of the land is
dissatisfied with any offer, such compensation may be determined by an expert appraiser. Where the
parties may not reach any agreement, the issue shall be resolved by the competent court. “
Appeal against acquisition
According to Alden-Wiley, “the owners cannot appeal against the expropriation, to receive payments in
front of a judge, to buy the property back if the land was not used in the manner intended and to
choose whether to be paid in cash or in kind.” 243 If the owners are not willing to give up their land, the
acquisition process starts and based on the transparency of the acquisition process, satisfaction with
the compensation and resettlement measures, the actions of the private owners is determined. There
is no particular authority where individuals can lodge their complaints against acquisition and the
compensation that has been paid to them. Complaints offices (not specific to land acquisition purposes)
exist with courts and people can also approach Council of Ministers but not all individuals have an
access to these institutions. The access strongly depends on the extent of social network and ability to
provide informal payments. This de facto means, that certain mechanisms for lodging complaints exist,
however not equally accessible to all. Although those affected can ultimately approach the court
system, resorting to courts should be the last instance to launch a lawsuit as opposed to only present a
common complaint. Furthermore, rampant corruption and lengthy processes in the judiciary leaves
lawsuits filed by such individuals unaddressed for long time. At the same time, individuals whose lands
have been acquired cannot easily defend their rights against powerful figures and/or state institutions.
For example, a farmer whose lands have been acquired by the Ministries of the Interior or Defence
cannot easily sue these legal entities in the court and defend their rights if they are dissatisfied with
the acquisition. For these reasons, ordinary individuals often refrain from approaching the court
system.244




242
   See Fabrizio Foschini, “The Social Wandering of the Afghan Kuchis. Changing patterns, perceptions and politics
of an Afghan community” (Kabul: Afghan Analyst Network, 2014) and “Justice & Security Practices, Perceptions,
and Problems in Kabul and Nangarhar” (Kabul: The Liaison Office, 2014).

243Wily,   “Land, People, and the State.” 49.
244Interview   with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March, 2015.


                                                        99
However, there is no accurate statistical information on the number of lawsuits launched in relation to
land acquisition or the time needed for their solution in Afghan courts. However, it is estimated that it
takes the court approximately a year or more to decide a lawsuit.245
To address this issue, the amended LAL law has proposed the creation of a complaints hearing
committee. Based on the proposed LAL (Article 40), the proposed composition of this committee
includes land experts, an expert engineer, a representative from the organisation that has
appropriated the land, a representative of the Pricing Committee and the person/or his/her
representative whose land/property has been appropriated. The objective of this committee is to make
sure that the rights of individuals are not violated by powerful figures or state institutions and to
shorten the time taken to adjudicate a complaint. This committee can prove effective in addressing
normal complaints within a shorter period of time. However, the structure of a complaints hearing
committee is the same as that of the pricing committee, which clearly constitutes a conflict of
                                                                                                   246
interest




245Interview   with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 27 March, 2015.
246Interview   with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11March, 2015.




                                                        100
    9.5. Transfer of Large tracts of land to investor
                                                                                                        Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                              Topic                                        A B C D
PANEL 5: Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investors
LGI 1: Transfer of Public Land to Private Use Follows a Clear, Competitive Process and Payments are Collected
5    1 1 Public land transactions are conducted in an open transparent manner.
5    1 2 Payments for public leases are collected.
5    1 3 Public land is transacted at market prices unless guided by equity objectives.
5    1 4 The public captures benefits arising from changes in permitted land use.
              Policy to improve equity in asset access and use by the poor exists, is implemented
5    1 5
              effectively and monitored.
LGI2: Private Investment Strategy
              Land to be made available to investors is identified transparently and publicly, in
5    2 1
              agreement with right holders.
              Investments are selected based on economic, socio-cultural and environmental
5    2 2
              impacts in an open process.
              Public institutions transferring land to investors are clearly identified and regularly
5    2 3
              audited.
              Public bodies transferring land to investors share information and coordinate to
5    2 4
              minimize and resolve overlaps (incl. sub-soil).
              Compliance with contractual obligations is regularly monitored and remedial
5    2 5
              action taken if needed.
              Safeguards effectively reduce the risk of negative effects from large scale land-
5    2 6
              related investments.
              The scope for resettlement is clearly circumscribed and procedures exist to deal
5    2 7
              with it in line with best practice.
LGI3: Policy Implementation is Effective, Consistent and Transparent
              Investors provide sufficient information to allow rigorous evaluation of proposed
5    3 1
              investments.
5    3 2 Approval of investment plans follows a clear process with reasonable timelines.
              Right holders and investors negotiate freely and directly with full access to
5    3 3
              relevant information.
5    3 4 Contractual provisions regarding benefit sharing are publicly disclosed.
LGI 4: Contracts Involving Public Land are Public and Accessible
              Information on spatial extent and duration of approved concessions is publicly
5    4 1
              available.
              Compliance with safeguards on concessions is monitored and enforced effectively
5    4 2
              and consistently.
5    4 3 Avenues to deal with non-compliance exist and obtain timely and fair decisions.
         Transfer of state land to private use follows a clear, transparent, and competitive
                                   process and payments are collected
     (Note: the analysis of this section makes the assumption that the indicator talks about “state land”
    rather than “public land” in the context of Afghanistan.)




                                                        101
There are five possibilities of state land transactions:
    6. Transfer to other government entities – ARAZI transfers state land to other governmental
        entities based on their request
    7. Exchange – ARAZI provides an exchange of private land in one area with the state land in
        desired area based on request. The private land is exchanged for state land with the same
        grade. When same grade land is not available in desired area, the value of the acquired land
        has to match the value of the original land. Monthly, ARAZI receives 7- 10 requests for
        exchange.
    8. Donation – ARAZI allocates the land for donation based on the Presidential Decree. In
        comparison to distribution, where minimal prices for distributed land are set, donations are
        free of charge.
    9. Lease – these transactions will be discussed in detail in this section of this report
    10. Sale/Distribution – there is an ambiguity in Afghan legal framework about the sales of the state
        land (see below). For distribution purposes, ARAZI allocates the land based on the Presidential
        Decree and the respective ministries are responsible for the actual distribution.
The sale of state land was banned by Presidential Decree 99 in 2002. The decree banned selling of
state land, including virgin and arid land for housing and all other purposes.247 The philosophy behind
this was to prevent the misuse and corruption in state land distributions. 248 The allegations of
corruption of the Mayor of Kabul for distributing townships to parliamentarians, or the case of Sare
Dawra township249 can serve as an example of the corruption, lack of transparency and oversight in
state land distribution processes. However, despite the ban on state land sales prescribed by the
Presidential Decree 99 in 2005, the LML enacted in 2008 allows for both selling and leasing of state
land and provides guidelines and procedures. According to art. 47 LML 2008 “Lands being specified for
sale shall be the net property of the State, or shall be virgin and arid lands, and shall not be under
State projects, urban master plan, forests, pastures, mines and historical monuments.” According to
Art. 46(3), such land is subject to sale and transfer to individuals, agriculture and livestock institutions
and private and joint domestic companies by ARAZI upon auction and subsequent approval by the
President. The law allows also for selling of virgin and arid land contingent to presidential approval
(Art. 46(3), 47), which brings us back to the issue of unclear definition of arid and virgin land, that can
be considered both public (as a pasture land) and state land having different impacts on transferability
restrictions.
Having said that, state land is sometimes being sold for investment not always in open and transparent
manner. Of particular interest are the transactions of Afghanistan Investment Support Agency (AISA),
established as a part of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The Ministry can requests state land
from ARAZI to be transferred to AISA, which then sells it to investors. The legality of these
transactions remains unclear. Furthermore, ARAZI has currently stopped transferring land to AISA due
to the lack of clarity and coordination of their respective investment policies (AISA implements
policies such as selling land to investors at very high price, which can discourage the investors) and the
ambiguity in relation to the legal status of AISA. While it was created under the Ministry of Commerce
and Industry to support private investment, now it claims to be an independent entity.
State land can be leased 250 to individuals, organizations, domestic and external private and joint-
venture agriculture companies based on an agreement and according to the provisions of the
law.251ARAZI is responsible for managing the leases and ensuring that the requirements of the LML are
observed. To attract private investment to establish agriculture, livestock, and farming, ARAZI has the

247 See art. 1 of the presidential decree #99
248 “The Stolen Lands of Afghanistan and its People” (Kabul: UNAMA Rule of Law, part 2 of 3, 2015).
249All governmental institutions were given a quota of land, which they distributed amongst their staff by lottery.

No land was earmarked for non-governmental landless persons. The price for a plot of 450m2 was 5,000 Afghanis,
equal to about $100 USD. The low price of plots provided an opportunity for officials to buy multiple plots and
derive large profits by reselling them. Allegedly, some high officials took up to 200 land plots and sold them on the
open market at up to $7,000 each, seventy times higher than the governmental price (ibid).
250See LML, Art. 59(1).
251 See Art. 64(1).




                                                        102
authority to lease fertile land for up to 50 years and virgin and arid land up to 90 years. 252 The
authority for leasing of land up to 1,500 jeribs is ARAZI. For 1,500 to 5,000 jeribs, it is the Economic
Committee of the Council of Ministers making the final decision. For land over 5,000 jeribs it is the
Council of Ministers. 253 In addition, ARAZI is authorized to lease land for investment purposes other
than for agriculture, livestock and farming, if the purpose complies with the Private Investment Law,
such as land leased for installation of commercial TV and radio antennas, 254restaurant, hotels, pump
stations, fishing farms, poultry, orchards, agri-business, food process, factory, car wash, green houses,
universities, entertainment parks and so on.
Therefore ARAZI categorized land lease for the following purposes:
      •   For installation of telecommunication purposes such as TV, radio and mobile antennas:
      •   For agriculture purposes;
      •   For development projects
In the past ministries and municipalities were also authorized to lease out state lands under certain
conditions, including the requirement that the lands be “relevant landed” properties of the ministry or
department;255 However, these lands may not be leased for more than five years and must be leased
through public auction.256. To mainstream the lease of state land, the Cabinet Resolution 5 of 2014
requires all the ministries and municipalities to transfer their surplus land to ARAZI for further leasing.
This, however, is not always implemented in practise.
To attract investments ARAZI has made efforts and developed a detailed procedure under LML to
simplify, save time, reduce administrative steps, and ease up the leasing process. Investors can initiate
a land lease request (reactive procedure), or ARAZI can proactively announce a bidding process for land
leasing in media and mosques (proactive procedure). The initiation of leasing process by individual
investors starts from the district where the land is located, then it goes through the local ARAZI office
to the provincial ARAZI and finally it is processed by the land lease directorate and approved at the
management of ARAZI. Individual in this case has to go through different ministries mentioned in Art.
69 of LML 2008 that are involved in the land valuation to get their opinion on land value. This creates
and enormous space for corruption. However, the proactive land lease is more common nowadays.
The following are the steps for reactive land lease (with slight differences for each category of land
lease):
1. A person makes a lease request at the ARAZI local offices
2. ARAZI local office sends the request along with the Personal information form and the Form of the
   approval of the Local Shura to the district administration (3 days).
3. At the district administration level, Art. 69 from LML 2008 should be applied. In case this is not
   possible257, a smaller leasing committee is formed (this is not possible for the state land leases for
   the purposes of development projects). This committee includes representatives from ARAZI,
   Mustofiat (the local taxation office of the MoF) and the districts administration representative. The
   committee expresses its opinion about the specifications of the land and its spatial dimensions and
   the minimum price for land is set by the committee based on the type, size and grade of the land
   (3 days).
4. After receiving the information from the committee, the ARAZI main office makes an
   announcement for public auction about the land lease. If there is no media in the district, the
   announcement will be made through the mosques (2 days). This does not happen in the state land
   leases for telecommunications purposes.


252
   See Art. 64.
253See Art. 66(2).
254See Art. 64(2).
255See Art. 64(3).
256See Arts. 64(3-5).
257
   Without any specification when the commission doesn’t have to be formed.


                                                     103
5. Any applicant can submit a bid (including the person who initiated the whole procedure) with all
   necessary documents such as business plan in sealed envelop to the ARAZI office no later than the
   announced deadline. It is important to note that if the initiator of the process proposes a rent
   higher than the rents proposed by any other applicant, he/she is considered as a winner
   automatically. If this is not the case, a letter will be issued to the initiator to negotiate the
   increase of rent value.
6. The lease documentation is collected by ARAZI district officials. After the legal procedures are
   completed internally, ARAZI office at the district level sends an official letter with the documents
   to the provincial ARAZI office (3 days).
7. The Provincial ARAZI office, after verifying that the documents have been processed properly in
   accordance with ARAZI lease procedure, sends the documents to the Leasing Office of ARAZI in
   Kabul.
8. MAIL, the Leasing Office of ARAZI and authorized representative from provincial sector assesses the
   documents and business plans (2 days). This only happens for state land leases for development
   project purposes. For agricultural and telecommunications projects such assessments are not
   conducted.
9. When approved, it sends the documents to the Head of ARAZI for approval (5 days).
10. The contract for lease will be prepared (4 days) for the signature of the Head of ARAZI (3 days).
11. The contract is then send to the Leasing Department. The Leasing Department makes 4 copies of
    the contract and sends them to the ARAZI office at the district level to get the signature of the
    lessee (4 days).
12. After getting the lessee’s signature, the office of ARAZI at the district level sends one copy of the
    contract to the ARAZI department at the provincial level and another one to Kabul (3 days).
13. ARAZI office at the district level sends one copy of the contract to the lessee and keeps one copy in
    the archives of the Leasing Department (3 days)258.
For pro-active procedure, the steps are similar, except first two, and the process starts with the
formation of the committee based on Art. 69. There is no possibility to form the smaller version of the
committee.

Transparency and efficiency of lease processes
The leases of the state land are a major venue for providing large tracks of land to investors. The
bidding for contracts goes through public auction, which is announced publically and the process starts
ideally after at least 3 bidders show interest. If there are no at least three applicants after the
determined bidding deadlines, the auction is re-advertised at least two times. If after third
announcement less than three bidders expressed interest, the process continues with existing number
of bidders. However, this is not always happing in reality and sometimes the ARAZI Land Lease
Procedures are not fully followed, making the transparency on paper unfulfilled in the reality.
Additionally, the results of land valuation are not made public, further compromising the transparency
of land lease processes.
Reducing administrative steps from 53 to 8 -12 steps depending on the type of lease has reduced the
amount of time required for finalization of the lease process. The detailed procedures for leasing state
land developed by ARAZI also aims at ensuring transparency and accountably to the investors and the
public. The timelines set forth for each of the administrative steps, inclusion of the business plan
templates, annexes and all required forms including the instructions on how to proceed with the land
lease process made the leasing of state land in Afghanistan more effective and faster.
All the information about the process is available in ARAZI offices. Nevertheless, sometimes it is
difficult to get the exact information required on time. Particularly in provinces and districts, the low

258ARAZI   Land Lease Procedure, 2012.


                                                  104
capacity of the staff, as well as occasional corruption, can prevent access to the required information
such as information on the procedures or the forms. Additionally, although the new procedures have
simplified the process and are much less time consuming, these steps cannot always be completed in
the time required due to corruption, incomplete, incorrect or missing information. In case the required
information is missing or the data is entered incorrectly or it is incomplete, the documents have to be
sent back to the province or the district. Hence, it takes longer time than specified as per procedural
requirements.
Collection of payments for state leases
Revenues from leasing state lands are collected in two ways. The leased land revenues for agriculture
and farming purposes are collected after the harvest as per the contract. For telecommunication, and
development projects purposes, lease rents are collected at least one year in advance and the
contractor has to proceed with the payment no later than 60 days after the signature of the contract.
If the contractor fails to comply, the fine of 2% of lease sum has to be paid for a delay of 1-30 days and
50% of lease sum for a delay of 31-180 days. If the payment is delayed for more that 180 days, it
constitutes a grave violation of the contract and it can be terminated.
The procedure for lease collection based on ARAZI’s lease procedure is as follows: The
contractor/leasor receives the invoice at local ARAZI office, which he pays via bank onto government
account of MoF. The local ARAZI office is responsible to report all collected lease rents at the end of
the month to the national ARAZI office in Kabul. Based on the information from the land lease directors
at ARAZI and the database for land lease contracts, allegedly only 10% of the total agreed payments
are not collected 259 . However, due to the bad security situation in some areas, which can lead to
missing information in ARAZI state lease database, it can be assumed that this figure might fluctuate
into certain extent. Additionally, some state leases were conducted during Taliban regime, where no
records exist. This has a direct impact on collecting the payments for state land leases.
Land valuation
Land lease prices are determined either through the valuation commission established based on Art. 69
of LML 2008, or, if this larger commission cannot be established, based on the type, grade (quality) and
size of land by the smaller Leasing Committee (see point 3 of the ARAZI Land Lease Procedure)
comprised of local representatives of ARAZI, MoF (Mustofiat) and district administration representative.
Based on some accounts of land experts, in cases if there is no land record with ARAZI or the land has
never been leased before, then the delegation as per Art. 69 of LML will determine the price. Because
the members of the valuation commission approach local property dealers and compare the current
lease prices of lands of similar types and grades in that area with the land being valuated, the price
will allegedly be determined based on market value260. If the smaller committee is formed, the market
value of the land is not taken into account.
Although provisions stated in Afghan legal framework set clear procedures for the land valuation,
delays in assessing the land and setting price is an issue as the members of the valuation delegation
often take time to present themselves. Sometimes it takes longer than one year to get the lease
contract signed off by both parties despite the fact that ARAZI has reduced the number of steps. Taking
into account the lack of clarity on when the larger commission based on Art. 69 of LML 2008 should be
formed; the market value of the land is not always taken into account. Additionally, due to the high
level of corruption in Afghanistan, powerful strongmen and public officials at times put pressure on the
valuation committee to decrease the value of the land. Finally, the results of the valuation are not
publicly accessible creating transparency issues within the process, providing the room for setting the
lease price value irrespective of the market price.


259It
    is in MS excel format and contains all required information such as the contractor’s personal details, type of
contract, location, duration of contract, rent, contract start and end date, etc.


260
  Please note however that there are various problems connected to the process of land valuation, which will be
mentioned in more detail in the section 9.7.


                                                        105
Public capture of benefits
In urban areas one way of capturing benefit from a land use change resulting from the lease of the
state land is Safayi (land/property) tax. Depending on the size of the construction, the tax increases,
which should be then used for the development of the community by the Municipality. However, public
benefits from collecting taxes are rarely seen in the communities. In rural areas, Safayi tax is not
collected, it is only tax from agricultural land that can serve as a mechanism for capturing the public
benefits. However, unless the investor uses the leased land for agricultural purposes, the land tax is
not collected at all. Hence the capturing public benefits from the state land lease are limited.
For the mining sector, certain efforts to this end where undertaken; however they were not successful.
There was a proposal for the amendment of the Mining Law that said that 5% of the profit from the
mines should be spent in the particular province. This law was not approved by the Cabinet when it
was proposed in 2013.
It is correct to say that sometimes the communities benefit from increased employment opportunities
due higher investment in that area, but the implementation of relevant policies to enable public
capture of benefits arising from changes in permitted land use has largely been ignored; thereby
resulting in some members of society unduly benefitting from these and some not being touched by the
benefits at all.
Policy to improve equity in asset access and use by the poor
The LML 2008 stipulates that any Afghan having the legal status, can have access to land lease. Even
ARAZI land lease procedure gives priority to women and up to 10% decrease in lease rent for women
based on the bidding process. 261 ARAZI is taking steps to amend the procedures to include other
marginalized groups such as handicapped, internally displaced persons, returnees etc. Additionally, as
mentioned earlier there are some land distribution schemes for minimal prices for returnees,
handicapped, teachers, municipality and MUDA for social housing purposes. Nonetheless,
implementation of these laws and regulations is facing challenges such as corruption, lack of political
will to implement the laws and inability of the government to establish rule of law in insecure parts of
the country. For example, land grabbing by powerful individuals can easily limit the poor’s access to
grazing lands. Field research shows that state land was not always distributed to those eligible. 262
                                  Private investment strategies
Identification of land suitable for lease
The legal code is clear regarding the type of land that can be leased, who can lease the land and the
state organisation that is responsible for the oversight of the leased land. However, the lack of clarity
of the Afghan legal framework on what land actually is the state land (as opposed to public land)
makes the identification of suitable land for lease at best murky. 263
Article 59 (1) of LML 2008 identifies the kind of land that can be leased: “ State and private lands shall
be leased on the basis of a written agreement between lesser and lessee in accordance with the
provisions of law.” And art. 66, makes provisions for the lease of virgin and arid lands stipulating that
250 jeribs of land can be leased to individuals, up to 5000 jeribs 1 to agriculture private and joint-
venture companies. However, public consultations with local communities regarding the lease of land
and private investment does not have any strong legal backing and does not take place allegedly due to
the same reasons as to why acquisition processes trigger various reactions from the side of the
community (see the section on acquisition). Hence, secondary right holders can potentially be left out
of the process.
Selection of investments



261Land lease procedure, Art. 9, p. 7.
262Please see the examples of Sar Dawra township or the distribution of state land to low-ranking public officials
above (in The UNAMA report “The Stolen Lands of Afghanistan and its People” part 2 of 3 March 2015).
263
    Please see the explanation of blurred boundaries between state and public land in the section 9.4.


                                                      106
ARAZI is responsible for the transfer of state land. As per provisions of LML an investment is selected
based on the type of project. Article 64 and 69 further elaborates the types of projects. It considers all
required parameters, and the land can be leased or transferred only after a comprehensive evaluation.
264


If one is requesting a land for food processing project, for instance, the potential leasee has to develop
a business plan. The business plan should include information such as availability of capital, equipment,
availability of skilled, semi-skilled and non-skilled staff, information on their salaries, source for raw
materials, identification of a market for the final product, potential availability of competitors, how
the company will compete in the market and so forth. Other factors such as the proximity to
residential areas and environmental impacts should be included in the business plan as well. If land is
requested for building a university, for example, these factors must be clear in the business plan: the
size of land, potential number of students, number of faculties, professors, number of admin workers,
official approval of MoHE, inclusion of parking and green area and so on.
The selection of investments mainly happens through the evaluation of above mentioned aspects of
business plans by MAIL, the Leasing Office of ARAZI and authorized representative from provincial
sector (see the step-by-step process of ARAZI lease procedure above). In telecommunication and simple
agriculture lease no economic assessment is conducted. However, in case of the development projects
and pro-active leasing requested by individuals a proper business and action plan is required. More than
three bidders are needed in order to proceed with the process. The criteria for selection are based on
analysis of the market, competitors and skilled, semi-skilled and non-skilled labour.
Although a land leasing process is in place as explained in the introduction and the legal codes which
require environmental, social and economic assessment of the investment projects exist, a formal
mechanism of benefit sharing that would consider local benefits does has not been developed. Taking
the high level of corruption in Afghanistan into account, some investments go ahead that are either not
according to the policy or despite unfavourable outcomes.
Public institutions responsible for transferring the state land
ARAZI was established by the Cabinet Resolution 5 of 2014 as the only organization to manage the
transfer and lease of state and public land. However, various other state organizations continue leasing
state land on ad hoc basis without following proper procedures and no coordination with ARAZI.
ARAZI is audited through the High Office of External Oversight and Joint Commission of Monitoring and
Evaluation (MEC). The provisions on how often ARAZI has to be audited are not clear in Afghan legal
framework, however ARAZI’s last audit was conducted in the beginning of 2015. Sometimes special
audits are conducted if a case of corruption is investigated. Furthermore, both AISA and ARAZI lack
qualified and capacities to carry out all its obligations. Particularly AISA does not have offices in some
provinces while ARAZI has offices in most provinces.
Monitoring of compliance with contractual obligations
The LML 2008 stipulates that any failure to comply contractual obligations will result in contract
termination. LML also stipulates that ARAZI will be monitoring the progress of land development, which
is under lease contract every six months. 265
In praxis, however, there is no regular monitoring taking place. In very rare cases ARAZI performs
monitoring every 6 months due to the lacking human resources, financial capacity and bad security
situation is some parts of Afghanistan. The lack of proper and regular monitoring creates space for
corruption and illegal practices. One example of this can be the leased land in Canal-e-Nanagrahar.
The state leased agriculture land, which was supposed to be used for agriculture purposes. However, it
was converted to residential are by influential political figures in the Nangarhar province. Another,
case in Nangrahar is the Kabul Ada case, which was leased for agricultural purposes. The leased land
has been converted to commercial land. Both cases are currently under investigation, with no tangible
outcomes. The cases, when ARAZI finds out about non-compliance are rare and remedial action is

264LML,   Art.64 and 69.
265   See LML Art.67.3.


                                                   107
almost never taken. Having said that, there is little information about whether the land leased or
transferred is used for the purpose that it was leased and if the terms of the agreement are followed or
violated.
Existence of safeguards
Based on the Art. 61 LML 2008 and ARAZI land lease procedure Art. 31, the lease contractor is obliged
to consider and protect the environmental protection principles. Also, it is one of the monitoring
obligations of ARAZI to assess environmental impacts and make sure that the project is not a threat to
the environment and does not have any negative impacts on the environment. 266 In addition, one of
the requirements of the lease contract is that the contractor must be committed to the environmental
protection principles.
In addition, the National Environmental Protection agency (NEPA) and the Environmental Law makes
provisions for environmental protection. NEPA is responsible to make sure that no project is
threatening environment and has the authority to stop any project that has a negative environmental
impact. Art. 6 of the Environmental Law makes provisions regarding government rights and obligations
in terms of environmental protection and Art. 7 discusses individuals’ rights and obligations towards
the environment. Environmental, socio-cultural and economic impacts of an investment project are
also mentioned in the new Minerals Law (2015).
Article 89 of Minerals Law (ML 2015) makes provisions for assessing environmental and social impact of
investment projects in the mining sector: “The License Holder shall comply with the conditions set
forth in the License and other applicable laws and as the case may be, conduct an assessment of
environmental and social impacts which shall include:
1. A detailed study of the natural and artificial environment of the License Area prior to any Mineral
Activities, based on measurements and indices with respect to the quality of air and water, soil, trees,
and animals, and other flora and fauna in order to provide a comprehensive environmental baseline to
be measured from that time; and
2. An Environmental and Social Management Plan that includes a detailed description of reclamation
activities and mine closure including:
    a. Detailed data regarding contaminating substances and resources;
    b. Identification of likely negative environmental impacts, including water, air and soil pollution
       damage to flora and fauna, and injection of poisonous and destructive substances into the
       environment;
    c. A review of the negative impacts of Tailings;
    d. Mitigation actions to be taken with respect to each environmental impact of each
       contaminating source;
    e. The availability of equipment required to mitigate environmental impacts and measures to be
       taken to anticipate expected impacts;
    f. The timetable for implementation of the Plan;
    g. The Projected budget and its timetable to achieve environmental objectives;
    h. An introduction of employees responsible for implementation of environmental mitigation;
    i. An introduction of monitoring officer, the methodologies to be used for monitoring, and
       sources of funding for monitoring activities;
    j. Meet with local communities and relevant government agencies in relation to environmental
       and social impacts; and
    k. Submission of an Environmental and Social Management Plan in accordance with the provisions
       of the Law.
Whenever the License Holder proposes to amend its work program, it shall provide sufficient reason to
the relevant agency that it will implement an appropriate environmental and social management plan.
Based on Art. 90 of ML 2015, investors are required to provide annual reports on environmental and
social impact of the project.

266Land   lease procedure, page 108, article 13.5


                                                    108
Additionally, ARAZI have build in some safeguards into the requirements for bidders. When ARAZI
provide lease for chicken farms, for instance, these should not be located in the cities and crowded
areas. When leasing land to petroleum companies, companies are not allowed to build the petroleum
pump in green areas. Protection of environments is mandatory and is included in the contract of
investors when leasing land from ARAZI. In fresh vegetables and fruits packaging houses, employees
have to wear sanitary clothing. However, due to the minimal monitoring that takes place, the
compliance with the safeguards is not possible to verify.
Resettlement and rehabilitation policy

Afghan legal framework does not provide for the resettlement and rehabilitation policy despite the fact
that many large-scale development projects, for example in the mining sector, can lead to mass
displacement of local communities. Art. 40 of the Mining Law states that the resettlement should be
used as a last resort and it only requires a license holder to ‘consult’ with local populations without any
protection set out if the local population does not want to accept the terms offered. This can
potentially lead to forced eviction by the investors.
However, the proposed Land Acquisition Law drafted by ARAZI has clear provisions in line with most of
the world’s best practices. Having said that, the proposed LAL law is in draft form and has not yet been
approved. It can be speculated that the government might not be financially able to make
compensations for large-scale investment projects.
              Policy implementation is effective, consistent and transparent
As mentioned already above, investors’ business plans a re evaluated based on various information
provided to ARAZI. Based on the Land Lease Procedures, ARAZI is responsible to assess technical
viability, community consultations – provincial office asks in the community, availability of resources,
project risks before the implementation and mechanisms for monitoring of the progress of the project.
ARAZI currently carries out these obligations and conducts technical viability and market assessments.
It also assesses demand in the market, competitors, risks, possible customers, marketing strategy,
funding, budget, staffing and environmental impacts.
The concrete steps for the approval of leasing of the state land to investors has been mentioned
already earlier in this report. In ARAZI land lease procedures, a timeline is given for each
administrative step depending on the type of the project (telecommunications, agricultural or
development). It usually takes around 45 working days to finalise the process. However, the leasing
process is negatively affected by a number of factors. It is sometimes difficult to process the
administrative steps on timely manner due to missing, incorrect or incomplete information required on
the forms, absence of ARAZI local officials, their limited capacity or bribery. In case of missing or
incomplete information the file has to be bounced back to province to district.
As discussed in the introduction, the only land holder, which can lease and transfer land for private
investment is the state. The leasing process, as explained before, as per Afghan law should happen
through the public auction; therefore it does not require negotiations. The public has been left out of
the discussion on investment projects even though they can exercise certain user rights over public
lands. Taking into account the lack of clarity of public and state land definitions, it can be assumed
that these rights are not always recognized; hence the need for the public consultation is not upheld.
In terms of public disclosure of benefit sharing modalities, the actual contracts include such provisions
allowing the pubic to share benefits. These include provision on hiring the unskilled labor from the
community, materials used should come from the community, if available, and products should be
preferably sold for the community. All these provisions, however, depend on the type of project.
However, there is a gap between the legal framework and practice due to many reasons such as lack of
proper monitoring, the weak local governance at the provincial and district level and absence of an
effective mechanisms to implement the provisions of law in consistent manner (in less secure areas for
example). This is mainly because of corruption, lack of public knowledge regarding the laws and
inaccessibility of the contracts to the public.
                  Contracts involving state land are public and accessible


                                                   109
If a piece of land has already gone through the land clearance process ( Tasfia) or the GPS department
of ARAZI took the coordinates of the land beforehand, then the spatial data is available with ARAZI.
Otherwise, every parcel of land, which is to be leased or transferred, must go through the land
clearance process or through the measurements of GPS department. Hence, there is spatial data
available for all of the leased lands except the leases dating way back, when the GPS technology
wasn’t available and those that are located in insecure areas, where ARAZI officials have no access.
Additionally, there is a special column in lease contract with GPS information and land boundaries.
The maximal land lease contract duration is determined by the LML as well. Currently, arid and virgin
land can be leased up to 90 years and agriculture land can be leased up to 50 years accounting for the
type of the project, investment and business plan as discussed earlier. Nevertheless, each project can
have different duration as long as it does not exceed the maximum allowed lease period. These records
such as duration of the contract, type of the project, spacial data etc. albeit existent, they are not
accessible to public.
The fact that ARAZI is responsible for the state land leases and at the same time for their monitoring
creates conflict of interest.267 The only third-party monitoring is conducted by the civil society on ad
hoc basis. Organisations such as Integrity Watch Afghanistan and EITI occasionally investigate whether
contracts such as mining contracts or development projects for which land was allocated have adhered
to the contracting terms. Furthermore, there is a government body, the High Office of Oversight and
Anti-Corruption and Joint Commission on Monitoring and Evaluation (MEC), which does sporadic
monitoring on ARAZI, which consequently should monitor investors. However, the lack of capacities in
HOO is preventing rigorous and regular third-party monitoring by this institution. It should also be
noted that the Afghan media has addressed some cases of gross violations of lack of compliance with
contracts. Nonetheless, in the absence of adequate safeguards and formal procedures in place as well
as lack of public information, the investors are less likely to cooperate with third parties such as the
NGOs and the media.
As mentioned above, there is a limited third-party monitoring of projects on leased lands, nor the
ARAZI conducts internal monitoring regularly. Due to the lack of adequate monitoring mechanism, the
question poses itself about how many cases of non-compliance is ARAZI actually able to “catch” in
order to proceed with their resolution. Nevertheless, issues such as violations of contract (if observed
by the ARAZI monitoring team) shall be resolved by the local ARAZI office and approved at the centre-
in Kabul. Based on accounts of one ARAZI official, the process is effective and efficient and the cases
are resolved locally. If the issue cannot be resolved, they are then referred to main office in Kabul or
relevant authorized court for resolution and final decision.




267   Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015


                                                       110
    9.6. Public Provision of Land Information, Registry and Cadastre
PANEL 6: Public Provision of Land Information: Registry and Cadastre
LGI 1: Mechanisms for Recognition of Rights
              Land possession by the poor can be formalized in line with local norms in an
6    1 1
              efficient and transparent process.
6    1 2 Non-documentary evidence is effectively used to help establish rights.
6    1 3 Long-term unchallenged possession is formally recognized.
              First-time recording of rights on demand includes proper safeguards and access is
6    1 4
              not restricted by high fees.
6    1 5 First-time registration does not entail significant informal fees.
LGI 2: Completeness of the Land Registry
6    2 1 Total cost of recording a property transfer is low.
6    2 2 Information held in records is linked to maps that reflect current reality.
6    2 3 All relevant private encumbrances are recorded.
6    2 4 All relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded.
6    2 5 There is a timely response to requests for accessing registry records.
6    2 6 The registry is searchable.
6    2 7 Land information records are easily accessed.
LGI 3: Reliability of Registry Information
              Information in public registries is synchronized to ensure integrity of rights and
6    3 1
              reduce transaction cost.
6    3 2 Registry information is up-to-date and reflects ground reality.
LGI 4: Cost-effectiveness and Sustainability of Land Administration Services
              The registry is financially sustainable through fee collection to finance its
6    4 1
              operations.
              Investment in land administration is sufficient to cope with demand for high
6    4 2
              quality services.
LGI 5: Fees are Determined Transparently
              Fees have a clear rationale, their schedule is public, and all payments are
6    5 1
              accounted for.
6    5 2 Informal payments are discouraged.
6    5 3 Service standards are published and regularly monitored.

    Introduction
    Cadastral and Inventory Land Surveys
    A decision was made (in 1965) to conduct the first nation-wide cadastral survey, a comprehensive
    mapping of land parcels and gather information about the probable ownership of each of the mapped
    parcels. The parcel mapping was to be the basis of a new system of land registration as well as an
    inventory of land resources for property taxation and program planning of various governmental sectors
    as described and regulated in the Land Survey and Statistics Law of 1344 (1965). That law also
    established the structure and mandate of the Cadastral Survey Directorate in the Ministry of Finance.
    Upon enforcement of the Law, the nation wide cadastral survey started in Kandahar and then expanded
    to other provinces. From 1965 to 1978, it surveyed state and private agricultural and barren lands
    (deserts, pastures, forests) covering 27,411,493 Jeribs or 5,64 Million Hectares268. Land surveying was
    put to a halt after the land reforms by Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. During the communist
    regime (1978-1992), surveying was only available on demand for land clearance and resolution of land
    conflict purposes. It cannot be estimated how much land was surveyed as at the time there as was no
    proper registry system to register the records. During the transitional Islamic State of Afghanistan the
    surveying process was suspended based on Presidential Decree 99 of 2003. Following this decree
    cadastral survey activities were carried out only based on official request of ministries and government

    268Cadastral   Survey Statistics Report, 1978.


                                                      111
institutions, which had obtained presidential orders. Having said that, only 34% of overall land in
Afghanistan was surveyed.
One already mentioned shortcoming of the cadastral recording of right is the fact that the entry of an
owner’s name on the forms of the Cadastral Survey does not necessarily represent an official
confirmation of ownership because the cadastral team in the field does not conduct investigations on
rightful owners. It is rather a statement of “probable ownership” based on the field data that the
survey teams collected about each parcel they surveyed.
The destruction of records during three decades of conflicts only adds to the complexity of the issue.
As many people were killed, disappeared or were displaced as refugees and IDPs, their properties were
taken over by others. Some of these lands were then sold leading to a significant number of contested
ownership cases. However, the courts do not provided any consolidated data on the number of these
cases. This issue was meant to be addressed by the LML 2008, Art. 28, which says that “in places
where principal property and tax books as well as valid land documents which could confirm the
property of a person are destroyed, and in case of non-existence of the books in the center, the
landholding area of persons shall be settled after the property is being confirmed legally.” This,
however, proves to be problematic in the current context of Afghanistan considering the limited
recognition of other than formal ownership documentation at Afghan courts.
                                Mechanisms for recognition of rights
Recognition of rights
The Afghan Constitution of 2004 established a legal framework for property rights safeguarding the
right of individuals to own property, stating property shall be safe from violation, no one shall be
forbidden from owning and acquiring property, except by law, and private property can only be
confiscated by legal order (article 40). Additionally, more than 30 laws and regulations were developed
to ensure the rights of all individuals to own the land and property. Nevertheless, the ways of
registering the land in Afghanistan, already explained in the section 9.1, has a number of shortcomings
(see the table in the section 9.1.) preventing a considerable portion of the population (including the
poor) to have their rights recognized. Although the legal code for land ownership has progressively
evolved to more comprehensive set of legal framework, its emphasis on formal documentary evidence
of land ownership and a number of contradictions, in particular concerning the definition of public and
state land, can, if implemented, deprive a considerable portion of Afghan population of their rights.
Furthermore the petty bureaucracy in the form of multiple steps and offices creates opportunities for
corruption and defers the poor to proceed with the registration process.
For example when registering the property with courts, the existing circular form has to go through at
least five different offices (please see the concrete steps of registration in the table below).This
lengthy and time-consuming process can be expedited by informal payments, however people who
cannot afford or refuse to engage in corrupt practices have to follow the proper procedure, which can
take over a year to finalize.
In addition, as mentioned already in section 9.1, it is believed that most of the rural population in
Afghanistan owns only customary deed proving their ownership ( Sanad-e-Urfi) or possesses no
documentation at all. There are two conditions for customary deed documents to be formally
recognized:
       1. During the transaction of land both parties fill all documents properly and accurately such
       as both parties include signature or fingerprints, two witness’s signatures or fingerprints. Then
       the customary deed documents are prepared in two copies, one for buyer and one for seller.
       2. When the customary deed documents were acquired before 1957 and the seller has a valid
       title deed (LML, Art.5(5)).
Nevertheless, even if these two conditions are met, there is no mechanism put in place to formalize
customary deed document without the land clearance process (Tasfia) or without selling the land,
where the future owner receives formal title deed when registered with courts.




                                                 112
Additionally, the non-documentary evidence is used only as a last resort to prove individual land
ownership. Non-documentary evidence is particularly crucial in the context of Afghanistan since in
many places principal property and tax books as well as valid land documents, which could confirm the
property of a person were destroyed during the wars leaving no official record of who the owner of a
disputed land is. Also, 35 years of unchallenged possession is not always possible due to the three
decades of wars in Afghanistan’s modern history. During the wars, many Afghans left their homes, were
internally displaced or migrated outside the country. Their land and properties were then occupied
without the permission of their owners. This provided the opportunity for powerful men and militias to
grab land. They occupied houses and took over commercial centres and stores. Additionally, there are
also concerns that the longer people remain on the grabbed land/property, the more likely to establish
rights on those lands based on the very same article.
One type of non-documentary evidence, often used in Afghan context, are the testimonies of witnesses
(for authentication of formal and customary deed documents) and neighbours (when certifying 35 years
of unchallenged possession). According to the Civil Procedure Code, at least two witnesses are
necessary269. Nevertheless, due to the extensive migration of population caused by the decades of war,
it does not provide effective way to secure the ownership. There are many cases when the witnesses
have moved from their place of origin and the claimants for land ownership do not have any means to
contact them270.
First-time recording of rights

As mentioned already in the section 9.1, there are several ways of registering or recording the
ownership rights in Afghanistan, each with different procedure and different costs 271.




269
    Civil Procedure Code 1990, Art. 294
270
    Please see the section 9.8 for more information on informal land rights recognition through non-state justice
mechanisms such as jirgas and shuras, frequently used by the Afghan rural population.
271
    Please see the section 9.1. for the information on their efficiency and effectiveness.


                                                      113
Type               of   Steps                                                              Forms     needed      Other costs (taxes ,     Time
registration                                                                               and costs             service   fees    or
                                                                                                                 informal payments)
Recognition by the      1. Initiation by ARAZI or other governmental entity                N/A                   No taxes or service      1– 15 days
State of private           (individual cannot request the land clearance)                                        fees, possibility of
                                                                                                                                          (Depends on a size
rights    to  land      2. Request of presidential approval                                                      informal payments
                                                                                                                                          of    the      land).
(Registration    at     3. Approval of the President
                                                                                                                                          Additionally,     the
ARAZI      -  land
                                                                                                                                          existence     of    a
clearance (Tasfia))
                                                                                                                                          dispute over the
                                                                                                                                          ownership prolongs
                                                                                                                                          the          process
                                                                                                                                          considerably. When
                                                                                                                                          the Tasfia team
                                                                                                                                          does not manage to
                                                                                                                                          solve the dispute
                                                                                                                                          informally 272 , the
                                                                                                                                          case has to go to
                                                                                                                                          the court.
Cadastral recording     a) National Cadastral survey                                       a) N/A                a) No     taxes    or    15 days after the
and mapping                                                                                b) N/A                   service      fees,    Presidential
                        1. Request by the President through the Presidential
                                                                                                                    possibility     of    approval 273     (in
                           Decree
                                                                                                                    informal              rural areas might
                        2. The Cadastral Department forms a team
                                                                                                                    payments              take longer due to
                        3. Team is sent to the field to perform technically
                                                                                                                 b) b) 550 – 1350 Afs     accessibility, lack
                           complicated and time consuming measurements
                                                                                                                    based on a grade      of public media
                        b) Inventory Survey                                                                         of the land while     etc.)
                                                                                                                    adding 50 – 200
                        1. Individual requests ARAZI to conduct the inventory
                                                                                                                    Afs per each
                           survey of his/her land.
                                                                                                                    jerib based on
                        2. ARAZI CEO give approval
                                                                                                                    size (based on
                        3. The cadastral team is sent to the field to conduct
                                                                                                                    the Cadastral Bill
                           simplified measurement of the land
                                                                                                                    of Service Fees,
                        4. In cases of large tracts of land such as whole villages,
                                                                                                                    Art. 4).
                           the approval of the President has to be sought before
                           conducting the survey. This is done by submitting a

272Tasfiateam can indeed be considered as one of the informal dispute resolution forum. Previously, the Tasfia delegation included a judge to support the
dispute resolution, however this practice was abandoned. Our research team did not find the conclusive evidence into why exactly it was abandoned.
273
    The Presidential approval can tike months to obtain


                                                                          114
                             letter of request to the Administrative Office of the
                             President.
Court registration –    1.   Submission of a petition form to the respective civil          1. Petition form       1.– 6. No taxes or       The certification of
acquiring the title          court and taking the circular form                                 - 5 Afs            service fees             all the offices on
deed of transaction     2.   The circular form has to be taken to court archives                (additionally                               the circular form
documents (deeds)            (Makhzan), where the title deed is compared to the                 100 – 500 Afs      7. 3% of court           can takes up to 1
                             court records (Konda). Makhzan certifies the circular              informal fee       registration tax and     week – 10 days,
                             form. When the court records of the title deed of the              for the court      1% transaction tax to    when the owner
                             seller do not exist, the process cannot continue. In               clerk to fill it   the Revenue Office       possesses     formal
                             recent praxis, the courts do not accept tax and water              in; it is not      of MoF (mustofiat)       title deed. In other
                             payments as a valid ownership documents although                   possible to                                 cases the process is
                             prescribed by the law due to fears of accepting forged             fill it in by                               often stopped.
                                                                                                                   The whole process
                             documents.                                                         yourself);
                                                                                                                   can be done through      The rest of the
                        3.   Circular form is taken to ARAZI, where the certification           Circular form
                                                                                                                   the dealer – 1% of       steps depend on
                             based on their Principal books is conducted. However,              is free (again
                                                                                                                   property or land         the    amount      of
                             since the change of the owners of the land (who                    for filling in
                                                                                                                   from buyer and 1%        informal payments
                             acquired new title deed through the court registration             the form by a
                                                                                                                   from seller.             the seller is willing
                             when buying the land) is not communicated to ARAZI,                clerls an
                                                                                                                                            to pay, as well as
                             ARAZI often cannot certify the ownership because in the            informal fee       The payments of
                                                                                                                                            the         personal
                             previous owner figures on their records. When one or               is often paid)     informal        fees
                                                                                                                                            networks. In some
                             part of a plot of land is sold more times using the court      2. N/A                 throughout       the
                                                                                                                                            cases the process
                             registration, ARAZI does not have the information on               (circulation       whole process is
                                                                                                                                            can take even up
                             current owner nor the size of land. However, based on              with one           often required.
                                                                                                                                            to 7 months.
                             accounts of ARAZI officials, as long as the seller has the         circular form
                             tax or water payment receipts, the Presidential Decree             to five
                             or valid customary deed document based on which the                offices)
                             ownership is claimed, they can proceed with the                3.-9. N/A
                             verification of the circular form.                             10. 200 Afs for
                        4.   Circular form is taken to the community experts for cost           the title deed
                             estimation, size of the property and other relevant                (Qabala)
                             information regarding the land.
                        5.   Circular form is taken to the Revenue Office of MoF
                             (mustofiat) to verify if all taxes were paid. However,
                             since the MoF tax records haven’t been updated since
                             1978 after Doud Khan’s assassination274, most of the tax
                             payers are not registered in MoF taxation books. If the

274During Doud Khan’s regime (1973 – 1978), the so-called Izharnamas –Land Declarations – were collected for taxations and tenure security purposes. People
had to declare (although often providing a smaller size of land to prevent paying high taxes) how much land they owned, and based on that, MoF tax books
were developed. This process stopped after Doud Khan’s death.


                                                                           115
                                 tax payments are not registered, no certification can be
                                 accorded.
                           6.    The certified Circular form by all above mentioned
                                 offices is taken to the head judge of the respective
                                 court for a signature.
                           7.    Commission of property valuation comprised of MoF,
                                 MoJ, Municipality, ARAZI, (those are the main members)
                                 and possibly member of Attorney’s General Office, NDS,
                                 local elders) revises the prices estimated by buyer and
                                 seller by
                           8.    Court gives a tariff to be paid for court registration and
                                 transaction tax. Furthermore, sometimes purchasers and
                                 sellers report a lower transaction amount in order to pay
                                 less tax, while the actual transaction has been higher.
                                 In such cases of tax evasion, the courts are often unable
                                 to establish the actual transaction cost.275
                           9.    The seller brings the receipt of a payment to the court.
                           10.   Witnesses go to head judge for testimonies and
                                 questioning about the authenticity of the sellers
                                 ownership.
                           11.   New title deed is written and signed by the head judge
                                 of the respective court (the court archive documents
                                 (Konda) have 2 parts, one is given to the new owner,
                                 one is kept for archiving purposes)
                           Please note that the certification of the Cadastral
                           Department is not necessary posing the questions about the
                           land spacial information. In the past, the certification of the
                           Cadastre was required (old circular form), however this
                           requirement was abolished. At times, however, when the
                           land is next to state land, the judges decide to use old
                           circular form and the person needs to get the certification
                           of Cadastre. Similarly the certification of Ministry of Water
                           and Energy was required to verified the water rights. Now, it
                           was abolished.




275Interview   with ARAZI official, Kabul, 27 March 2015.


                                                                             116
                                        Completeness of the land registry
Total cost of recording a property transfer
Though the amount of registration fees for either of the procedures are not extremely high, during the
course of preparing the paper work, several informal payments must be made to get the process
running. Additionally it is the length of the procedure that can last up to 7 months or one year, which
makes the process so cumbersome. These problems in particular affect people living in rural areas as
they have to travel a long distance to get to one of the land registry sites and the long procedures and
corruption they have to incur increases the costs of registering their land. Therefore, they are more
likely to bypass such issues and refer to the village elders and formalize land transactions through
customary deeds. Hence, there are no effective and proper safeguard requirements for recoding rights
to prevent the costs and abuse. Furthermore, while the formal registration of rights has been
compulsory in previous versions of the LML, this is not explicitly the case in the 2008 version or in
current proposed amendments of the law.276 In the absence of a registering their land (customary) or
do not register their land at all.
Record keeping
The only office in Afghanistan which records the location with spatial information (land survey
measurements) and maps is the Cadastral Department. As mentioned already in this reports, only 34%
of the land in Afghanistan has been registered with its spatial specifications. 30% of land was recorded
by the Cadastre from 1965-1978, and 4% has been surveyed since based on presidential decrees.
Although the land registry offices at the local level might have a recording of the privately held land in
the area of their responsibility, identifying this on the maps is not necessarily possible since the
Cadastral Survey Department does not have maps of all the land in the country. 277The surveyed records
include the boundaries of the land and their spatial specifications. Cadastral surveying information,
however, have not been updated since 1978. Taking into account that much of the land recorded and
mapped have changed drastically in recent years, such as currently 75% of the arable land is changed 278
to residential areas, the records available in Cadastre cannot be considered reliable nor complete.
When registering the land with courts, the courts are using two types of circular forms. One is the
latest version approved by Supreme Court and one is the old circular form. The decision is with the
court to which one they choose. The new circular does not include cadastral certification, whereas the
old one has the cadastral certification column. The fact that the new circular form does not contain
the exact spacial information about the land, provides room for corruption for people potential land
grabbers and illegal usurpants of the land. The old form is more often used, when the land transaction
is happening adjacent to a state land, where the courts are paying more attention to prevent the
corruption.
When the delegation of land clarification ( Tasfia) goes to the field, allegedly the team includes the
members of the Cadastral Department or at least the members of Tasfia delegation should draw a
sketch. It was impossible to verify how often these processes are actually happening in practice.
Private encumbrances, such as conflicts over land and mortgage are recorded during surveying process.
The information about private encumbrances is recorded in cadastral ownership lists by cadastral
surveyors while doing the survey. The surveyors mark the forms as “not finalised”. The same
procedure is in place for the state land as well. However, since only 34% of the irrigated lands is
surveyed and recorded and yet not updated, the information cannot be considered reliable.
Additionally, land conflict cases, which are taken to court, are recorded in the courts. ARAZI and
municipalities records all the information about land or houses including encumbrances such as
existence of the guarantee over the land. In case someone wants to buy a property than they verify
with ARAZI and municipality. The buyer can also verify with MoF if the property is free of any charges
or taxes.However, the obligation to verify the existence of any encumbrances in not legally binding for
the offices certifying the circular form during the process of land registration. Therefore unless the

276Wily,   “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 15.
277   Interview with ARAZI officials, Kabul, March 2015.
278   Interview with ARAZI official, Kabul, 1 September 2015.


                                                         117
individual proactively seeks this information, the possibilities of buying the land with encumbrance is
very high.
Additionally, public restrictions and charges are not recorded. In the past the violations of public
restrictions used to be recorded in ARAZI principle books (e.g. when using public land for a purpose
other than the one specified). The law on pasture, during King Zahir Khan’s ruling, required
registration of all violations; however, later this requirement was removed from the law. The reasoning
behind the removal of these provisions was, the less records about any aspect of public land (e.g.
violations), the easier it is to change records and take public land for state land and distribute it or use
it for private purposes. Recently in the new Land Management Law, which has not been approved yet,
provisions have been made to record the violations and charges.
Access to the registry records
For accessing records on land ownership people have to go to different public institutions for each type
of          information         or         a          copy           of           a           document.




                                                    118
Organization                    Information from               Information and documents                  Accessibility279               Costs280                       Time
responsible
ARAZI                           Principal Books of State       Information about registration of          Publicly available             Free of charge                 1 week
                                and Private Land               private and state land; information        (Information on state
                                                               about Land Declaration Forms               land only accessible for
                                                               (Izharnamas)                               the government or
                                                                                                          powerful figures)
Court               Archives    Land Title Registration        Copy of the title deed (whole              Publicly available             Petition form – 5 Afs          2-3 months
(Makhzans)                      Books (Konda)                  process as when transacting the            (*computerized system          (*when acquiring the
                                                               land); copies of others documents          installed by LTERA             copy of a title deed,
                                                               (usage of the petition form)               project is not publicly        the whole process of
                                                                                                          available)                     registration has to be
                                                                                                                                         conducted with all its
                                                                                                                                         costs)
Cadastral Department            Land Statistics                Matching maps with existing legal          Publicly available             Cadastral service fee          1 week
                                Registration Book              documents; sub-division of                 (Information on state          based on the grade and
                                                               properties; inventory survey on            land only accessible for       size the land (based on
                                                               demand; requests of owner lists;           the government or              the Bill of Cadastral
                                                               coordinates of an area on a trace          powerful figures)              Fees)
                                                               paper
MoF                             Property and Land              Information about the payment of           Publicly available             Free of charge                 Depending on
                                Taxation Books                 the land and property taxes                                                                              the age of the
                                                                                                                                                                        original
                                                                                                                                                                        records (if the
                                                                                                                                                                        records were
                                                                                                                                                                        established
                                                                                                                                                                        long ago, it
                                                                                                                                                                        takes more
                                                                                                                                                                        time (2-3
                                                                                                                                                                        months)
Municipality    Property        Safayi Tax Book                Information on the payments of             Publicly available             Free of charge                 1 day
District Office                                                Safayi tax
Ministry      of   Hajj   and   Registration Book of           Information on endowed lands               Publicly available             Free of charge                 Depending on



        279 Please note that the accessibility to information for third persons (e.g., information about somebody else’s private land or state land) is never granted
        unless it is a powerful person. Therefore, “publicly available” in this context means that the access to information is granted to the owner of the land.
        Additionally, in reality, the access to the land information, can also differ from province to province and district to district based on individual decisions of
        ARAZI employees to disclose the information or not.
        280 Please note that there is always a possibility of informal payment requirement.




                                                                                        119
Endowment                  Endowed Land             (accessible only to owners, not      (Information on state                       the
                                                    third persons)                       land only accessible for                    availability of
                                                                                         the government or                           the ministerial
                                                                                         powerful figures)                           officials
Respective Ministries      Registry of properties   Information on properties and land   Not publicly available     Free of charge   Depending on
                                                    owned by the ministries (not         (Information on state                       the sensitivity
                                                    accessible to public)                land only accessible for                    of the
                                                                                         the government or                           particular land
                                                                                         powerful figures)
Archive of the Office of   Archives                 Information on land distributed by   Publicly available in      Free of charge   Impossible to
the President                                       the Presidential Decree (not         theory (in praxis the                       estimate,
                                                    public)                              information only                            however in
                                                                                         accessible for the                          general
                                                                                         government or powerful                      months
                                                                                         figures)




                                                                          120
The information on land is in general available for individuals, however not third parties e.g. the
information on state land is not accessible to public, nor the information about somebody else’s land.
Nevertheless, the powerful figures have priority access to information, putting question marks on the
transparency of land registration processes. The process, particularly in courts (2-3 months), is time-
consuming and cumbersome due to the high informal payments that have to be made to keep the
process going. Additionally, the records are only available for manual search, prolonging the access to
information even more.
Formally registered land/property ownership documents have a personal and a general registration
number. A record of these documents is registered and kept in courts. As mentioned above, through
the LTERA project, some of the archives in courts have been computerised. The portion of court
archives records that have been computerized can be searched by name, father’s name, date of issues
and special court number. 281 However, the land tenure records in Cadastral Survey Department and
ARAZI are yet to be computerized linking ARAZI Principal Books and cadastral maps.
The cadastral records and maps can be manually searched by parcel number and owner's name.
However, since these cadastral records have not been updated since 1978, searching for the right
owner can be rather a challenging task because some of the owners are not the rightful owners
anymore or are deceased. Additionally, the Presidential Decree 83 forbid to make any survey
information public (Article 15 (2)) due to the complaints that survey offices were making records
available to elite persons, who then used the information to acquire the ownership. Even though this
practice did not necessarily stop, this restriction added to the over land matters in the hands of the
President.282Copies or extracts of documents recording rights over property can be obtained by anyone
who makes a request and pays the necessary formal fee. The client is requested to pay a certain
amount of money to Cadastre’s account at one of the local banks and bring back the receipt to obtain
copy of his/her deeds. The process only takes up to one day.
In 2003, RONCO-USAID started a project to reorganize the legal documents in court archives. Pursuant
to this, LTERA-USAID started the computerization of court archives. Land records, to various degrees,
had been computerizes in 22 provinces. However, access to computerized records is not allowed for
public, coming from the reasoning that if the records were public, they can fall into the hands of
powerful people, who can then utilise them for their own private interests. Thus only the Heads of
archive has an access to these records. This reasoning, however, is somewhat dubious, in particular in
light of the existing corruption in the Afghan justice system despite the lack of public availability of
land information.
                                       Reliability of registry information
Afghanistan does not have one single registry and the information is scattered across various registries
with different ministries and agencies with only limited synchronization:




281It   is not known what aggregate percentage has been computerised.
282Wily,    “Land, People, and the State,” 33.


                                                       121
Registration Book                 Organization              Information recorded                             Issues and comments (linkages)
                                  responsible

Private land
Principal Book of Private         ARAZI                     All the information above and name of            Connected with the court Land Title Registration Book
Land (incl. registry of                                     the owner, father’s and grandfather’s            (Konda) through the circular form (the process of
Izharnama      –     Land                                   name, type of ownership documentation,           acquiring of a title deed can only be finalized, when
Declaration Forms during                                    water rights, taxation type of transaction       circular form is certified by ARAZI e.g. when ARAZI has
Doud Khan regime)283                                        – inherited land etc.                            the record of particular land in their Principal Books).
Deeds Registration        Book    Courts                    Names of the buyer and the seller, date,         See above. However courts inform ARAZI only
(Konda)                                                     boundaries (names of neighbors north,            sporadically about new owners of the land when new
                                                            south, east, west), title deed number,           title deed is accorded and people do not record the
                                                            price,   signatures  (or   fingerprints),        change themselves regularly either. Therefore ARAZI
                                                            pictures of the buyer and seller and             certification is mere verification if the land is private,
                                                            witnesses (cadastral maps are not                not state land due to often missing information about
                                                            included)                                        new owner and size of owned land, which can also be
                                                                                                             sold only partially.
Land Statistics Registration      Cadastral Department      Name of “possible” owner, father’s and           Only connected to ARAZI (based on current Cadastral
book                                                        grand father’s name, land size and grade,        Law, it is a responsibility of the Cadastral Department to
                                                            boundaries - name of neighbors (north,           sent a copy of the survey report to ARAZI, when survey is
                                                            south, east, west), type of ownership            done). Additionally, during Tasfia process, the members
                                                            document, existence of share croppers,           of the cadaster are included in the delegation.
                                                            cadastral map
Land Taxation Book                MoF                       Name, date, size of the land, amount of          The MoF land taxation books are interlinked with other
                                                            taxes paid.                                      land registries only sporadically, are often outdated and
                                                                                                             don’t have an effective mechanism in place to upda te
                                                                                                             the      records.      Provincial      district    finance
                                                                                                             offices (mustofiat) of MoF collect land tax based on their
                                                                                                             taxation books, which contain information about eligible
                                                                                                             tax payers based on land declaration forms (Izharnamas)
                                                                                                             dating back to Doud Khan regime (1973 – 1978), sporadic
                                                                                                             exchange of official letters between courts and MoF
                                                                                                             informing about new landowners and even more rare
                                                                                                             voluntary reporting by new owners. Due to due to these

      283   More than 80% of Afghanistan has Izharnama (not in south, were it wasn’t allowed) – Interview with land expert, Kabul, 13 September 2015.


                                                                                     122
                                                                                                         reasons, the tax records are often not accurate.
                                                                                                         Additionally, a considerable number of Afghans do not go
                                                                                                         through official land registration channels, completely
                                                                                                         circumscribing the updating mechanism of courts and
                                                                                                         ARAZI. No effective enforcement mechanism exists to
                                                                                                         search for not registered tax eligible persons, people
                                                                                                         have themselves responsibility to go to Mustofiat offices
                                                                                                         and pay taxes. Therefore, when the land is transacted
                                                                                                         outside of the close family 284 , nor record is written in
                                                                                                         MoF taxation books, nor the new owner registers with
                                                                                                         Mustofiat office, the MoF cannot trace the eligible tax
                                                                                                         payers, hence the land taxes are not paid in full.

Property Taxation Book          MoF                      Name, date, size of the property, amount        See above.
                                                         of taxes paid.
Safayi tax      registration    Municipality Property    Information on physical characteristics of      Not connected to the property and land taxation book of
book (land and property         Office (MAU)             the property including GIS images               MoF because Municipalities are allowed to spend their
tax only in urban areas)                                                                                 own revenues.
Endowed Land Registration       Ministry of Hajj and     Boundaries (name of neighbors north,            Not connected, except when cadastral department
Book                            Endowment                south, east, west), land grade and type,        makes the survey, they write down the description of
                                                         past transactions.                              land as waqf.
State Land (*there is no registration for public land)
Principal   Book   of   State   ARAZI                    Boundaries (newly cleared or surveyed           Connected to the each property book of respective
Land                                                     lands by using GPS coordinates, otherwise       ministry when the land was transferred by ARAZI. The
                                                         names of north, south, east, west               surplus land should be given to ARAZI for further lease,
                                                         neighbors), land grade and type, past           however this has not happened in full yet (some of the
                                                         transactions, (rarely cadastral map)            ministry properties were not declared to ARAZI).
Land Statistics Registration    Cadastral Department     Land size and grade, boundaries - name          Only connected to ARAZI (based on current Cadastral
book                                                     of neighbors (north, south, east, west),        Law, it is a responsibility of the Cadastral Department to
                                                         type of ownership document, existence of        sent a copy of the survey report to ARAZI, when survey is
                                                         share croppers, cadastral map                   done). Additionally, during Tasfia process, the members
                                                                                                         of the cadaster are included in the delegation.


      284When the land stays in the family, the tax payments can be traced back based on the father’s or grandfather’s name. When the transaction happens outside
      of the family, this is not possible.


                                                                                 123
Book of properties   Each Ministry   Different for each Ministry, however the    Connected to ARAZI Principal Book of State Land (with
                                     main data is available such as boundaries   exceptions see above).
                                     (newly cleared or surveyed lands
                                     transferred by ARAZI by using GPS
                                     coordinates, otherwise names of north,
                                     south, east, west neighbors), land grade
                                     and type, past transactions, (rarely
                                     cadastral map)




                                                          124
Adding to the issue of synchronization of various registries, the reliability of registries is further
compromised by the out-dated information it contains. The cadastral survey records and maps have not
been updated since 1978, as well as the MoF tax records and ARAZI Principal Books lack an adequate
mechanism for updating the data. Taking into account that approximately 66% of the land is not
surveyed yet at all and the customary land tenure is often not formally registered, only further
aggravates the situation. Finally, the fact that some documents were destroyed during years of wars
and forgery of documents is a recurrent issue, renders updating of registries difficult compromising the
reliability of registry information.285It is also important to note, that even though the changes in land
records, sometimes occur in the provinces, they are not necessarily forwarded to the centre. Hence no
centralized database of land records exist in Afghanistan.
                 Cost-effectiveness and sustainability of Land Administration Services
The registry is financially sustainable through fee collection to finance its operations.
As explained in the table above at the beginning of the section, the fees collected by the land
administration authorities are very limited (excluding the informal payments). The only organ that can
acquire registry fees are courts. However, these cannot be kept it in court accounts, it has to be sent
to MoF because they don’t have the permission to use their revenue. Although, courts are able to gain
registry fees but it is not enough to cover all their expenses. The only organ that uses its revenue is the
municipalities, all other public sectors send their revenue to MoF and then MoF distribute the revenue
in form of the national budged. All the other organs dealing with land ownership registry do not gain
any fees from their activities in relation to land registration.
The service fee collected by the Cadastre is specified in the Bill of Cadastral Service Fees. Cadastre is
the only organization having such a list of fees. The cadastral service fees are not connected to the
land registration but are rather payments for different services such as provision of certain information,
copies of the documents etc. These, however, does not match the operation costs of Cadastral
Department286.
Despite numerous efforts by the international community (IGOs, INGOs, NGOs, etc.) to support this
sector, the capital investment in land administration is not sufficient. Based on the Afghanistan
Statistical Yearbook prepared by Central Statistics Organization (CSO), total budget for ARAZI, for
instance, was 194 millions Afs, of which 15,5 millions Afs was on development budget and 178,5 on
operating budget. ARAZI’s operating budget constitutes only 0.06% of overall Afghan operating
budget287 and 0.01% of overall development budget. Considering the financially demanding tasks ARAZI
is (or should be) undertaking (such as land surveys and clearance processes, frequent state land lease
contracts monitoring etc.), the capital investment in primary land administration organization in
Afghanistan is, according to the views of technical experts consulted for this study, insufficient 288.
                Fees are determined transparently to cover the cost of service provision
Fees have a clear rationale, their schedule is public, and all payments are accounted for.
Cadastral Survey Department was the first state organization in the country to introduce cadastral
service charges. Cadastral services fees are set and clear; however, they are not publicly accessible.
The Bill of Cadastral Survey services fee is only available at Cadastral Survey Offices. In courts there is
no list of fees available to public. No other land related organization has a list of fees that is publicly
available.
The receipts are issued for all the transactions because the individuals have to go to the bank to
process the payments of court registration fee and MoF transaction tax. The receipt is issued in the
bank, which then serves as a proof of the payments, based on which the process of registration can
continue. When it comes to the receipts for service fees, the issuance is not that consistent.

285Discussion with officials at ARAZI.
286 Based on discussion with ARAZI officials.
287 For comparison purposes, the National Olympic Department received 0.06% of operational budget.
288
    Please see the participants’ lists of the Panel Workshops in the Annex IV.


                                                     125
Additionally, since the taxes are not paid based on these receipts, there is no motivation to issue
receipt regularly.
Informal payments are discouraged.
Informal payment is widespread within government institutions. There are measures and policies in
place for monitoring civil servants and dealing with corrupt issues. For instance, MEC (Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee) and High Office of Oversight are the most prominent organisations that deal
with the issues of corruption. Nonetheless, due to limited capacities of these institutions and rare
internal audits in some of land related organizations, corruption remains rampant in the country.
The issue of corruption and informal payments was already mentioned in the previous sections within
various land administration institutions. It is important to note, however, that ARAZI was considered by
the Asian Foundation as the least corrupt institution in Afghanistan. Internal audits are conducted on
monthly basis or in urgent cases. The Monitoring and Evaluation unit provides, although often not in
timely manner, their reports. When the report is developed, it is up to CEO to take appropriate
measures. In the past some employees of ARAZI were fired, paid a fee or the cases were forwarded to
the General Attorney’s Office.
Nevertheless, the Operational Strategy of ARAZI does not address the issue of corruption and it
contains no measures to ensure transparency and accountability. 289 While ARAZI claims “Client
Orientation” to be one of its main organisational values, there are no procedures in place to get
feedback from the clients based on which the organisation can assess service delivery.
Finally, ARAZI is the only organ among public institutions dealing with land issues that has certain
service standards written in its Strategic Plan. There are several values and virtues that are followed
such as client orientation, equal treatment of similarly situated customers and preferential treatment
of women. Standards are set for a specific activity to be completed within certain period of time.
ARAZI publicly provides all information about their achievements in their official website.




289   ARAZI, Operational Strategy to Become a Modern Public Land Services Institution.


                                                         126
    9.7 Land Valuation and Taxation
PANEL 7: Land Valuation and Taxation
LGI 1: Transparency of Valuations
7    1 1 There is a clear process of property valuation.
7    1 2 Valuation rolls are publicly accessible.
LGI 2: Collection Efficiency
7    2 1 Exemptions from property taxes payment are justified and transparent.
7    2 2 All property holders liable to pay property tax are listed on the tax roll.
7    2 3 Assessed property taxes are collected.
7    2 4 Receipts from property tax exceed the cost of collection.
    Introduction
    Taxing land and properties began in the early 1930s by the Ministry of Finance (MoF). Around 1960,
    King Zahir Shah’s land policies emphasized the documenting of land titles to facilitate tax collection
    mainly to enable the collection of state revenues, as well as to increase the tenure security. Initially, a
    land department, AMLAK, situated in the Ministry of Finance was established for this purpose.290 It was
    a system of progressive taxation, with the land being divided into three categories depending on the
    production. The lands with the highest production paid higher taxes 291. The tax was introduced also for
    the transactions and “stampduty”. Since then, a record of land and properties had evolved. Many
    landholders retained receipts of their land/ property tax and later these receipts have been used as
    documents indicating land ownership. The receipts contained 292 limited information such as the name
    of the payee, the year, the village and the number of jeribs for which the tax had been paid.293There
    was no other indication on where the land is located, nor the link to the cadastral maps. The land
    registration books were updated every 10 years294.
    In 1973 the Daud Khan regime set the effective system of taxation as a main priority and the
    information in the land registration books has expanded. By 1978 land registration books contained
    significant amount of information. The Books of Integrated Land Size and Progressive Taxation
    (commonly referred to as Books of Ownership) include lists of owners, village and size of their
    properties. This information was “based on the self -reported Land Tax Forms filed by owners, endorsed
    by village leaders, and submitted to District AMLAK Offices. Information includes the name of the
    owner, his ID number, name of his father, name of forefather who paid tax, tax payment number under
    the 1970s system, and amount of taxes paid. Each parcel was also given a land number. No maps
    accompanied these submissions.”295 These books were referred to as the “Principal Books” or “Basic
    Books,” and they contained updated information on owners. The books were sent from the provinces
    to AMLAK in Kabul.296 During the wars, records of the properties were destroyed. Allegedly, according
    to Wily (2013:28), some influential community members destroyed records such as Books of Ownership
    to grab more land, particularly during the Mujahidin era of the 1990s. 297 However, it cannot be
    estimated how many books are destroyed and in which parts of the country they were destroyed.
    Almost three decades of war in Afghanistan after 1979 have contributed to the difficulties with the
    maintenance of the system of the taxation as it was in Daud Khan era.
    Tax collection from 1979-2001 was very limited since the country was struggling with the wars and
    violent conflicts. For instance, the Mujahidin’s government (1992 -1996) was not able to collect

    290   Mohammad Yasin Safar and David Stanfield, “Cadastral Survey in Afghanistan, Capacity Building for Land Po licy
    and Administration Reform” (Kabul: ADB/DFID, 2007).
    291 Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 3 August 2015’ and interview with employee of the MoF – DG for

    Revenue Collection, Kabul, 4 August 2015.
    292Based on interview with employee of ARAZI (August 3, 2015, Kabul), the format of the tax receipts has not

    changed since the introduction of the taxation in Afghanistan.
    293Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 25.
    294Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 3 August 2015.
    295
        Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 28.
    296Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 28.
    297Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 28.




                                                           127
land/property tax. Nonetheless, some land and property owners paid taxes to either Mustofiat or the
Governor’s office (in the provinces). Since the tax was nominal, the owners willingly paid the tax to
retain receipts as proof of land/property ownership regardless of whether they had title deeds or
not.298
Since 2001, there have been efforts to reform the land/property tax system in the country. The
international community has been helping the Afghan government to restart property and land
taxation, mainly to generate revenue for the country. Certainly the tenure security was another reason
behind these efforts to build a strong central administration, which was perceived to be crucial to
creating the rule of law and peace needed to nurture land-based investment and growth. 299 The
current government also views tax collection particularly from both rural and urban areas, as a
significant means of revenue. For example, President Ashraf Ghani's Manifesto, states: "by expanding
cities we can collect hundreds of millions of dollars through municipalities and since municipalities
have the legal right to spend, it is our pledge that we will create the widespread participation of
citizens... so that people take part in creating and boosting conditions for urban living." 300 However,
tax collection faces a number of challenges and it is not done uniformly.
Land tax (from agricultural land both in rural and urban areas):
Land tax is the tax paid for owning a agricultural land and is fixed, calculated based on the size and
grade of the land, as per the Land Tax Law. Land tax collected from rural areas is usually done at the
district level. A receipt is given to the tax payers which states the amount of the tax paid. In rural
areas, the tax officers deliver tax slips to the rural land owners, the landowners then have an
obligation to go to the district MoF office (mustofiat) and pay land taxes yearly.301The tax is collected
in cash through mustofiat and then the money is deposited into the provincial bank account. 302The land
tax collected in rural areas is kept in the provinces and used for provincial development projects
including the districts. The provinces send a report to Kabul informing the center about the amount of
tax they have collected. MoF then deducts the equivalent amount of money from the provincial
budget, which is normally transferred from MoF to the provinces. 303 If someone does not pay the land
tax, they have to pay a fine of 1% in the first year, 2% in the 2 nd year and so forth. However, there is
not adequate enforcement mechanism to pursue tax evaders.
Safayi tax (from all the properties only in urban areas):
Safayi or sanitation tax differs from the land tax significantly. Firstly it is collected only in urban areas
and only from properties including buildings (not land only properties). It is only the municipalities that
are allowed to collect and spend local revenues from sanitation taxation (Safayi), however, the MoF
does not make information on how much tax do municipalities collect per year public. The municipality
provides property owners with Safayi notebooks, which indicates the amount of taxes they have to pay.
Safayi is paid once a year and a fee increases should the owner fail to pay tax on time. 304 The
information from the Safayi notebooks is collected centrally by the organizations when introducing the
project (such as UN-HABITAT and Democracy International), however after the project is finalized, the
government takes over and the collection of the data is not systematic 305.
Tax on the transfer of property and land:
Art. 25, 30 of (ITL) 2005 sets the transfer tax at 1% of the market value of the property and is
administered and processed by courts. 306 A committee comprised of MoF, MoJ, Municipality, ARAZI
(occasionally more members are present depending on the area – rural- urban) and verifies the
accuracy of the price written on the title deed and market value of the property/land by acquiring

298 Based on email correspondence with WB expert.
299Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 44.
300Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai, “Manifesto and Change and Continuity Team,” (2014) 71.
301 Interview with ARAZI employee, Kabul,3 July 2015.
302Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 3 June 2015.
303 Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 3 June 2015.
304 Interview with ARAZI Officials, Kabul, 8 June 2015.
305Interview with UN-HABITAT employee, Kabul, 6 August 2015.
306 Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul,3 June 2015.




                                                     128
information from local property dealers and community members. Currently, MoF is working on new
draft of ITL.
Tax on rents:
The Income Tax Law 2005 makes some provisions regarding taxing property based on income from the
land and property. Art. 17 and 27 that rent received from renting and leasing the immovable property
and gain from sale, exchange or transfer, except by inheritance is subject to income tax.
Property dealers are required to send a copy of the rental agreement to the Ministry of Finance for
taxing purposes. Art 65 (6) of ITC 2005 stipulates that the “Property dealers are required to send a
copy of the agreement to the Ministry of Finance as soon as it is signed. If a property dealer makes a
false agreement or delays sending the agreement, the Ministry of Finance will officially notify the
Ministry of Justice to take necessary action.”
According to Art. 65 (5), if it is proven that the rent in a lease agreement is more than 20% lower than
the market value, the Ministry of Finance calculates the rent according to the market value by an
authorised panel. This is applicable if the Ministry of Finance finds evidence and documents, which
show that the rent in the contract is less than the rent actually paid (Article 65 (7)).
                                           Transparency of valuations
Process of property/land valuation
In Afghanistan, there are only four instances, when the land valuation through the establishment of
impartial commission is used - during the acquisition of the private land by the state in order to
estimate the amount of the compensation, when transferring the state land from one governmental
entity to another, when leasing the state land to the private investors and when estimating land and
property transaction tax. In none of these cases is the land valuation used for the land/property
taxation purposes.
Valuation during the process of acquisition, transfer of state land to other governmental entity and
some cases of state land leases including leases for development project purposes:
There are clear legal provisions for the assessment of “land values”, particularly when it come to the
topic of land and property expropriation. Once a person or an organization requests an assessment of a
land/property value, ARAZI forms a commission to evaluate and set the price of land/property. Art. 69
of LML, lays out the structure of this commission as mentioned in the section 9.5.
To determine the market value of the land, the commission gets quotations from three local real
estate dealers, verifies the price of land located next to the land/property, and requests courts to
share information about the most recent transactions in the area. 307This valuation commission does not
evaluate property or land for taxation purposes.
However, in practice, a number of issues are associated with land assessment and evaluation
process308:
•   The commission takes longer than one month to set the price, as it is not easy to get all the
    members for meetings. The process can only be on time, if there is pressure from the leadership
    or those who have some economic interest.
•   Sometimes members of the commission do not cooperate and refuse to share information with each
    other. For example, the courts often refuse to cooperate and send an assessment of the price.
•   The whole process, from the time the price has been set by the commission until an individual gets
    his land, can take more than a year (in cases where an individual’s land has been appropriated for
    state projects). Hence, by the time the individual is compensated, the compensation amount is
    less than the current market value.
•   Real estate dealers might not provide accurate assessment of the price.
307Interview   with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015.
308Interview   with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 27 March 2015.


                                                       129
•      Corruption can lead to valuation, which is not necessarily based on market values.        Also as
       discussed earlier, corruption can influence tax valuation.
•      Strongmen and powerful individuals whose economic interests are at stake can put pressure on the
       commission so that the set price benefits them. This means that the valuation price cannot
       necessarily be based on market values.
For the above-mentioned reasons, the price set does not necessarily reflect the market value of the
property and tax valuation.
Valuation for cases of land lease (telecommunications and agricultural land leases):
In case of the land valuation for above mentioned cases of state land lease, when the bigger
commission based on Art.69 cannot be formed, the simplified procedure is used. Land lease prices are
determined based on the type, grade (quality) and size of land by the Leasing Committee (see point 3
of the ARAZI Land Lease Procedure) comprised of local representatives of ARAZI, MoF ( Mustofiat) and
MAIL. The market value of the land is not taken into account in this procedure.
Valuation for land and property transaction tax:
1% property transaction tax is paid when the property/land is sold during the process of land
registration in courts. A committee comprised of MoF, MoJ, Municipality, ARAZI (occasionally more
members are present depending on the area – rural- urban) and verifies the accuracy of the price
written on the title deed and market value of the property/land. The committee asks the community,
local property dealers and relevant land offices of the latest buying and selling price. Then the seller
of the land receives the receipt from the court, which is then deposited to the bank account of MoF.
Calculation for land taxation purposes:
The calculation for taxation purposes is determined according to the fixed calculation schemes based
on the size and the grade of land. The market values of the land are not used in this procedure. Based
on Land Tax Law, the grades of the land are:
       •    First grade land (e.g. orchard or vineyard), factor 1.00
       •    Second grade land (e.g. land that can be cultivated for two seasons), factor 0.85
       •    Third grade land (e.g. land that can be cultivated for one seasons), factor 0.67
       •    Fourth grade land (e.g. land that can be cultivated for one seasons, however only 50% of the
            land can be cultivated), factor 0.40
       •    Fifth grade land (e.g. rain-fed land which is cultivated every other year), factor 0.20
       •    Sixth grade land (e.g. rain-fed land which is cultivated every two year), factor 0.15
       •    Seventh grade land (e.g. rain-fed land which is cultivated once every three, or more years ),
            factor 0.10.
                                               309
Tax based on size is calculated as follows:
       •    Up to jerib is taxed 45 Afs per jerib
       •    10-20 jerib is taxed 60 Afs per jerib
       •    21-50 jerib is taxed 85 Afs per jerib
       •    51-100 jerib is taxed 120 Afs per jerib
       •    101-200 jerib is taxed 175 Afs per jerib
       •    201-500 jerib is taxed 235 Afs per jerib
       •    501-1000 jerib is taxed 310 Afs per jerib
       •    1000+ jerib is taxed 400 Afs per jerib
The calculation for taxing land is done based on the records of the land. This is mainly applicable to
the registered land. Since the procedure for tax valuation is fixed, there is no proper updating of the
tax values.
Calculation of Safayi taxes by municipalities:

309   , 1355 (367) Ministry of Justice.


                                                        130
All properties within the municipal boundaries should pay Safayi tax, which is calculated based on the
combined assessed value of land and improvements. 310 The value is calculated as land area (m2)
multiplied by value + building volume (m 3) + boundary (m) multiplied by value. The value of land
depends on location, so for each city a land value zoning map is needed. Distance to the city center,
main road, area of mainly commercial land are also influencing the value. The value of the
improvement of the building depends on the volume, use (e.g. residential, commercial) and quality and
type of material (e.g. concrete, bricks, mud)311.
In the absence of a land cadaster, the Safayi system relies on onsite surveys. When the implementing
agencies and the municipality decide to introduce the Safayi system to a certain district, the teams of
surveyors go house by house and record the physical characteristics of each property. The surveyors use
a standard form and then enter the information to digital property database including in Geographic
Information System (GIS).The district offices ( Nahyia) use the property information to calculate the tax
and then issue an invoice to the property and then the invoices are hand delivered to the properties or
the residents are informed to collect their tax invoices. 312 The residents then pay their tax. Until
2012, residents used to pay taxes in cash, however since 2012, they need to pay the tax in Municipal
account at the local bank and receive a receipt from the bank. Then “the Nahyia offices register
payments and issue a “Safayi Certificate” as proof of payment. ”313
Once one area is surveyed they move to another area and so on. The surveying is not done regularly
such as annually or monthly, but only to survey the identified areas with outdated information, which
after the project has been implemented, are left for the government to manage.314
The information collected in GIS system, together with the Integrated Financial Management System
(IFMS) contains the information to build a approximate “book of rights”, however this information does
not have the legal recognition in Afghanistan. It can certainly help for the person claiming the
ownership over land in the land registration procedure and acquisition of the land title, however it is
not a proof of ownership315.
It is important to note that only the implementing agencies and one municipality - Kandahar are using
the GIS maps. The majority316 of the municipalities don’t have the capacities to update the GIS maps
themselves, so they use printed maps, while putting red dots on the properties that already have paid
the taxes317. The GIS maps are being updated by the implementing agencies themselves, while working
in the area. After the project’s end, the updating is not happening because the government does not
have the capacities to do so.
Accessibility of valuation rolls
There are no legal provisions that would require making the valuation rolls public. State organizations
can provide information regarding the value of land or property upon request as long as an individual
have a legal basis for such a request such as a land dispute case that he/she is involved in.
For example, the municipalities can provide generic information regarding the price of property/land
in urban areas. This list (Laya) identifies zones in urban areas with corresponding land prices estimated
based on accounts of local property dealers For instance, Kabul is divided in to 5 zones and each zone
has different land value written in Laya. If an individual intends to buy a parcel of land from zone 3
he/she goes to Kabul municipality to get the value of lands in zone 3. The municipalities update this


310 “Safayi Mahsool Regulations: Independent Directorial for Local Governance, (Guidelines for Safayi Taxation)”,
(Kabul: Government of Afghanistan, 2012).
311“Managing Land, Mobilizing Revenue: Strengthening Municipal Finance and Land Administration through Property

Registration and Taxation”(Kabul: UN-Habitat, discussion paper 3, 2015).
312“Managing Land Mobilizing Revenue.”
313 Managing Land Mobilizing Revenue.”
314Managing Land Mobilizing Revenue;” and interview with UN-Habitat employee, Kabul,6 August 2015.
315Interview with UN-Habitat employee, Kabul, 6 August 2015.
316UN-Habitat is working in five big cities of Afghanistan (Kandahar, Mazar-i-Sharif, Herat, Jalalabat, Lashkar Gah).

Only in Kandahar is the Municipality using the GIS maps.
317Interview with UN-Habitat employee, Kabul, 6 August 2015.




                                                        131
list each year. These are however not used for taxation purposes, because it only provides generic
information on the prices of land in certain area.
Based on the accounts of various government officials involved in this project, given the prevalence of
corruption in the country and the fact that powerful individuals can easily use information to promote
their economic interests, lack of public availability of valuation rolls is rather a protective measure.
This assumption, however, can be challenged (similarly to the same argument related to the
information about cadastral survey) by the fact that although the information on valuation rolls is not
made public, the prevalence of corruption is still high.
In general, information regarding valuation of land/property, particularly in cases of expropriation, is
collected. However, there is no consolidated national database for this information and no national
database for taxation exist.
                                               Collection efficiency
Exemptions from property taxes
Currently tax exemption is applicable to those owning less than 2 jeribs of land and whose
land/property has been affected by natural disasters. For example, Art. 21 of the Presidential Decree
1365, states that if arable land is destroyed by natural disasters, until the land is restored, the owner is
exempted from tax. Accordingly, the MoF and the Provincial Administration decide the tax exemption
period, which can be up to three years, which can be renewed if more time is needed. There is also
legal provision for exemption of tax on agricultural produce. Art. 23 of the same law gives the MoF and
the Provincial Government Administration, the authority to exempt the farmers, whose produce has
been completely or partially destroyed as a result of natural disasters.
The prevalence of corruption among the civil services can prevent transparent implementation of
policies of tax exemption. For example, land, which cannot meet the criteria to be exempted from
tax, can be recorded as exempted from tax if the landowner makes a deal with the civil servants. A
farmer can extend the exemption period by paying off state officials. Furthermore, farmers who
genuinely qualify for tax exemption might be asked for bribes so that their land is exempted from tax.
Corrupt practices can continue and increase in rate, particularly in the absence of public’ s awareness
of the tax exemption policies.318
Tax rolls
Most of the property and land owners are not registered with MoF taxation provincial offices because
they didn’t wish to go through the formal procedures to register their land, which requires payments
and taxation, or the information sharing between courts, ARAZI and MoF is not happening in consistent
manner. It is also possible that they did not view registering their land being necessary as customary
deeds and transactions are more common in Afghanistan. Hence, tax rolls can be incomplete.
Furthermore the capacity of the MoF provincial and district offices to update records and to collect
taxes is limited. There is not always enough staff to pursue cases of tax evasion. In some areas, there
are no MoF district offices at all because of the lack of security or simply such offices are not formed
yet. This means that in certain areas, the land transactions are not recorded and land tax books are
not modified.




318   Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, April 2015.


                                                           132
Various projects have attempted to facilitate the process of registration and tax collection (aiming to
regularize the tenure recognition) particularly in the urban areas such as UN-HABITAT in Herat,
Kandahar, Mazar-e-Sharif and Jalalabat, as already mentioned in the section 9.1. As mentioned above,
the house-to-house onsite surveys are conducted based on the decision of the municipality and
implementing organizations to introduce the Safayi system. In this manner, over 100,000 parcels have
been entered into the municipal system of Kandahar through this mechanism. These notebooks are not
ranked as provisional entitlements and the information provided in each notebook is sufficient in the
event that such documents may be accepted as a basis for formal entitlement in the future. The person
still has to go through the regular legal procedure of acquiring the land title, however the Safayi
Notebook can help this process, particularly in case of the government’s decision to distribute that
land319. Each parcel is awarded a unique number and a map of its location drawn from satellite images
of the neighborhood.320 This data is updated based on the information of the district and property
manager responsible for Safayi who see the changes, when they are happening, and reporting to the
central office. People also can come and self-report the changes321.
Another example is the 2004-09 USAID-funded LTERA project, also mentioned in the section 9.1. LTERA
carried out upgrading and regularisation of tenure for 59,100 households in Kabul, Mazar-i-Sharif,
Kunduz and Taloqan. The project “facilitated existing routes to legal entitlement, depending upon
community-based clarification of rights, followed up by municipal registration of claims, revision of
master plans, and court adjudication of claims based on quiet possession.” 322Pursuant to LTERA is the
USAID programme, LARA project, which similarly works through community-based organizations in its
two informal settlement sites in Jalalabad. The beneficiaries are all returnees. “Occupants will receive
provisional occupation permits valid for 35 years. This innovation has been entered into the proposed
amendments in the Land Management Law. The Municipal Safayi Notebooks described above are not
being awarded this status. It is not clear that ARAZI is aware of their existence.” 323
Amount of property taxes collected
Since not all property holders are registered as it was discussed earlier, collecting taxes from these
property owners faces challenges. Taking into account the scale of urban informality reaching an
estimated 70% of Afghan cities.324, not all taxes that are supposed to be paid in reality are. Based on
the survey done by MAIL, in 2011 from 2 million jeribs of taxed land 120 Millions Afs in taxes should
have been collected. The actual tax collected by MoF in 2014 was only 20 Million, lower than 50% of
the total amount of land taxes to be collected. How much in taxes was collected for transaction tax is
not clear.
In terms of the Safayi tax, there is no accurate data available on how much tax is collected yearly
through this system. Additionally, Safayi system has its own challenges as outlined below:
     •     There is a low tax collection because citizens do not see the benefit of how their tax is being
           spent
     •     Poor surveying or deliberate mis-surveyings have been reported to reduce tax calculation. 325




319Ibid.
320Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 61.
321Interview with the UN-Habitat employee, Kabul, 6 August 2015.
322Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 61.
323Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 61.
324“Managing Land Mobilizing Revenue.”


325“Managing   Land Mobilizing Revenue.”




                                                      133
    •       Because there is still certain portions of the properties in certain districts not surveyed and
            because the Safayi system itself went through some changes in 2009 in the ways of the tax
            calculation, some nahyias (districts) within cities are using the old manual system, and some
            the new system. Taking into account that the old method of tax calculation from the prize
            noted on the land title document mentioned above, there can be different tax rates for similar
            properties. This can be confusing for citizens, and makes tax collection and enforcement
            difficult for municipal staff.
Cost of collecting taxes in Afghanistan
The costs of collecting transaction taxes is relatively low, because apart from the establishment of the
pricing committee, it does not require any further activities by the state. People go to the bank to
precede the payment themselves based on the price of land on the legal title deed.
The cost of collecting land tax in Afghanistan, in particular in rural areas, is high because the system is
manual, giving space for administrative duplication. Data registry is done manually and the high
number of departments and institutions such as ARAZI, MoF with its Small-Owned Enterprises
Department, Properties Department, Directorate General for Revenues, which has four different
departments e.g. small, medium and large tax payers office and non-tax revenue office, involved in
the process make it time consuming and inefficient. 326
There are two tax collectors per district (finance and revenue collection clerk). 327 Their salary is
approximately 15,000 Afs for both persons per month. Since the cash collected from taxing has to be
transported from the districts to provinces usually by cars, there are certain minimal expenses for the
fuel, together with the per diem of tax collectors transporting the cash. When calculating the expenses
for all 366 districts in Afghanistan, the collecting taxes in rural areas costs approximately 66 millions
Afs. Taking the amount of taxes collected for instance in 2014 amounting to 20 millions Afs it is not
rentable for Afghan government to collect land taxes.
Collecting taxes in residential areas and, generally, in urban areas is rather easy and straightforward.
Safayi has proven to be a cost-effective and relatively straightforward intervention with multiple
benefits. 328 According to the UN-Habitat report, the average cost of survey and registration of the
property is 8 USD, while the net income per residential property per year is 17 USD, and the average
annual Safayi tax is 25329 USD.330




326Interview   with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 27 March 2015.
327Please   note that they are not solely responsible for taxation, therefore their remuneration corresponds to more
tasks.
328“Managing Land Mobilizing Revenue.”
329This figure includes the average from all the properties – residential, commercial, governmental and industrial.
330 “Managing Land Mobilizing Revenue.”




                                                         134
    9.8. Dispute Resolution
PANEL 8:Dispute Resolution
LGI 1:Assignment of Responsibility
8    1 1 There is clear assignment of responsibility for conflict resolution.
8    1 2 Conflict resolution mechanisms are accessible to the public.
             Mutually accepted agreements reached through informal dispute resolution
8    1 3
             systems are encouraged.
             There is an accessible, affordable and timely process for appealing disputed
8    1 4
             rulings.
LGI 2: The Share of Land Affected by Pending Conflicts is Low and Decreasing
8    2 1 Land disputes constitute a small proportion of cases in the formal legal system.
8    2 2 Conflicts in the formal system are resolved in a timely manner.
8    2 3 There are few long-standing (> 5 years) land conflicts.
    Introduction
    Although land disputes are the most common cause for conflict in Afghanistan from all the other types
    of conflicts (42%)331, they seem to proceed to the formal justice system infrequently 332. Some court
    personnel also appear to feel that they are less capacitated to adjudicate land claims than are non-
    state dispute resolution providers, as the latter possess superior local knowledge and evidence-
    gathering capacity. As a result, the low percentage of land cases in government forums does not
    constitute evidence of a low number of land cases.
    Formal justice system in Afghanistan
    The Afghan judiciary is an independent organ of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan comprised of
    Islamic, statutory and common law. No law should contravene the tenets and provisions of Islam 333. The
    courts are the primary formal organs for addressing disputes. The court system consists of
    approximately 540334 primary courts in each district or municipality, 34 provincial courts of appeal in
    each province, and the National Supreme Court including courts with specialised jurisdiction whose
    organisation and authority are regulated by the law 335. Additionally, there are other dispute resolution
    forums addressing land issues within the formal justice system. These include well-established bodies
    such as the Ministry of Justice Department of Huqooq and Department of Government Cases. Finally,
    the informal dispute resolution mechanisms such as shuras, jirgas, Community Development Councils
    (CDCs) and other ad hoc and permanent bodies, including armed opposition groups’ justice system,
    exist to deal with land disputes in Afghanistan.
    The key role of the Supreme Court is dispute resolution as it is the highest judicial organ of the state.
    However, it carries out certain administrative roles such as land registration, land transfer and issuing
    title deeds, which among certain experts is considered as creating a conflict of interest in terms of
    Supreme Court’s judicial role. In the latest rounds of the donor meetings in summer 2014, discussions
    were held on the possibility of the transfer of the authority for land registration from the Supreme
    Court to the Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI). Recently, concrete steps have been
    taken by the National Unity Government in the form of Cabinet Resolution #5, dated 5 th February 2015,
    to acknowledge the land registration and issuance of the title deeds as an administrative rather than a
    judicial process. ARAZI is currently working closely with the Second Vice President and MoF on how this

    331Warren,   “Afghanistan in 2014.”
    332Please  see the statistics in the Introduction.
    333Constitution of Afghanistan, Article 3, 2004 (SY 1382).
    334 According to the provisions of the LOJJ, the Supreme Court may establish district primary courts in each district

    (there areapproximately 400 districts in Afghanistan) and family, commercial, juvenile and military primary courts
    in each province (4*34 provinces of Afghanistan);as additionally, there are four municipal primary courts in Kabul.
    Due to the remoteness of certain areas some of the primary courts have not yet been established; however, the
    statistics on the precise number of not-yet-established primary courts is not available.
    335Constitution of Afghanistan, Article 116, 2004 (SY 1382).




                                                            135
role and function can be taken out of the Courts system and absorbed into ARAZI with corresponding
budgetary implications. The Presidential Decree necessary for the transfer of responsibilities was
already drafted by ARAZI awaiting the President’s approval. ARAZI is preparing to launch a pilot project
in Herat to try out the functioning of the new mechanism in late 2015.
The Appeal Courts located in the capitals of each province are responsible for general criminal,
security, civil and family, public rights, commercial and juvenile cases, while having the jurisdiction
over primary courts such as Central Provincial Primary Court, Juveniles Primary Court, Commercial
Primary Court, District Primary Court and Family Issues Primary Court. These adjudicate general
criminal, civil, public rights and security and traffic criminal cases.
Formal justice system – other dispute resolution forums
Other dispute resolution forums address land issues within the formal justice system. These include
well-established bodies such as the Ministry of Justice Department of Huqooq and Department of
Government Cases. Since ARAZI is the afghan land authority addressing property claims of refugees and
returnees, expediting property disputes resolution, and identifying and verifying of forgery documents,
the dispute resolution function constitutes a vital part of their portfolio 336. Huqooq (Rights) Department
is an organ of the MoJ established to adjudicate and settle land disputes arising from debts, properties,
commercial or family issues between the citizens and legal persons. It aims to do so through the
engagement of tribal elders and other community leaders similarly to the informal justice system
mechanism, referring the cases to courts in case of the lack of evidence or willingness to settle the
dispute. Government Cases Department of MoJ serves similarly to the Department of Huqooq as a
bridge between public and courts, while protecting and safeguarding movable and immovable
properties of the government. However, to this point, these institutions have not significantly affected
the primacy of the courts and informal justice mechanisms and serve more as channels through which
some cases are referred to the formal system.
Afghan informal justice system
Before engaging in the discussion about informal justice system in Afghanistan, it is important to clarify
the terminology. The informal justice system will be at times called informal dispute resolution
mechanism(s) without denying the courts the final decision power as the only organ which can legally
resolve disputes and give final decision to the case in Afghanistan. However, since the informal justice
system indeed at times resolves disputes, as opposed to only addressing them, it will not be called
“mechanism for addressing land disputes”.
Although notable improvements were made in Afghanistan’s formal justice system after 2001, the
informal non-state justice sector still handles what appears to be the majority of disputes in the
country. According to the Survey of the Afghan People, conducted by the Asia Foundation in 2015, 47%
of people approached elders of local shura in the case of a land dispute, though the total number of
land related court cases in the formal system varies between 10-50% per region. People taking the
dispute to the informal dispute resolution body are mostly from rural areas, while nearly half of the
disputes are land disputes (42.2%). When asked which type of justice (formal – courts, and Huqooq or
informal) is fair and delivers the best results, the majority of Afghans preferred jirgas/shuras, followed
by the Huqooq Department, and Courts were the least preferred venue 337.
A great profusion of actors are mediating land disputes within the non-state informal justice sector.
Even though this briefing paper will treat the non-state justice sector in a fairly unitary fashion, in
reality the non-state sector is better understood as an institution of multiple actors (e.g., registered
and non-registered Shuras/Jirgas, Community Development Councils (CDCs), Commissions on Conflict
Mediation (CCMs) - a joint initiative in South-Eastern provinces, tribal elders, local commanders and
other influential individuals), who at times cooperate with one another in order to form the informal




336Decision   of the Cabinet Ministers #24, 2009; Decision of the Cabinet Ministers #23, 2010.
337Warren,    “Afghanistan in 2015.”


                                                          136
justice mechanism to solve the dispute. Due to a dearth of reliable information on their operations,
this paper will not consider forums of dispute resolution provided by armed opposition groups 338.
                                         Assignment of Responsibility
Afghanistan’s court system enjoys competence to address land disputes, and de facto principles of
territorial jurisdiction generally determine which court will address the dispute at the primary and first
appellate levels.339As designated by the Constitution of Afghanistan, the Supreme Court is the country’s
chief judicial organ (Arts. 116 and 120) with provincial courts of appeal (LOJJ, Art. 52; and Constitution
of Afghanistan, Art. 116), and primary courts located in each provincial center and in each district
(LOJJ, Art. 62). District primary courts, particularly the Civil dewan of the central primary court (when
both parties to the dispute are natural persons), and the Public Rights dewan (when at least one party
is a legal person) are responsible to address land disputes (LOJJ, Art. 63). The Public Security dewan
could also conceivably handle particularly aggressive instances of land grabbing (LOJJ, Art. 63). While
district primary courts are capacitated to address only land disputes within their district (LOJJ, Art.
68), central primary courts are able to address disputes both inside and outside their particular
geographical area (LOJJ, Art. 63). Nevertheless, despite the above mentioned provisions of the LOJJ,
there exist other governmental and non-state entities engaged in dispute resolution efforts in
Afghanistan.
In Pashtun and non-Pashtun areas, many parties pursue their claims through an ad hoc dispute
resolution body known as a jirga or a maraka.340 All adult men are in theory able to participate in the
jirga/maraka. However most commonly tribal elders compose these bodies, although, religious leaders
are also involved in some instances. Certain persons fitting these descriptions have developed a
reputation as particularly effective mediators, and participate in more jirgas than do other persons of
similar status. These individuals are known as jirgamaran. Individual government officials, most
commonly District Governors or District Chiefs of Police, also mediate disputes in some instances, as do
some commanders or other non-state armed actors.341 Outside of the core Pashtun areas of Eastern and
Southern Afghanistan, mediation by individual non-state leaders such as commanders, maliks/arbabs
and religious leaders is very common342 using the forums called jalasas or marakas.
Shuras additionally mediate disputes in many areas, Pashtun or non-Pashtun. Unlike jirgas, these are
permanent bodies with a fixed membership. Shuras are most often either organised around a common
identity (e.g., a tribal shura or ulema shura) or a common activity (e.g., a shura to promote
development). The latter includes a significant number of shuras with donor or other outside support,
such as District Coordination Councils (DCCs) put in place pursuant to the since-ended Afghan Social




338For  more information please see: Antonio Giustozzi, Claudio Franco and Adam Baczko, “S hadow Justice: How
the Taliban Run their Judiciary?” (Kabul: Integrity Watch Afghanistan, 2012).
339 The LOJJ does not in fact specify principles of territorial and subject-matter jurisdiction, except in the division

of dewans in the Central Primary Court. One could nevertheless read the Civil Procedure Code, at Arts. 81-82, as
establishing principles of territorial jurisdiction. In any event, territorial jurisdiction appears to predominate in
practice, and disputes over jurisdiction between various courts based on territory seem quite rare.
340See, e.g., “The Customary Laws of Afghanistan”(New York: Inte rnational Legal Foundation, 2004); Ali Wardak,

“Jirga - a Traditional Method of Conflict Resolution in Afghanistan” (unpublished working pap er; University of
Glamorgan, UK: 2003)(please note that, although the terms are usually used interchangeably, Prof. Wardak
suggests a slight distinction, with maraka more often referring to village-level processes, and jirga to either
village-level or supra-village processes (e.g., Loya Jirga).
341See, e.g., “Customary Laws,” 53-54 (on role of commanders in dispute resolution in northern Afghanistan).
342 See, e.g., “Justice and Security: Practices, Perceptions, and Problems in Kabul and Nangarhar”(Kabul: The

Liaison Office and Cordaid, forthcoming 2014)(noting the prominent role of Imams and Mirabs for dispute
resolution in Istalif); “Customary Laws,” 51 et seq. (giving information on the prominent role of commanders in
northern Afghan dispute resolution); Thomas Barfield, Neamat Nojumi, and J. Alexander Thier, “The Clash of Two
Goods, State and Non-State Dispute Resolution in Afghanistan”(Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace,
2006), 12 (noting the prevalence of arbabs as mediators among Afghan Arabs, and that the Pashtun jirga is
characterised as being more theorised and regimented than other Afghan non-state dispute resolution systems).


                                                         137
Outreach Program. Dispute resolution is part of the DCC mandate 343, as it is for other donor-supported
shuras.
Furthermore, there were (some still continue) various initiatives from NGO community such as NRC’s
ICLA project running Information and Legal Assistance Centers (ILACs), PEACE project focused on Kuchi
communities, a pilot project of USIP and ARAZI supporting ARAZI’s mechanism of addressing land
disputes and LC project that are using various mediation mechanism to support conflict resolution
within local communities.
Accessibility of conflict resolution mechanisms to the public
The majority of Afghans lack access to conflict resolution mechanisms for land disputes. 344 However,
the level of access varies dramatically between demographic groups.
Adult men of majority populations345 enjoy the greatest degree of access, whether it is to formal or
informal justice systems. They face the least social stigma in accessing state dispute resolution services
(see below for contrast with women’s situation) and have the gr eatest capacity for travel in case the
dispute requires so. Additionally, most sources indicate that costs associated with their use are low
enough so as to not constitute a general barrier to access. Technical issues nevertheless impede the
access such as the absence of state judicial presence in remote and insecure areas 346 and lack of
financial means for private legal counseling 347. Young people experience limitations in relation to the
access to conflict resolution forums claiming that the elders or other non-state leaders do not consider
the youths’ arguments or evidence.
Men from marginalised population groups face additional barriers to accessing conflict resolution
services. Because court access requires possession of the ID document tazkera (Civil Procedure Code,
Art. 13(1)), minority groups thus found themselves cut off from state conflict resolution mechanisms.
This is notably the case for Jogi and Chori Frush populations; none of the former and only a few of the
latter possess any form of identification from the Afghan state 348. Additionally, access to non-state
forums depends upon disputants’ social integration in the area. New migrants, refugees and IDPs have
thus significantly greater difficulty in accessing non-state forums than long-term residents.
By contrast, women in Afghanistan have extremely limited access to both state and non-state dispute
resolution forums. 349 In both instances, strong and strictly enforced social norms discourage women
from approaching any dispute resolution forum. As such, the only way to access any conflict resolution
forum is through their male relatives or when accompanied by a mahram (intermediary or “chaperone;
in all known cases a male relative”). In both instances, a woman’s ability to access dispute resolution
forums strongly depend on the support of her family members. Given the fact that Afghan women often
become the owners of the property only through inheritance, the possibility for women to use the
dispute resolution mechanism in order to gain property is virtually non-existent350.

343AECOM,   “Afghanistan Social Outreach Program (ASOP) Annual Report: July 2010-July 2011” (Washington, DC:
United States Agency for International Development, 2011).
344See Tim Luccaro and Erica Gaston, “Women’s Access to Justice in Afghanistan: Individual versus Community

Barriers      to    Justice”     (Washington,     DC:    United     States     Institute     of    Peace,     2014),
http://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/PW98_Women's-Access-to-Justice-in-Afghanistan.pdf, (detailing how most
women do not have access to any dispute resolution forum. More precisely, if virtually no women have access to
dispute resolution forums, then only a small number of men lacking access would constitute a majority).
345 Given that Afghanistan’s demographics vary by region, and reliable statistics to establish them do not generally

exist, here we use “majority” to mean the population locally perceived to be the majority.
346For example, until a recent deployment of judges from the provincial center, most districts of Khost province

lacked a sitting judge.
347Some NGOs and civil society organisations are offering legal aid for land issues – among these, the Norwegian

Refugee Council’s Information, Counseling, and Legal Awareness program is certainly the most well-known.
348 See for instance “Assessment of Out of School Children and Jogi communities” (Kabul: Samuel Hall, UNICEF,

2011).
349 For this section, please refer to: Luccaro, Tim; and Erica Gaston, “Women’s Access to Justice in Afghanistan:

Individual versus Community Barriers to Justice”(Kabul: USIP, 2014).
350There are some exceptions, such as widows and old well-accepted women in the community, who can approach

non-state leaders without an intermediary. Additionally, a small number of women in urban areas who became


                                                       138
Effectively and equitability of informal justice system – recognition of informal justice
mechanisms
Even though the informal justice system is widely used in Afghanistan, it does not enjoy full legal
recognition and the evidence and rulings are shared between state formal mechanisms such as Huqooq
and courts and formal mechanism and non-state dispute resolution venues only on an ad hoc basis.
Often it happens that the court decides the case differently than the shura or jirga, creating obstacles
for the implementability of any decision.
1 in 5 people prefer avoiding the formal justice system and solving their disputes (not only land
disputes) in the non-state system in its entirety351. Based on the Civil Code and Civil Procedure Code’s
provisions, the decision of the informal justice system can assume legal status, when it was registered
with a court from the beginning of the case and court referred it to the informal justice system. Since
in a high number of cases Afghans do not approach formal justice system at all, when the decision is
made in informal justice system, under Afghan legal provisions, it is not eligible to be registered by
courts352. Additionally, there is a huge difference in opinions between judicial practitioners about this
issue. Some judges claim that as long as the case is settled in a non-state system before the start of
the court proceeding, it can be registered with the court; others believe that it is not their legal
obligation, however they can do it depending on their workload and available time to do so. Finally,
some judges say that registering cases that were brought to an end by the informal justice system is
not legal at all353.
Nevertheless, the linkages and ad hoc cooperation between formal and informal justice systems do
exist. The Civil Code and Civil Procedure Code of Afghanistan contain specific rules that give legal
recognition to non-state system dispute resolution. Both lay out basic rules that all Afghans should
follow in their relations with each other encouraging people with personal disputes, including land
disputes, to use reconciliation in order to find compromise 354 . Based on this, the decisions of the
informal justice system can be perceived as an agreement (contract) between two people that can
indeed be enforced by a court. Additionally, according to the both laws, the non-state system of
dispute resolution decisions have the same status as court decisions, as long as the dispute is registered
with the courts from the beginning and the court recommends it to be referred to an informal or
traditional justice body, such as a shura or jirga. Taking this into account, the non-state system’s
decisions can gain legal status as valid contracts recognised by court. However, certain preconditions
apply such as that all parties must voluntarily agree to the non-state system’s decision355, while courts
will not accept a non-state system decision for some types of cases, such as criminal cases.
Additionally, recently a new wave of interest in the possible linkages of formal and informal justice
system has arisen among Afghan political circles and international community. The debate started
around the possibility of the revival of the draft “ Law on Dispute Resolution, Shuras and Jirg as” that
was initiated in 2010 and is still pending at the Ministry of Justice. The main purpose of this draft law is
to regulate the operation of shuras/jirgas. Moreover, the draft law aims to create the linkages


community leaders due to individual circumstances or efforts have the ability to move about with a significantly
greater degree of freedom, and mediate disputes to which a woman is a party, or at least directly lobby men’s
leaders on a woman disputant’s behalf.
351Warren, “Afghanistan in 2014.”
352
     Although there are some indications in the Civil Code giving the possibility to register the dispute as a contract.
Please see the next paragraph for more details.
353Ali Wardak “Civil Dispute Resolution in Afghanistan” (Kabul: UNDP, JHRA Project, 2015).
354 Article 1297 of Afghan Civil Code states that the reconciliation (compromise) is a contract which resolves a

dispute and ends hostility on the basis of disputant’s mutual consent. Further, the Article 1306 explains when one
person claims a specific property and the other person agrees, reconciliation (compromise) over the specified
property is valid and this shall be deemed as a sale contract. Finally, Article 1313 points out that
whenreconciliation (compromise) is satisfactorily concluded, the dispute ends and what is agreed upon (monetary
compensation, etc) becomes the claimant’s property which could not be returned to the defendant.
355If the settlement is in the form of the claimant’s property, he/she becomes the owner. However, if the other

party refuses to pay the claim, he/she is illegally holding the claimant’s property, as if it was stolen from the
claimant.


                                                         139
between formal and informal justice system. A number of international actors, including UNDP 356 ,
UNAMA357, USIP358 and others, reflected on this debate by producing reports and policy papers on the
topic. Currently, two versions of the draft law (one containing criminal, another one only civil cases)
were submitted to the Ministry of Justice awaiting the final decision.
Secondly, the first draft of Land Dispute Resolution Regulation for ARAZI, supported by USIP, is
currently being drafted. The aim of this regulation is to address land disputes that are outside the
court system via community councils (shuras), district and provincial ARAZI offices and local
governance structures, which will operate under common district and provincial commissions.
Additionally, it shall support maintaining the social order and justice via disputes resolution,
strengthening relation between shuras and ARAZI district and provincial offices and local governance
structures, engaging the shuras and reinforcing their role in land dispute resolution, cooperating with
judicial bodies to prevent accumulation of cases and registering the outcomes of the land disputes in
ARAZI principal books and database. The outcome of the current debate on the possibilities to link
formal and informal justice system still remains to be seen.
At the practical level, there is a general ambiguity in terms of the legal recognition and the use of
informal justice system based on how various government officials relate to informal dispute
resolution. Some government entities encourage their use; others discourage it, while at the provincial
level the officials are generally more supportive. This ambiguity is only exacerbated by certain
provisions of the Civil Code and Civil Procedure Code that, according to some jurists, imply that the
decision of the informal justice system can acquire legal value as long as it was registered in the court
from the beginning of the case. However, in practice most Afghans solve their disputes entirely outside
of the formal legal system and treat the state as a kind of appeals mechanism when the informal
system fails. After multiple failed informal resolution attempts, these parties will bring their dispute to
state authorities, who then might bring it to the court system or, in a likely larger number of cases,
supervise the conduct of further informal processes.
Currently, in Kabul, stakeholders such as the Ministry of Border and Tribal Affairs are willing to work
with non-state dispute resolution forums, while others, such as the Ministry of Women’s Affairs,
severely criticise their continued proliferation, and seek their curtailment. Possibly due to the lack of a
law or policy sanctioning the use of non-state forums, of those persons interviewed for this briefing
only one mentioned the state registering informal decision 359; the rest were explicit that this practice
does not occur, while being equally explicit that non-state authorities resolve the majority of land
conflicts in their area.360
At the provincial and district levels, and especially as regards executive branch officials, responses to
non-state forums appear more diverse. In some cases, provincial and district governors and chiefs of
police regularly refer land disputes to non-state forums, and encourage these forums’ use. Some judges
also engage in this practice, at both the first instance and appeals level, although among judges the
practice appears less widespread. Finally, in some instances, state officials may participate as
members of non-state dispute resolution forums, or themselves mediate disputes on an individual basis.
In all instances, state officials are more likely to cooperate with non-state dispute resolution forums
for land and other civil disputes than they are for criminal cases. 361


356See  Dr Ali Wardak’s paper on “Civil Dispute Resolution in Afghanistan.”
357“Stolen  Lands.”
358The Policy Note is in the process of finalisation. The expert in his capacity as a consultant of USIP has access to

the draft of the policy note.
359 Interview with a non-state community leader, PD 13, Kabul, 25 June 2014.
360See, e.g., Interview with a non-state community leader, PD 13, Kabul, 25 June 2014, (estimating 80% of land

disputes in his area are resolved through non-state processes); Interview with a Non-State Community Leader,
Guzara District, Herat, 21 June 2014 (estimating only 2% of land disputes in his area are resolved through the
court); interview with a non-state community leader, Arghandab, Kandahar, June 8, 2014 (likewise estimating 80%
of disputes in his area were resolved via non-state authorities)
361 Compare Deborah Smith, “Community-Based Dispute Resolution in NangarharProvince” (Kabul: Afghanistan

Research and Evaluation Unit, 2009)(noting cooperation between state and non-state dispute resolution providers
for both civil and criminal issues); with Thomas Barfield, “Informal Dispute Resolution and the Contemporary Legal


                                                        140
In most rural areas, the District Governor and Chief of Police are the best-resourced officials, with
other government persons typically facing a significant deficit of resources. For this reason and others
(e.g., persistent insecurity aggregating authority to the executive), these officials often take the lead
even in areas outside their technical legal mandate. For dispute resolution, this means that executive
branch officials often spearhead working with elders and/or other non-state leaders, broadly taking
one of two forms. In some cases, executive branch officials will route cases to non-state leaders, to a
degree supervising their work. In other cases, the official will himself sit on a non-state dispute
resolution forum, working alongside non-state leaders. However, these sorts of involvement are not
systematic, and depend upon the individual initiative and temperament of both the officials and non-
state leaders in question.
Finally, some judges, at either the primary or appellate level, encourage parties to resolve their
disputes through non-state instances. Indeed, courts appear to particularly seek non-state assistance
for land disputes, as local non-state leaders often far better know the parties and history of the area,
and possess greater capacity for the investigation of claims.
Provincial or district Huqooq officials enjoy official mandate for linking state and non-state dispute
resolution capacities through referral of disputes (See Art. 17 Civil Procedure Code362). When Huqooq
recognizes the decision of shura or jirga, it is only an administrative recognition, because only courts
can provide the legal recognition. In some areas, the Huqooq actively plays this role (under the
supervision of the District Governor). In other areas, the Huqooq is not willing or does not possess the
resources, including human resources, to play this role adequately.
Accessibility of process of appeal
After primary courts, two layers of appellate courts exist. Each province has one appellate court (LOJJ,
Art. 52; Art. 116 Afg. Const.), and the Supreme Court serves as the country’s high est appellate
authority (Afg. Const. Arts. 116, 120; LOJJ Art. 23). In many areas, appeal against primary court
decisions appears near-universal, including for land disputes. This pattern indicates appellate
procedures that are accessible to similar degree than the primary courts, though this high rate of
appeal itself creates systemic difficulties.
An appellate court sits in each of Afghanistan’s 34 provinces (LOJJ, Art. 52). These courts receive cases
from all first instance courts across the province, including all dewans of the central primary court.
They also receive cases from Commercial, Juvenile, and Family courts (LOJJ, Art. 61). Provincial
appellate courts may review both the factual and legal aspects of the disputes brought to them.
In turn, the Supreme Court is Afghanistan’s highest judicial authority (Afgh. Const. Art. 116; LOJJ Art.
23). The ability of the Supreme Court to revise lower court judgments appears more or less limited to
legal aspects of the case.
In practice, parties appeal almost all primary court and appellate court decisions. This pattern has two
potential implications for costliness. First, it might indicate that parties do not find accessing court
procedures too costly. However, this conclusion would contradict most other evidence, which indicates
that many parties do find court procedures to be unreasonably costly. Thus the more plausible
interpretation is the second: that, given near-universal appeal, parties factor the cost of appellate
procedures into their initial calculations, before embarking on primary court litigation. Conversely, if
parties believe appellate procedures to be too costly, they will avoid court proceedings altogether,
instead of “dropping out” after primary court litigation has finished.



System in Contemporary Northern Afghanistan”(Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace, 2006 ) at 2
(“While actors in the formal sector claim a monopoly over criminal cases, they saw this monopoly as restricted to
the “Rights of God” (Huquq Allah), that is in criminal matters those general overarching offenses against the state
(as God’s agent). But local communities have jurisdiction over the “Rights of God’s servants” (Huquq al -‘Ibad), the
ability of individuals to seek personal redress in criminal matters.“).
362 More specifically, the referenced article seems to empower to Huquooq office to transfer cases to the court in

case out of court resolution has failed. However, Afghan law does not elaborate on the powers of the Huquooq,
which is nevertheless an office of long standing.


                                                       141
Closely related to cost, dispute parties also consistently report state proceedings as too costly. 363
However, as explored in greater length later in the report, parties seem to weigh this factor more in
their decision to pursue a primary court verdict than in their decision to pursue an appeal.
Additionally, the process of appeal for ruling takes long (at times 3-4 years) if it’s done without any
informal payment and/or good network. The legal process for appealing stipulated in the law is 15
days364, however judges and other employees of the court often make it long in order to be able to
collect informal payments for the speedy resolution of the case.
Within non-state systems, appellate procedures appear substantially less common than in the state
system, where most of the land disputes are resolved by village elders (who may be understood as
being the forum of first instance). However, if village elders do not succeed in resolving a dispute or
disputants are not satisfied with the outcome of the dispute resolution, various informal appeals-like
procedures exist.
In a very rough typology extremely dependent on the area, it has been observed that, once village-
level dispute resolution processes have not been successful, parties often take recourse to non-state
leaders well-known for dispute resolution prowess at the district-, provincial-, or even regional level. In
one notable example, the tribes of southeastern Afghanistan have over the years developed an inter-
tribal regional jirga (the tokhm jirga), employing specialised procedures to address those disputes
where multiple previous attempts at resolution have failed.
Most sources report that pursuing these informal appeals is less costly than the formal system. Yet they
are clearly not costless, especially if one takes into account that informal processes might take place
over the course of decades, albeit with long lulls in the conflict. In some instances, parties have indeed
seemed to abandon a dispute less because of satisfaction with the dispute resolution outcome than
because the costs of further pursuing the dispute at that time outweigh the positive outcome.
                                 Share of Land Affected by Pending Conflicts
Due to the lack of comprehensive or systematic data, it is impossible to estimate with any certainty the
amount of land in Afghanistan subject to dispute. However, from the data that does exist, the disputes
related to land cause over 42% of conflicts (the most common cause for conflict in Afghanistan from all
the other types of conflicts) and are decreasing. According to an Asia Foundation survey, almost 53% of
cases in 2009 were related to land disputes, while in 2014 and 2015 we see the drop of approximately
11%. It is also important to note that, considering that approximately 43.2% of all disputes are resolved
by the informal justice system365, the latter is carrying significant responsibility for land disputes in
Afghanistan.
Having said the above, it is important to note that the frequency of land disputes is somewhat
dependent on migration patterns. During the Soviet invasion to Afghanistan in 1979 and the Civil war of
1992 - 1994, millions of Afghans migrated to Pakistan, Iran and other neighboring countries. After the
military operation by the international armed forces in 2001, people started returning to their
homeland only to find out that their land had been grabbed, the boundaries had been altered and the
land was occupied by other ethnic groups. This created societal tensions in the communities, providing
the incentives for land conflicts. However, since 2001 some sources report a lessening of land conflicts
linked to patterns of migration. In provinces such as Khost, Afghanistan experienced a surge of land
disputes as displaced persons returned to their home areas and sought to re-claim property occupied
during the years of their absence, as mentioned above. However, as repatriation of the refugees to
Afghanistan is slowing down, the amount of land subject to disputes is slowly being reduced 366.



363See,  e.g., interview with a non-state community leader, Arghandab, Kandahar, 8 June 2014 (stating that the
court would take up a dispute should non-state processes founder).
364Civil Procedure Law
365Warren, “Afghanistan in 2015.”
366Note that there are certainly other factors contributing to the occurrence of land conflicts, therefore this report

does not aim to claim in any way that with the slowing down of migration patterns the land conflicts will decrease
dramatically. However, a certain decrease can be expected.


                                                        142
Despite the best efforts of our team we were not able to acquire nationwide statistics on the nature of
disputants, types and reasons for land conflicts in Afghan courts. We were informed that the Supreme
Court in partnership with USAID implemented a Case Management System (CMS) designed to collect on
the type of disputes that came before it. However, when we attempted to access this information we
were informed that a condition of the agreement made between the judiciary and the donor was that
the data collected would not be released to the public. We also approached the Afghan partner
working on the project and were informed that the system is not yet in place. However, based on
personal communication with Norwegian Refugee Council’s (NRC) Information, Counseling and Legal
Assistance (ICLA) project367, GIZ Rule of Law project in Kunduz and land titling studies conducted by
PTRO and TLO in Khost and Kunduz in 2014, we were able to acquire anecdotal data.
In terms of the typology of disputant parties, most of the land disputes brought in front of the court
are between the families, communities and tribes, while cases between individuals tend to be resolved
by traditional mechanisms, especially those within the tribes and families 368 . The cases between
individuals and government are rare and tend to occur in urban or semi-urban areas, where the
government enjoys at least minimum presence. The types of conflict range from disputes over
inheritance rights, ownership and possession rights and money recovery to conflicts over forest and
constructible land369.
Despite the decrease in land disputes, several causes point toward the share of disputes of conflicted
land in relation to other types of conflicts continues to be high (42%). In rural areas, lands such as
mountains, forests, and pastures tend to be communally held. Frequent migration and displacement in
recent decades accompanied by dramatic population increase have created pressure over resources,
particularly constructible land such as housing plots and land used for any type of constructions. This,
combined with the lack of documentation on both communal and private land and unclear boundaries
demarcation, has created situations particularly susceptible to land disputes. Land in peri-urban areas
also appears particularly prone to frequent disputes involving large lands in size. In these rapidly
urbanising areas, land records are likewise scanty, while, due to their proximity to major cities, the
last ten years has witnessed a rapid increase in land values. For these reasons peri-urban areas appear
particularly prone to land-grabbing 370 by significant power-holders. In some instances, communities
report the seizure of hundreds of hectares of land. If another power-holder contests control of the
land, land disputes over very large tracts can thus emerge. In addition, while communities themselves




367NRC   ICLA project has seven Information and Legal Assistance Centers (ILACs) in Kabul, Herat, Kunduz, Nangarhar,
Balkh, Faryab and Kunar provinces and additional ten provinces across the country are covered through outreach
activities from these bases.
368
     Please note, however, that regional differences may occur in different areas of Afghanistan due to various
factors such as presence of the state (or lack of thereof), availability of informal dispute mechanisms, cultural
practices etc.
369 “Major Land Disputes and Land Titling Systems of Khost Province: Implications fo r Collaboration between

Traditional Dispute Resolution Mechanisms and ARAZI” (Kabul: The Liaison Office, 2014); representative of NRC,
pers. comm., 16 March 2015; and Afghan civil aociety actor, pers. comm., 18 March 2015.
370The term is defined as “use, control, occupation or ownership of land by one without bona fide right” (in “The

Stolen Lands of Afghanistan and its People: The state land distribution system” (Kabul: UNAMA, Rule of Law Unit,
2015). The definition includes different waysthe land grabbing is performed, such as “use of physical force,
intimidation or violence by powerful people to remove others from land, occupation of empty lands; obtaining the
title through a land allocation scheme that fails to meet the legal requirements [and] obtaining the title through
fraud” (in Policy Advisory Group on Land, “Draft Policy Paper on Addressing Land Grabbing through Criminal
Justice System, 2014). According to the statistics compiled by ARAZI, more than 1.2 million jeribs of land (a jerib
is equal to 2000 square meters or 0.2 hectares) were grabbed in the past decade (in Independent Joint Anti-
Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation Committee, “Public Inquiry into Land Usurpation, Kabul: MECC, 2014) by over
15,000 individuals (in “The Stolen Lands of Afghanistan and its People: The state land distribution system” (Kabul:
UNAMA, Rule of Law Unit, 2015).



                                                       143
rarely confront power-holders over land seizure, research has uncovered instances of original owners
raising land disputes when the land is re-sold to less powerful third parties371.
Although land disputes most likely constitute the plurality of disputes in the country, they seem to
proceed to the formal justice system infrequently. Research from various parts of the country has
indicated that land disputes in any given court make less than 10% to about 50% of disputes.372 The
history of land administration in a given area goes toward explaining this variation. For example, some
dispute parties seek out the court to undo communist-era land distributions, where these have
remained in place. Other parties seek out the court because they possess land documentation issued by
the Karzai government. In other words, in those instances where the state itself has been active in land
administration, parties appear relatively more likely to turn to it for land dispute resolution. Field
research for this study thus indicated a significantly greater percentage of land cases in the court for
Herat City373, a traditional government stronghold, than for those rural areas examined. 374 By contrast,
parties across the country bring criminal issues to courts with far greater regularity, and in most courts
these make up a much more substantial percentage of formal system cases.
Some courts appear to route land disputes away from the resolution in state forums because they feel
that they have less capacity to adjudicate land claims than non-state dispute resolution providers, as
the latter possess superior local knowledge and evidence-gathering capacity. More specifically, many
judges appear reluctant to rely on the sort of oral evidence on which land cases, particularly in rural
areas tend to rest, therefore they prefer leaving the decisions to be made by the non-state actors.
Timelines of the dispute resolution system
The Civil Procedure Code of 1990 prescribes a time period of roughly 8 months from the filing of a
lawsuit until its final resolution at the Supreme Court level: 2 months from the initiation of the lawsuit
to its resolution in the court of first instance (Art. 200 Civil Procedure Code); 1 month in which to file
an appeal (Art. 365 Civil Procedure Code); “final appeal” not more than 2 months after primary court
judgment (Art. 437 Civil Procedure Code); and the Supreme Court may take up to three months to issue
a judgment after it has received the objection of one of the parties (Art. 489 Civil Procedure Code).
However, the reality differs from the legal prescriptions375.
The time to file a first appeal, and the time for the court to consider that appeal seem to run
concurrently: thus, a party who waits two weeks to file an appeal will have left the court with two
fewer weeks to consider his objection (see Art. 200 Civil Procedure Code). In turn, the Civil Procedure
Code at Art. 437 appears to refer to the consideration of courts of appeal as the “final appeal”, while
nevertheless later prescribing Supreme Court processes. And, finally, the Civil Procedure Code, at Art.
437 et seq., does not appear to specify any time limit for the filing of an appeal before the Supreme
Court, after having received judgment from an appellate court. When combined with provisions
explicitly conferring discretion on courts to lengthen the time for certain filings (e.g., Art. 201 giving


371 “Major  Land Disputes and Land Titling Systems of Khost Province: Implications for Collaboration between
Traditional Dispute Resolution Mechanisms and ARAZI” (Kabul, The Liaison Office, 2014); representative of NRC,
pers. comm., 16 March 2015; and Afghan civil society actor, pers. comm., 18 March 2015.
372See The Liaison Office, “Formal and Informal Justice in Paktia and Nangarhar: a TLO Working Paper” (noting

especially a high number of land conflicts in the court of Mohmand Dara district); and The Liaison Office, “Formal
and Informal Justice in Southern Afghanistan: Evidence from Helmand, Uruzgan, and Nimruz” (noting that the
court of Grishk district appears to hear exclusively criminal matters).
373 Interview with a non-state community leader, Herat, PD 15, 14 June 2014 (estimating 50% of land disputes in his

area are addressed to the court); interview with a non-state community leader, Herat, PD 5, 15 June 2014
(estimating 40% of disputes in his area are addressed to the court).
374E.g., Interview with a non-state community leader, Guzara District, Herat, 21 June 2014 (estimating only 2% of

land disputes in his area are resolved through the court); interview with a non-state community leader, Balkh, Shor
Tepa District, 15 June 2014 (estimating a “very small” percentage of disputes in his area are addressed to the
court); interview with a non-state community leader, Arghandab, Kandahar, June 8, 2014 (likewise estimating 80%
of disputes in his area were resolved via non-state authorities)
375For example, in 2012 there were 3,992 land cases referred to the Huqooq Department. Only 5% were resolved in

the same year (“Report of the Public Inquiry into Land Usurpation,” Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring
and Evaluation Committee, 2014).


                                                       144
the court of first instance the ability to lengthen time to file an objection to be considered on appeal),
significant ambiguity might exist for however long primary and appellate court procedures are to take.
With that said, the most straightforward reading of these provisions would suggest primary and
appellate judicial processes (except perhaps for a ruling from the Supreme Court) taking place within
more or less one year after the initiation of a claim. In reality, judicial proceedings seem to rarely
conclude in this amount of time. Both state officials and dispute parties describe resolution within 3-5
years as more typical, with the resolution in the first instance court taking place approximately within
one year or 18 months, however varying from province to province and district to district. In Kabul the
time to reach the decision in the court of first instance seem to be approximately one year for most of
the cases, whereas in other provinces the closing of a case might take longer. According to the
information from the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC), the land disputes take up to 3 years to resolve
(including other than fist instance courts) in the formal sector. Generally it takes a shorter time in the
informal sector; while the average number of days it takes NRC to resolve a case is currently about 390
days 376 . Indeed, respondents for a great range of studies have identified the length of court
proceedings as a primary reason to avoid them 377.
Several factors appear to increase the length of court proceedings. Firstly, the adversarial court
proceedings disrupt community relations and relations between plaintiff and defendant, triggering a
sort of (non-violent) cycle of revenge. This phenomenon obviously increases length, but would not
necessarily account for exceeding statutory maximum periods at each level of adjudication. Secondly,
courts often mention a big workload and report an inability to adjudicate in a timely manner. Many
sources also report courts delaying proceedings in lieu of bribes, although, as with information on
corruption more generally, this is very difficult to substantiate and cannot be taken at face value, as
parties unfamiliar with the legal system might conflate full procedural due process with bribe-seeking
delay. At the least, the perception that courts delay processes in an attempt to extract bribes is quite
widespread, and probably influences how parties interact with the court system.
There appear to be relatively small number of long-standing conflicts lasting longer than 5 years in
Afghanistan. Although the nationwide data on this indicator does not exists, the case studies from
Kunduz and Khost, as well as personal communication with NRC and GIZ, can serve as an anecdotal
evidence.
Our research has uncovered few land disputes remaining in government instances for this length of
time.378 As mentioned above, most of the land disputes spend approximately three years in the formal
system, while outside of formal system it is generally less 379. However, this should not be taken as
evidence of an absence of long-term land disputes in Afghanistan380. Rather, Afghanistan witnesses a
profusion of long-term land disputes, of decades, or even over a century, in length, while the disputes
typically cycle through a series of government and non-government forums, not remaining with any one
forum for the length of time implicated in this indicator. However, one should also not take the
absence of long-term disputes in government forums as evidence of these forums’ efficiency. If a

376Representative  of NRC, pers. comm., 16 March 2015.
377See for instance The Liaison Office, “Major Land Disputes and Land Titling Sytems of Khost Province”(Kabul: The
Liaison Office & USIP, 2014) (forthcoming), The Liaison Office, “Justice and Security: Practices, Perceptions, and
Problems in Kabul and Nangarhar”(Kabul: The Liaison Office and Cordaid, forthcoming 2014); interview with a non -
state community leader, Daman District, Kandahar, 3 July 2014; interview with a non-state community leader,
Kabul, PD 13, 25 June 2014.
378See, e.g., “Major Land Disputes and Land Titling Sytems of Khost Province”(Kabul: The Liaison Office & USIP,

forthcoming 2014)(detailing land disputes cycling through a variety of dispute resolution forums over time); “USAID
Country Profile: Property Rights and Resource Governance: Afghanistan” (Washington, DC: United States Agency
for International Development, undated [post-2010])(noting a high incidence of land disputes; a profusion of
forums addressing them; and that government institutions are playing a limited role).
379 Representative of NRC, pers. comm., 16 March 2015.
380We are using the word “disputes” rather than “cases” in this report because the word “case” refers to a dispute

presented to one instance (e.g., court) and the period between the opening and the closure of the case (not
necessarily meaning that the dispute was resolved). In Afghanistan, “dispute” is more accurate word to be used
due to the fact that the disputes move from one instance to another without being resolved for long periods of
time.


                                                       145
government (or other) forum does not prove efficient, parties usually remove their cases from that
forum.
In urban areas, disputes of such a character lasting longer than five years tend to relate to land
distributions, settlements, or acquisitions that local parties allege to have been fraudulent. First, those
local residents alleging displacement might seek to confront the power-holder381 and re-acquire their
land. Because of the extreme power differential between the two power-holders and the persons
displaced, this sort of dispute tends to remain sub rosa, with displaced persons waiting for more
favorable circumstances to confront the power-holder directly – thus lengthening the dispute. Second,
especially in crowded peri-urban areas, the interests of power-holders might overlap. In these
instances, power-holders will among themselves dispute the ownership of the land. Because each party
possesses substantial resources, they do not necessarily have strong incentives to resolve the dispute
quickly. Third, displaced residents might have a land dispute with those persons who acquired the land
from the power-holder. Here, current residents have in some cases actually followed proper
procedures in acquiring their land, and possess legally valid land title (even as those persons originally
displaced might also have legally valid title). In other cases, current residents will continue to enjoy
the protection or patronage of the power-holder from whom they acquired their land. Either of these
circumstances might account for the lengthening of the dispute.
Long-term disputes in rural areas usually present a different set of circumstances. These disputes often
take place between groups of persons, for example tribes or villages. They also often implicate off-
farm resources, such as pastures or forests. In these cases, the disputants will often both be located
adjacent to the disputed land, or will have habitually used it (e.g., for the gathering of firewood) in
the past. Periodic clashes over this land, with attendant short-term resolutions, might have taken place
for years, if not decades, with the dispute going through hot and cold phases. As such, outside
observers might more accurately characterise the dispute in question as a rivalry between the groups,
i.e., one of several ways in which these groups compete. Each party in turn possesses enough other
resources that they prefer not to risk losing standing in the community by giving up the dispute. In
some of these long-term land cases, third parties will themselves intervene as mediators. But such
intervention tends to occur only if the dispute is manifesting in a way that tends to destabilise the
broader area.
Recent research in the southeastern province of Khost, for instance, indicates that some of the major
inter-tribal land conflicts in the area have been ongoing for decades, with tensions periodically
reigniting over the extension of traditional boundaries of territories tribes consider as their own, the
use of natural resources, or construction over contested land. These conflicts however, are only
occasionally introduced to the formal system – notably as most take place over land legally owned by
the government. The rising price of land, the value of resources available on it, tribal rivalries and a
history of violence contribute to complicating the resolution of the conflict. Similar trends have been
observed in other areas in the southeast, notably in Paktika and Paktia, and there are strong
indications that the existence of protracted inter-communal conflicts, fuelled by historical rivalries, is
a likely phenomenon across rural Afghanistan. Another notorious example is the decades-long conflict
                                                                                                       382
between         Hazaras        and       Kuchi       tribes       in        the       Hazarajat.




381Theinfluential person either from the political, social or military status point of view in a particular area such
as warlords, strongme, etc.


382   See, among others, Foschini, “Social Wandering.”


                                                         146
    9.9 Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies
PANEL 9: Institutional Arrangements and Policies
LGI 1: Clarity of Mandates and Practice
              Land policy formulation, implementation and arbitration are separated to avoid
9    1    1
              conflict of interest.
              Responsibilities of the ministries and agencies dealing with land do not overlap
9    1    2
              (horizontal overlap).
9    1    3 Administrative (vertical) overlap is avoided.
              Land right and use information is shared by public bodies; key parts are regularly
9    1    4
              reported on and publicly accessible.
              Overlaps of rights (based on tenure typology) are minimal and do not cause
9    1    5
              friction or dispute.
              Ambiguity in institutional mandates (based on institutional map) does not cause
9    1    6
              problems.
LGI 2: Equity and Non-discrimination in the Decision-making Process
              Land policies and regulations are developed in a participatory manner involving all
9    2    1
              relevant stakeholders.
              Land policies address equity and poverty reduction goals; progress towards these
9    2    2
              is publicly monitored.
              Land policies address ecological and environmental goals; progress towards these
9    2    3
              is publicly monitored.
              The implementation of land policy is costed, matched with benefits and
9    2    4
              adequately resourced.
9    2    5 There is regular and public reporting indicating progress in policy implementation.
              Land policies help to improve land use by low-income groups and those who
9    2    6
              experienced injustice.
9    2    7 Land policies proactively and effectively reduce future disaster risk.
                                           Clarity of mandates and practice
    Separation of policy formulation, implementation and arbitration – possible overlaps
    Despite the uncertain status of the Land Management Law of 2008 383 , it remains the primary legal
    reference for issues related to the division of land policy formulation, implementation and arbitration.
    Policy formulation rests with the Ministries and ARAZI for the development of proposals, the President,
    the Council of Ministers, High Council on Water and Land and the Parliament for approval and
    amendments. Implementation differs according to the legislation but is most commonly the
    responsibility of the ministries, ARAZI and/or the local municipalities. The Law further details in
    Articles 13-28, the arbitration system for land conflicts. The responsibility rested with the Ministry of
    Agriculture and Livestock (Article 13) until a 2013 cabinet decision shifted the responsibility to ARAZI as
    the government representative. ‘Practical work’ (not further defined) related to arbitration of land
    issues rests with the ‘Settlement Commission’, which has not yet been established..Furthermore, the
    courts also adjudicate the land disputes.
    Having said that, ARAZI figures in policy formulation, implementation and arbitration. With the
    decision of Council of Ministers 23 of 2009 and 11 of May 2013, ARAZI is aiming to become an
    independent “one-stop-shop” for land issues in Afghanistan. However, concentrating all the
    responsibilities for land issues in ARAZI, although making the administrative procedures more effective
    and management of land issues more coordinated, risks to blur the lines between land policy
    formulation, implementation and arbitration. Additionally, ARAZI makes decisions about both the
    leasing of the state land, as well as it is responsible for its monitoring. This significantly compromises
    the impartiality of the monitoring.



    383Wily,   “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 4.


                                                         147
Furthermore, greater clarity over the role over dispute resolution between ARAZI, courts, Huqooq and
other dispute resolution bodies is needed. ARAZI’s Department of Addressing Land Disputes provides
necessary documentation when a case comes before a court. Additionally, it can informally resolve the
dispute, which is then recorded at ARAZI. This adds to the myriad of conflict resolution bodies existing
in Afghanistan creating further complexity to the arbitration mechanisms.
Secondly, the President enjoys great decision-making powers over land issues. Decisions on distribution
and donations of state land to disadvantaged people, on transfer of arid and virgin lands, on
conducting land surveys and making the information public (national or on demand) and on exceptional
cases of acquisition of public lands are contingent upon his approval.

Thirdly, the policy formulation and its implementation is further very much fluid in the responsibilities
of the municipalities. The ‘control and supervision of implementation of Master Plans is the
responsibility of Master Plan designer (MUDA) and municipalities’ 384 as a joint task, while the
implementation of the plan is fully under the responsibility of the municipality. The obvious legal issue
existing here is that the implementing body– municipalities – is also responsible for their own control
and supervision. This becomes further muddled when looking more carefully at the Municipality law,
which notes, that ‘[m]unicipalities can formulate their own Master Plan and submit them for
Government approval’385.
Finally, a perceived conflict of interest exists between courts administrative function of registering
land and providing the formal title deeds and judicial function of resolving land related disputes.
Currently, ARAZI is working together with the President, Vice President, MoF on the mechanism of
transfer of administrative responsibilities to ARAZI.
Horizontal overlaps also exist between authorities dealing with land governance. As “[t]here is no
‘Ministry of Lands’ to lead, coordinate or monitor … [administrative responsibilities] are dispersed
among ministries and municipalities’386. The High Council on Land and Water, chaired by the President
and comprising of 16 members from all institutions dealing with the land governance was established to
this end. Being it only a couple months of its establishment, the results of this coordination body
remain to be seen.




384Wily, “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 19.
385Wily, “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 8.
386 Wily, “Land and the Constitution: Current Land Issues in Afghanistan”, (Kabul: Afghanistan Research and

Evaluation Unit, 2003), 3.


                                                   148
In urban setting, significant horizontal overlap exists between the Ministry of Urban Development
Affairs (MUDA) and local municipalities, leaving processes applied by the institutions without
integration. The process of urban expansion and infrastructure development is shared between local
urban municipalities (Kabul, Jalalabad, Kandahar, etc.) as well as the MUDA, formally tasked with
developing urban policy for the country. Actual collaboration has developed informally and depends
heavily on the individual municipal and ministerial objectives and ideologies. When shared ideology and
objective is weak, urban expansion and infrastructure development remains primarily outside of the
formal realm. Planning objectives differ by municipality and the MUDA, with no specific planning
objective existing across the board in either group. Objectives remain overly individualised and often in
conflict with one another, resulting in numerous stalemates in policy planning. However, certain
efforts are being made to rectify this. In 2011, for instance, the MUDA signed an MoU with the
Independent Directorate of Local Governance accompanied by a 2012 technical MoU. The joint MoUs
agreed to cooperate on a number of important land issues, including meeting the basic needs of the
urban sector, improvement policy enforcement, and updating the master plans of the largest cities in
the country (Kunduz, Kandahar, Herat, Jalalabad, Mazar-e Sharif) with the notable exception of Kabul.
The clarification of roles between the actors and commitment to improve cooperation on specific
actions is a positive step towards reduced horizontal overlap.
In rural areas, the main actors – the MRRD and MAIL – have a track record of impressive cooperation and
little horizontal overlap. While programming may occasionally diverge, cooperation exists (i.e., MAIL
relies heavily on the MRRD-initiated NSP to implement some of its local agricultural and irrigation
projects). The MRRD and MAIL not only rely on each other for technical assistance, and on-the-ground
support, but also cooperate on projects in agricultural development in rural areas (with grants offered
to NABDP through MAIL for livestock projects) without significant issue. Nevertheless, the level of
cooperation between government line departments in rural areas is highly based on their individual
capacity and technical knowledge. Cooperation exists in some areas between government line
ministries whereas, in other areas, competition and a lack of cooperation exist between agencies.
Despite the current overlap that exists, promising strides have been made through the establishment of
the Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI) and High Council on Land and Water. ARAZI’s
current main purpose is to address the very overlaps listed here on the issues of land. A gradual
evolution of ARAZI from an inter-ministerial institution to an independent institution from 2007 to 2013
marks a promising achievement in enabling the authority to tackle all relevant land issues in rural and
urban areas. ARAZI currently reports directly to the Presidential Office in order to streamline decisions
and efforts.
High Council on Land and Water, mentioned above, is chaired by the President and has members –
Afghanistan CEO, Special Senior Advisor to the President on reform and good governance, MoF, MoJ,
MUDA, MoFA, MAIL, MoWE, MRRD, Ministry of Economy and Industry, IDLG, NEPA, Ministry of Mines and
Petroleum, ARAZI CEO, President’s Advisor on Agriculture, Afghanistan Chamber of Commerce and
Industries (ACCI), Administrative Office of the President, Central Statistics Organization, representative
of civil society. Its main aim is to coordinate between various land administration agencies and approve
and monitor the implementation of their policies.
To sum up, a high degree of autonomy among municipalities, tensions between and within ministries
and the overly centralised legal framework results in significant conflicts of role between public
institutions that work on land issues. The blurred lines between their responsibilities open a window for
the relevant public institutions to blame each other and to defer responsibility of real issues. The
autonomy also gives way to conflicts of interest, corruption, nepotism and bribery. Because the roles of
public institutions are unclear, it further becomes easier to sidestep responsibility in front of the public
eye, with intra-government bodies deferring blame or responsibility for action (in i.e., the upgrading of
infrastructure in communities) to one another.




                                                    149
In terms of vertical overlap, Afghan government offices are highly hierarchical. While overlap exists
horizontally between departments and agencies, administrative – or vertical – overlap is avoided. Clear
organisation hierarchies exist with well-established division of labor. Some duplication of
responsibilities and lack of information sharing exists due to excessive bureaucracy, but roles are
generally well separated. Organisational structures are top-down pyramids with headquarter offices,
regional coordination offices and provincial management units. The field staff reports to provincial
staff, they report to regional staff, who then report to headquarters. The management and
implementation structure thus generally lacks overlap of responsibilities and focuses on clear role
delineation between bodies.
Public accessibility and reporting on land right and use information
In section 9.6. we were talking about public accessibility of land information that is scattered across
various land administration institutions. Although available to individuals, complicated, costly and
time-consuming processes (in particular in courts), renders the access to information difficult for
private persons. Due to better social networks and leverage, government officials can access
information lot easier, even when requiring the information as private, not public persons, for their
personal use. Lacking an adequate data collection and established linkages between various land
governance institutions though, is making the process of information sharing difficult. As such, various
land registries are for most part not interconnected, creating major overlaps in certain types of
information, however gaps in other. Land information is not widely publicly available, mostly limited to
the owners of the particular land; third persons are mostly not provided the access to information.
Information on state land is particularly well protected and certainly not publicly available. Finally, no
reporting on land rights and use by public institutions exists in Afghanistan.
Overlaps on right based on tenure typology
Private ownership of land was introduced under the reign of King Amanullah Khan (1919 – 1929) as part
of a greater effort towards tax regularisation387. Since then, the legal framework on right to land and
property has been severely disrupted with overlapping regulations, the existence of long-standing
informal settlements in urban centers, and mass internal and external migration which has led to
multiple (equally legitimate) owners to a single piece of land or property. Three primary types of
ownership can be identified: (1) private ownership, (2) state ownership, (3) public ownership. These
types of ownership are well differentiated, with the exception of public land, already mentioned in this
report.
Duplicate ownership issues can arise in various situations such as former refugees returning to
Afghanistan only to find out that somebody else uses the land. Both sides have the legal document of
some sort proving the ownership leaving them with seemingly equal rights to the land. In other
instances, perhaps different courts issue title deeds to two different families due to the unavailability
of records or simply the corruption. While many histories exist in the realm of duplicate ownership,
what remains is that the issue has not been resolved in a comprehensive manner, with the government
often opting to handle the issue on a case-by-case basis within the formal or informal justice sector.
                      Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process
Development of land policies – stakeholders involvement




387Jawad Peikar, “Historic and current intuitional developments in Afghanistan’s land sector” (Kabul:
Afghanistan’s Independent Land Authority, 2014), paper presented at 2014 World Bank Conference on Land and
Poverty, Washington, D.C., 24-27 March 2014, 7.


                                                   150
Following the establishment of the goal to develop a national land policy in the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy (Volume 1, item 14), the National Land Policy was adopted in 2007 after
extensive but informal consultations with public institutions over a two-year period388. No formal public
consultations took place during the development of the Land Policy. Nevertheless, the contents of the
policy are largely considered to hold up to international best practices 389. The inter-ministerial working
group tasked with the policy development was chaired by a representative from the MAIL with
participation from the MoJ and MUDA 390. It was signed jointly by the Minister of Agriculture, Minister of
Urban Development and Minister of Justice 391. Following the initial signing of the draft land policy, six
working groups consisting of the representatives of above mentioned ministries on Land Law, Land
Registration, Land Dispute and Adjudication, Land Grabbing, Informal Settlements and Rangeland and
Forests were established to review elements of the land policy and prioritize its activities392.The Land
Policy required changes in the legal framework, noting even in the policy document that ‘land
management in Afghanistan is governed by an ineffectual and inadequate legal framework’ 393.
Most of the pledges of the National Land Po licy of 2007 have not yet been ‘absorbed’ 394 into the legal
framework of the country. The ‘current legal framework still has remnants of past land rights reforms’
and ‘customary law … remains poorly integrated with formal law and policy’ 395. The Land Policy, while
developed in a semi-participatory manner (only among public institutions) has been left without a
matching legal framework to support it, and thus remains as an aspirational reference document.
The regulations related to urban and rural land were developed in top-down manner with little to no
input from the general public, the issue exacerbated by the fact that public institutions are not
required by law to consult the public. The lack of a requirement translates to a lack of action, and the
most relevant actors – the affected public – are often left out of the consultation and drafting process.
The affected public may be involved in small-scale rural projects (i.e., through the NSP) but they are
not widely included in the process of drafting regulations related to the programs themselves. This is
particularly visible in the case of urban planning where the on-the-ground realities of cities like Kabul
are not considered in drafting plans.
Equity and poverty reduction in land policies – public monitoring
Some sections of the National Land Policy pay homage to international sources (i.e., Article 17 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which notes that ‘Everyone has the right to own property alone
as well as in association with others’ and ‘No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property’), as well
as to the Constitution (which is not only explicitly evoked in the land policy but also whose language
from Articles 40 and 41 below, are visible in the land policy.
Article 40 of Afghan Constitution states that the “Property shall be safe from violation. No one shall be
forbidden from owning property and acquiring it, unless limited by the provisions of law. No one’s
property shall be confiscated without the order of the law and decision of an authoritative court.
Acquisition of private property shall be legally permitted only for the sake of public interests, and in
exchange for prior and just compensation. Search and disclosure of private property shall be carried
out in accordance with provisions of the law.”
Similarly, the National Land Policy is a “flexible, equitable and transparent policy that serves the
diverse interests of the Afghan society”396. It stipulates that all Afghans should have the opportunity to
legally access land resources and the right to maximise their social welfare. No individual or group

388Wily, “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 9.
389Ibid, 9.
390“Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Capacity Building in Land Policy and Administrative Reform”(Scanagi Denmark

A-S, Asian Development Bank, 2007).
391Ibid, 39.
392Ibid, 39-42.
393 Rationale for a Land Policy, Draft Land Policy, 2007 (SY 1386), Government of the Islamic Republic of

Afghanistan, 1.1.
394Wily, “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 1.
395Ibid, 1.
396 Article 1.4.1. of National Land Policy 2007.




                                                     151
should be barred from ownership. Additionally it says that the “Transparency, accountabilit y and
community participation are critical for effective land administration and must be applied at all levels,
from communities to the highest levels of government. Local communities must take responsibility and
the government must acknowledge its role to serve the people.” Finally, the policy also aims to address
a portion of the citizenry’s most pressing concerns by allowing for the formalisation of land rights in
informal settlements. The policy notes the following objective in Art. 1.3: “Ensure that land markets
are efficient, equitable, environmentally sound and sustainable to improve productivity and alleviate
poverty”.
Additionally, the land policy aims to support the poor and marginalised in Afghanistan. It makes special
mention of landless farm workers (Art. 2.3.2), recognising that “poor farmers have mortgaged their
land in such a manner that their livelihood and land ownership is at risk” (Art. 2.3.2). It further notes
that the land market does not operate to the benefit of all citizens (Art. 3.1.3), explaining that
“people with limited financial resources find themselves excluded from acquiring land through
purchases” and that the “poor must be able to access land markets” (Art. 3.1.3). It upholds an overall
principle to “protect the poor” (Art. 1.4.14) and allow for greater inclusion and equitably targeting the
poor and marginalised in land affairs.
While the policy is generally intended to alleviate poverty and increase equity among citizens of
Afghanistan, the goals of the policy have not been sufficiently incorporated into the legal framework,
nor have the monitoring mechanism put in place to measure those.
The Land Management Law of 2008, for instance, is not pro-poor apart from an indirect mention in its
objectives to the poor and marginalised, stating that it aims to provide “opportunity for people to
access land” (Article 2). However, neither the Law’s section on restitution (Chapter 4) nor its section
on state commitment to the poor is noticeably pro-poor. The section on restitution containing a
government obligation to allocate lands to the poor was removed from the 2008 LML, the definition of
eligible persons to include large landowners was expanded and remained “silent on the need to include
urban dwellers in need of housing in its purview” 397. It also provides no support for informal dispute
resolution (an important avenue for resolution among the poor who may not be able to afford to
resolve problems in court), and the poor and marginalised are never directly mentioned in the law.
Other laws, including the Presidential Decree #104, which legalised the distribution of land to IDPs and
returnees, have simply not been successfully implemented.
Additionally, existing land laws have been inconsistent on the issue of discrimination against women
and girls. Women and girls, often deprived of their inheritance rights to land and property (although
the Article 40 of Afghan Constitution is stating their right to inheritance), are left without sufficient
protection. They are further more vulnerable to domestic violence within greater conflicts on land.
However, some notable attempts of incorporation of the Land Policy of 2007 and rectification of the
women equity have been made. The Elimination of Violence against Women (EVAW) law was decreed in
2009 aiming to protect property rights of women. Additionally, ARAZI have conducted a review of the
Land Management Law of 2008 in light of the policy of 2007, and developed a series of proposed
amendments 398. The draft amendments are expected to go to Parliament for review in 2015, however
it did not happen until now.
Ecological and environmental goals of land policies – public monitoring
The Land Policy notes in its objectives (Art. 1.3) to develop the “land markets [that] are efficient,
equitable, environmentally sound and sustainable to improve productivity and al leviate poverty”. It
further recognizes the dangers to the environment in informal and unplanned developments (Art.
2.2.4), noting that the “relevant municipality in consultation with the Ministry of Urban Development
shall determine the habitability of an area taking into account clearly defined environmental and
planning criteria…” (Art. 2.2.4). It prioritises environmental protection (Art. 2.2.6), noting it as a
primary issue (Art. 3.1.9).

397Wily,
       “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 29.
398JawadPeikar, “Historic and current intuitional developments in Afghanistan’s land sector” (Kabul: Afghanistan’s
Independent Land Authority, 2014), paper presented at 2014 World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty,
Washington, D.C., 24-27 March 2014, 15.


                                                      152
A whole section in the National Land Policy is dedicated to environmental sustainability. It stipulates
that “Land management systems have not traditionally assigned priority to environmental issues with
regard to the sustainability of natural resources including forest conservation and prevention of
desertification. Degradation of land, from overgrazing, lack of flood controls, poor mining techniques,
deforestation, to name only a few has negatively impacted Afghanistan’s greatest natural resource.
Environmental protection campaigns are most successful when supported and implemented by the
general public, however public awareness of environmental issues is negligible.” (Art. 3.1.9) . Further
the policy explains that “It is national policy that land is a natural resource and fundamental to the
livelihoods of our people which shall be protected for present and future generations. Land
management issues shall consider the environmental impact in all aspects related to land use,
regulation, allocation, resource use and management.” Also “It is national policy that a campaign of
public awareness be initiated to ensure that all citizens develop a level of environmental awareness in
order to support and implement environmental protection measures, individually, at the community
and national level.”
In practice, however, the similar issue as with the equity and poverty reduction goals happens. While
the land policy addresses ecological and environmental goals and concerns, the policy lacks
corresponding laws to ensure proper implementation and contains no provisions for public monitoring.
In practice, the environmental and ecological concerns are typically overlooked by government
agencies and private individuals in the interest of other objectives (such as construction and
expansion).
Budgeting and adequate resources for land policies
The communication with the MoF in terms of the financial resources needed has been limited or non-
existent in the drafting of policies resulting in the absence of a cost-benefit analysis or accompanying
review of resources and institutional capacity for the implementation. Additionally, the donor priorities
lie in other sectors such as security and health, not providing adequate resourcing opportunities for
Afghan land administration. Therefore the land policies in Afghanistan are not properly costed and lack
adequate financial resources for their implementation.
Public reporting on progress in policy implementation
The Land Policy was drafted to “serve as a general guidance to inform the revision and modification of
the legal framework for land”, aiming to encourage the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock
as well as the Ministry of Urban Development to “formulate or adjust their strategies and plans of
action to tackle challenges” 399. While ARAZI has used the Land Policy (among other documents and
information from consultations) to develop draft amendments to the Land Management Law of 2008,
the amendments have not yet been reviewed by Parliament 400. Neither the Land Management Law of
2008 nor the Land Policy of 2007, however, contains a requirement for public reporting indicating
process of implementation.
Public reporting has thus far occurred at the initiative of the relevant government agencies.
Furthermore, challenges related to high rates of administrative corruption and an overly centralised
bureaucracy further limit the public’s access to information.
Disaster Risk Reduction in land policies
The National Land Policy makes significant strides in laying the foundation for disaster risk reduction
(DDR) language in its text. Of utmost risk in Afghanistan is the threat of natural disasters such as
floods, droughts and landslides. While the land policy does not mention disasters directly, section 2.2.4
indicates that land must be assessed to determine its habitability according to environmental criteria.
It further indicates that “access to land resources (must) be clarified and secured as part of an
integrated natural resource management” (Art. 2.2.6) to ensure environmental sustainability (Art.
3.1.9).



399National  Land Policy, Introduction.
400Jawad   Peikar, “Historic and current intuitional developments,” 15.


                                                         153
While the section’s focus is on environmental protection, clear linkages to disaster risk exist (i.e.,
reference to floor controls and mining techniques). However, the laws aiming to improve the disaster
risk management have not been developed following the adoption of the National Land Policy.
Non-governmental organisations and the Afghanistan National Disaster Management Authority (ANDMA)
have implemented most recent efforts related to DDR. Their efforts are of particular importance given
that an estimated 250,000 Afghans suffer from natural disasters on an annual basis, with more than
23,000 displaced per year on average between 2008 and 2014 401 . Between 2000 and 2010, the top
disasters that affected Afghanistan were droughts (in 2000, 2006 and 2008, affecting more than 4
million people) and a storm in 2008 that affected approximately 170,000 people 402. Large DRR projects
aim to mitigate the risks of disaster while building the capacity of ANDMA to undertake such work in
the future. ANDMA has developed several guidelines, including:
         •   Disaster Management Plan for Herat Province
         •   Natural Disaster Mitigation Policy
         •   Disaster Response Procedures
         •   Policy and Coordination Guidelines on Formulation of National Disaster Management Plan
ANDMA’s resources, however, remain severely limited with its practice thus containing corresponding
limitations. Additionally, taking into account the fact that the Land Policy 2007 was not reflected in
LML 2008, the policies that would reduce the risk of future disasters are virtually non-existent in
Afghanistan.




401 “Major New Disaster Risk Management Program for Afghanistan”(International Organization for Migration, 10
March       2015),    http://afghanistan.iom.int/press-releases/major-new-disaster-risk-management-programme-
afghanistan
402Takeshi Komino, “Disaster Risk Reduction National Platform and Strategic National Action Plan in Afghanistan, in

Civil Society Organization and Disaster Risk Reduction: The Asian Dilemma”(Tokyo: Springer, 2014), 30.


                                                       154
10. Policy Issues and Recommendations (per thematic area)
                                            Land Rights Recognition
Recognition of continuum of rights
The main issue in the recognition of rights in Afghanistan is the discrepancy between the existing legal
framework and the reality of land tenure in the country, which is overwhelmingly informal. The
tendency of current Afghan legal framework to prioritize landowners with formal documentation
excludes the majority of Afghan population from ownership rights. Additionally, the lack of awareness
of general public, as well as Afghan National Police and Army, on land issues and land rights
contributes, in certain cases, to the limited land rights recognition in Afghanistan.
Article 5 of the LML of 2008 recognizes the validity of customary deeds under the condition that it was
prepared and submitted before August 1975 and the land seller owns valid title deed. Additionally,
customary deeds in order to be formally recognized have to contain all the details such as name and
signature (or fingerprints) of the owner, signatures (or fingerprints) of witnesses, description of
boundaries of the land, price and date. Although no comprehensive research of the customary deed
documents was conducted for this study, based on the accounts of various technical experts involved in
this project, the format of customary deed documents is not unified across the country and people
have limited information what the customary deed document should entail. Thus the customary deed
documents often lack all the necessary information.
In terms of undocumented rights, long term unchallenged possession is ensured in Art. 8 of LML 2008.
The Art. 5 sets up certain requirements for the legal formalization of ownershiplimiting claims to land
acquired after 1973. Considering the occurrence of wars in the period after 1973, this article is in
reality of limited usage for those not possessing any (formal or customary) documentation.
Lastly, Afghan land laws do not protect collective ownership, very commonly used in Afghanistan.
Having said that, through the enactment of the LML 2008 and Presidential Decree 83 in 2003, which are
strongly pro-formal ownership documentation and supersede all previous laws relevant to establishing
ownership property rights including through customary documents, the majority of land in Afghanistan
falls under state, depriving the majority of Afghans their rights to land tenure.
In urban setting, the tendency to prioritize formal ownership documentation has similar effects as in
rural areas, however with some specificities. Due to the lack of tenure security combined with large
influx of returnees and IDPs, the phenomenon of extensive land grabbing and irregularized building of
informal settlements became very common practice in Afghan cities.
For the purposes of this report, we have defined indigenous tenure rights as rights of Kuchi nomadic
and Jat communities to own and use the land, because due to overly informal tenure in Afghanistan
and specific life style and social organization, the vast majority of population could be considered as
indigenous in Afghanistan. Although some regulations exist in Afghan legal framework to provide
ownership and user rights to nomadic communities403, in practice, when translated into state policies
of settlement of nomadic tribes and land distribution plans, these efforts are often met with the
resistance of local populations who are using the land and claim ownership over it. Consequently, Kuchi
communities are not able to secure their tenure and user rights because of the contradicting claims
over pastures.
The situation of Jat communities is distinct from that of Kuchis 404. Considered as stateless, most are
refused citizenship by the Afghan authorities. As such, studies indicate approximately 80% of
households are not registered and do not hold any form of identification document, inhibiting, among

403
    Article 14 of the 2004 Afghan Constitution provides for “improving … the settlement and living conditions of
nomads” and the Environment Law (2007) requires demarcation of “areas appropriate for use of pastoralists”
(rangeland), including migration corridors, and consultation with nomadic communities in land use and resource
management plans (Ch. 1).
404 The categorization of Jats (also known as Jogi and Chori Frush) in an ethnic category is also contested, and the

denominations “jat”, “Jogi” and “Chori Frush” are exogenous to the communities themselves. Cf. “Assessment of
Out of School Children and Jogi communities,”(Kabul: Samuel Hall, UNICEF, 2011).


                                                       155
other things, their legal access to land ownership.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
    •   The minimal limit of continued ownership and cultivation of the land needed in order for the
        long term unchallenged possession be formally recognized should be decreased through the
        amendment of current LML.
    •   Customary deed documents prepared after August 1975 but otherwise meeting all the other
        requirements as per Art. 5 of LML 2008 should be formally recognized through the amendment
        of current LML.
    •   The provisions clarifying the status, legal recognition and ways of registration of collective
        rights should be amended in current LML.
    •   Awareness of public, Afghan National Police and Army on the land issues and land rights has to
        be increased. The land governance has to be included in the teaching and training curricula for
        these target groups.

    •   ARAZI’s plans to initiate a telephone line that would allow people to call ARAZI, record their
        complaints and ask questions on different land issues such as how to record the land should be
        promptly materialized and adequately financed.
    •   The efforts of various NGOs (such as TLO and Checci) to capacitate Afghan citizens on what
        information a customary deed document should include in order for it to be formally
        recognized should be further enhanced involving the government in these efforts.
    •   As an interim measure, community-based land recording system should be developed, which
        will be later on connected to ARAZI registering system (when transferred from courts to ARAZI)
        and their Principal Books.
    •   Creation of centralized (gradually computerized) system at ARAZI as one-stop-shop for land
        registration.
    •   Relevant authorities should work together to operationalize already existing efforts to
        incorporate a provision on land usurpation into the Criminal Code. Where appropriate donors
        and civil society stakeholders should provide technical assistance to the drafting process.
    •   Approval and support of the draft Restitution Policy on Land Grabbing.
    •   Prosecution of land grabbers should be made a priority within the Attorney General’s office.
        Similarly investigation and technical capacity to do so should be enhanced within the Afghan
        National Police (ANP) with the possibility to establish a special police force tasked with the
        protection of lands against the land grabbing.
    •   The Presidential Decree 104 enacted in 2005, which puts the provisions in place on the
        distribution of land for housing to eligible returnees and IDPs, and the National Policy on
        Internal Displacement, approved in November 2013, which addresses the right to adequate
        housing and access to land (Article 7.1.3), should be adequately implemented.
    •   Policy on Upgrading Informal Settlements, currently awaiting Cabinet approval, should be
        promptly enacted.
    •   The implementers of various upgrading projects (including NGO community) should create an
        adequate coordination mechanism to share the information and lessons learned. Municipality
        with technical support of international community should develop a database including all
        information about upgrading in each area, which will be publicly available on municipalities’
        website.




                                                      156
    •    The provisions of the Afghan Constitution and the Environment Law 2007 to give land user
         rights to nomadic communities should be promptly implemented, coupled with the capacity
         building of the local communities about the issues of settlement and usage of lands by the
         nomadic tribes. Community-based conflict resolution mechanisms should be used to solve the
         disputes between nomadic tribes and local communities unless involving criminal justice
         elements. If so, those cases should be immediately brought before courts for adequate dispute
         resolution.
    •    Prompt approval of the Draft Rangeland Law, which provides the framework for the
         management of private, community and public rangeland. In particular it states that nomadic
         or semi-nomadic people may acquire pastureland for grazing their livestock through application
         to the local authorities stating the need for land, and through the identification of vacant land
         (mawat).
    •    The request by ARAZI to establish a technical working group comprised of MAIL, MRRD, MEW,
         Independent Directorate of Kuchi Affairs and members of the Commission for Dispute
         Resolution for Kuchi and Nomad Affairs, the parliament and ARAZI to provide technical inputs
         on adequate solutions to the issues of Kuchi communities in Afghanistan should be promptly
         approved.
b) Long term
    •    Increase incentives for individuals in rural areas to formally record their title, for example by
         reducing costs associated with acquiring title, should be devised. Possible measures can include
         discounts for low-income individuals or vulnerable groups.
Respect for enforcement of rights
Although opportunities for tenure individualization exist (basically only through regular venues of land
registration), they exhibit various challenges. There are two fully valid and third “provisional”
possibilities of land registration in Afghanistan.
Registration in ARAZI Principal Books is one of the most valid types of registration in Afghanistan. Only
way, how to get the land registered with ARAZI is through the land clearance process Tasfia. However,
currently Tasfia is conducted only in cases when a major dispute over land exists, a big development or
mining project is planned to be implemented, when land is located near the state land or when
powerful people are involved. It is very difficult for ordinary Afghan citizens to get his/her land cleared
by ARAZI, hence to be registered in it Principal Books.
Secondly, it is a registration and subsequent acquiring of the title deed at courts that is considered as a
valid proof of ownership. Although the courts are legally bound to accept all the seven types of legal
documents proving the ownership as listed in LML 2008, in current Afghan realities, often the judges
refuse to accept the tax and water payment receipts, as well as Sanad Rasmee Mulkyet – documents
proving the ownership during the period of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (1978 – 79) -
because of fears of accepting forged documents.
Having said that, it is not possible in Afghanistan to formalize customary title deed without actually
transacting (selling) the land or having the land cleared by Tasfia (which is virtually impossible). In
other words, there is no mechanism established, where one could go and after meeting all the
necessary requirements, the customary deed document will be turned to formal title deed. Only the
buyer, buying the land based on the customary deed document of the seller after going through the
court registration will acquire formal title deed. Similarly, land that went through the Tasfia will get
registered in ARAZI Principal Books. Also, the process of formalizing of a long-term possession based on
non-documentary evidence does not exist in Afghanistan. Similarly to the customary deed documents,
one has to transact the land in order for the buyer to acquire formal title deed or the land has to go
through Tasfia process.
Third way of having the land registered, however only “provisionally 405 ” is cadastral survey. Last

405Cadastral   survey provides only “probable” proof of ownership.


                                                         157
national cadastral survey was conducted between 1970-78, while only 30% of land was surveyed. The
records were not updated since then, except for additionally 4% of land surveyed in last 5 years, based
on various presidential decrees. The surveying of Afghan land was suspended completely by the
Presidential Decree 83 in 2003. Since then, it is possible for the individual to have his/her land
surveyed on demand; however the approval of the ARAZI CEO is needed. In cases of large tracts of land
such as whole villages, the approval of the President has to be sought. This is done by submitting a
letter of request to the Administrative Office of the President. The fate of the approval usually rests
with the amount of informal payments or number of personal connections. Additionally, due to high
fees, when done on demand (2% of actual property value) and general reluctance during the Karzai
regime to conduct the cadastral survey fearing the misuse of the land information, the land inventory
happens rarely in Afghanistan.
Apart from the procedural problems mentioned above, one of other reasons mentioned for low
registration and formalization is reportedly the widespread corruption of government institutions,
which require the payment of bribes. According to agencies involved in addressing land issues, most
rural residents prefer the use of customary deeds as the process for formalization and registration
requires the payment of informal fees. Customary deeds are thus considered cheaper, do not require
travelling to the nearest centre, and include little or no payment of debts 406 . Another reason
mentioned was the perceived complexity of the administrative process. According to the World Bank
Doing Business in Afghanistan report of 2015 it takes approximately 250-360 working days for the
completion of land registration in Afghanistan 407. Paying taxes also deter people from registering their
property, in particular when adding the informal fees, which often have to be paid in addition to
regular land taxes fees. People try to avoid paying taxes due to the lack of financial resources or
because they do not believe that the government will spent the money to their benefit. Some high-
ranking officials and rich people do not pay taxes knowing they will not be pursued. Finally, it is a
limited knowledge of particularly rural Afghan population about their rights and the exact steps of the
administrative process that can discourage them to register their property, although the limited
knowledge in the context, when the rights to land are often not recognized, must be considered as a
secondary factor.
The registration, or lack of thereof, is of particular importance. Studies found almost all land is
registered in the name of the male head of household: less than 2% of women own land and most of
those women are widows 408. The reasons for this trend are strong social and customary barriers to
property ownership by women, where patriarchal structures remain prevalent.
Due to the largely customary tenure of Afghan land with only minimal portion being recorded or
mapped and high levels of corruption in formal system, the opportunities for illegal land transactions
are enormous. Illegal land sales are most commonly known in Afghan istan as “land usurpation” or “land
grabbing.” A recent report by Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation Committee
identified that one of the most common means of land usurpation is forgery of documents. 409 In
particular, forgeries carried out by court employees have been identified as one of the main forms of
land usurpation. Despite the extensive nature of the problem, the current legal framework does not
adequately address the crime of land grabbing.410
Recommendations
a) Short term




406
    Although the information on payments in informal system is difficult to acquire, this information is based on
accounts of various technical experts involved in this study.
407    “Registering      property,”http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/afghanistan/#registering-
property (accessed 4 September 2015).
408Wily, Land and the Constitution.”
409“Public Inquiry into Land Usurpation,” 9.
410 See “Stolen Lands of Afghanistan,” 9.




                                                      158
      •   ARAZI’s plans to implement National Demarcation Project identifying the boundaries of villages
          and Gozars (administrative units smaller than districts in urban areas) should be materialized.
          As a follow-up step the land clearance process on large scale should be restarted. The judge
          should be included in Tasfia delegation to deal with the land disputes, if necessary. In case of
          more complex land disputes, the fact that the ownership of land is disputed, should be
          indicated on the Tasfia report and forwarded to courts. Adequate financial resources should be
          allocated for this purpose from the national budged. The support in form of financial means, as
          well as technical expertise should be sought with international community and civil society.
      •   The possibility of a first-stage land clearance done by communities to enable nationwide land
          identification should be explored.
      •   The regulation proposed by ARAZI that allows for registering of urban properties should be
          approved promptly.
      •   Draft Customary Deed Registration Law, drafted by the Judicial Reform Commission in 2005,
          should be reviewed and approved, as well as new law, stipulating the possibilities of
          formalization of non-documentary land ownership evidence should be enacted.
      •   The process of gradual cadastral (or inventory) survey should be restarted, together with the
          land clearance process Tasfia on a large scale.
      •   As an interim step, the option should be explored to establish a community-based identification
          of the boundaries of the lands belonging to one community (e.g. village) together with the
          acceptance of judges to use these boundaries to locate the lands registered with courts and of
          ARAZI during Tasfia process.
      •   More information about the physical characteristics, type of the land, its exact location and a
          cadastral map (or sketch) should be included in formal and customary title deed documents to
          decrease the possibility of illegal land transactions.
      •   ARAZI should take over administrative responsibilities of establishing the title deeds of courts
          and become a one-stop-shop for the registration of private land. Simultaneously, the
          registration system should be replaced by a computerized one, including the GPS coordinates,
          GIS imaginary and the cadaster map. This will also enable to compare the names of the seller
          and buyers in previous transactions of the same plot of land to prevent the acceptance of
          forged documents 411 . Extensive public campaigns should be conducted to inform ordinary
          citizens about the new system and the steps required for registration of your property.
      •   The expenses for computerized registration system have to properly budgeted taking account
          the licensing fees.
      •   The benefits of collecting taxes for the community should be clearly communicated to the
          citizens, in particular in rural areas. The government has to assure proper spending of collected
          taxes back to the community. The plans for such public campaign were already planned by the
          MoF, however, they need to materialize.
      •   Awareness about legal provisions and women rights should be raised in particular within rural
          communities.
      •   ARAZI should take steps to facilitate increased registration of land by women by, for instance,
          providing discounts to women on the range of fees involved.




411
   Although this technical solution to corruption might alleviate the low-level corruption, it might not prevent
corruption linked to powerful and well-connected persons




                                                        159
    •      Relevant authorities should work together to operationalize the already existing efforts to
           incorporate a provision on land usurpation into the Criminal Code. Where appropriate donors
           and civil society stakeholders should provide technical assistance to the drafting process.
    •      Support the draft Restitution Policy on Land Grabbing.
    •      Prosecution of land grabbers should be made a priority within the Attorney General’s office.
           Similarly investigation and technical capacity to do so should be enhanced within the Afghan
           National Police (ANP) with the possibility to establish a special police force tasked with the
           protection of lands against the land grabbing.
b) Long term
    •      Fighting corruption should become the priority of the NUG. The Anti-Corruption Strategy
           established by the President Karzai in 2008 should be implemented through the stronger
           engagement of the President himself and increased results-based support of the international
           donor community. Additionally, the past and yet unaddressed cases of corruption should be the
           priority of the Attorney’s General Office.
    •      Courts should develop the technical capacity to detect forged documents and establish proper
           procedure of verification. Unless the document fails to pass the procedure, the judge has to
           recognize the validity of the document, as it is prescribed by the law. Failing to do so,
           penalties should be introduced. For this purpose, internal and external audits of the courts
           should be conducted on regular basis.
    •      Penalties should be developed in Afghan Criminal Code for those holding and/or developing
           forged documents.
                     Right to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations
Rights to Forest and Common Land
Although the identification of forests and their usage is clear in Afghan legal framework, in praxis,
management of forests faces a number of issues. Lack of security and the inability of the government
to implement rule of law throughout the country often leads to destruction of the forests, cutting down
the trees, smuggling and conversion to residential areas.
Common lands are considered equal to public lands in Afghanistan, however, the current body of laws
does not provide a clear definition of public lands. This is particularly problematic when it comes to
the ownership rights of virgin and arid lands. Virgin and arid land can be a pastureland 412, hence it
cannot be sold nor leased413. However, based on the concurrent articles 46 - 49 of LML 2008, the state,
providing certain conditions are met, can allocate and distribute arid and virgin land to individuals and
other legal persons.In the current body of laws, it is not clear, which arid and virgin land is considered
pasture land414, hence public land that cannot be sold nor leased, and which is considered state land
that can indeed be distributed to individuals and other legal persons. Due the ambiguity of the
definitions, although the Afghan legal code provides certain clarity in the relation to the access to key
natural resources, in reality there are numerous conflicts over the usage of pasture and forest lands in
Afghanistan.
Furthermore, no process of legal recognition of “the public” as an owner of public lands was
established in Afghanistan. This means that even though the general understanding is that public lands
are owned by the public, there is not legal way to prove that during Tasfia (land clearance) processes
or before courts. Therefore according to the Art.2(8) LML 2008, stipulating that all the lands, which
ownership cannot be legally proven, belong to state, all these lands legally belong to the state. Weak
legal understanding of common property particularly undermines the interests of those who own small

412Based  on the definition of pastureland in Art. 3(9) LML 2008
413LML 2008, Art. 82(1): “Pastures shall be kept unoccupied for the sake of public requirements of local villagers
(for cattle grazing, graveyard, threshing ground and etc.)“ and Pasture Law 2000, Art. 6: “Buying, selling and
leasing a pasture is prohibited.”
414Hence the very unclear definition of the pastureland in Art 3 (9.2).




                                                        160
farms or no farms at all. The rights of this group of people are endangered by people with influence
and that legal standards are not able to protect their rights. Disputes over outlying lands such as rain-
fed agricultural lands and pasturelands are commonplace, putting into conflict the rights of individuals
versus the local population as well as the interests of different ethnic groups. 415
Similarly to public land, collective property rights are not provided for in the current body of laws in
Afghanistan, nor the definition of communal land exists. Even though the National Land Policy (2007)
defines the term “community land”, this term is not embedded in any other existing law relat ed to
land management. It is only the Pasture Law 2000 that mentions the communal pastures (not
communal land). Since the cadastral survey was conducted only on 34% of Afghan territory, while
communal lands, nor pastures were identified, the boundaries are not clearly demarcated.
In terms of multiple rights over common and private lands, this is a regular occurrence in Afghanistan
and the rights can legally coexist. Multiple venues (formal and informal) exist in case of disputes;
however, there are numerous examples of lengthy and complicated unresolved disputes, raising
questions about the efficiency of dispute resolution venues. Multiple rights over land and mining
resources can also legally coexist in Afghanistan and the rights and obligations of the licence holder
and the state (owner of the land) are stipulated clearly in Minerals Law 2015 including the dispute
resolution mechanisms. Whether or not the government is able to implement the Minerals Law 2015
remains to be seen, however past experience illus trate the government’s inability to monitor the
application of the mining contracts.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
       •   Identifying mechanisms to promote forest management in areas which are currently out of
           reach of the government such as developing and empowering community based adjudication
           groups (comprising of elders and influential figures in the community) to address rural land use
           restrictions’ violations . One possible option would be channelling the rural land management
           through CDCs.
       •   Raising awareness of the local population about the importance of forests and other natural
           resources and the negative impacts of deforestation in order to encourage communities to take
           part in maintaining the forests particularly in the areas where the presence of the central
           government is limited.
       •   Communities should be capacitated on the provisions of Water Law of 2009 stipulating their
           rights and obligations. District MAIL offices should ensure the adequate implementation of the
           law.
       •   Addressing contradictory legal codes in terms of definition of public lands including clear
           distinction between arid & virgin lands and pasturelands by approving existing new draft of LML
           developed by ARAZI and Pastureland Law by MAIL.
       •   The process for the recognition and most importantly registration of public lands has to be
           established to protect rights of public though amendment of current LML.
       •   The clarification of the status, recognition and ways of registration of collective rights should
           be embedded in Afghan legal framework through the amendment of current LML.
       •   Prompt approval of the draft Rangeland Law, which provides the framework for the
           management of private, community and public rangeland. In particular it states that nomadic
           or semi-nomadic people may acquire pastureland for grazing their livestock through application
           to the local authorities stating the need for land, and through the identification of vacant land
           (mawat).




415   Liz Alden Wily, “Looking for Peace on the Pastures,”(Kabul: Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2004).


                                                         161
       •   Prompt approval of the request by ARAZI to establish a technical working group comprised of
           MAIL, MRRD, MEW, Independent Directorate of Kuchi Affairs and members of the Commission
           for Dispute Resolution for Kuchi and Nomad Affairs, the parliament and ARAZI to provide
           technical inputs to the adequate solutions of the issues of Kuchi communities in Afghanistan.
       •   The possibility of community-based pasture land administration (for example as used by RLAP
           or SALEH projects) should be considered, as well as reconsideration of the Land Administration
           Management Project (LAMP) prepared in cooperation with MAIL in 2007.
       •   Prioritizing the cadastral survey of disputed lands where interests of local communities are at
           stake. In the absence of a comprehensive survey, in the short –term combining satellite images
           with GPS coordinates is a cost-effective method to demarcate boundaries of communal
           pastures.
       •   Identifying mechanisms to promote protected areas management in areas which are currently
           out of reach of the government such as developing and empowering community based
           adjudication groups (comprising of elders and influential figures in the community) to address
           rural land use restrictions violations
       •   The process of gradual cadastral (or inventory) survey should be restarted, together with the
           land clearance process Tasfia on a large scale.
       •   Effective anti-corruption measures should be introduced and capacity-building programmes
           conducted for the judges and other court officials to prevent lengthy proceedings.
       •   Establishing clear monitoring system of application of mining contracts, with participation of
           local communities, under the auspices of the Ministry of Mines and Petroleum.
b) Long term
       •   Community discussion and dialogue regarding conflicts over access to natural resources should
           be encouraged. Traditional structures such as various tribal bodies and new structures such as
           community, district and provincial development councils can play an important role in this
           regard.
Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
Although restrictions on rural land use are clearly stipulated in Afghan legal code, in practise, rural
lands are often used for the purposes not specified by the law. Residential buildings, for instance, are
not allowed to be built in disaster prone areas. However the monitoring of the compliance of these
restrictions is not available. Due to unclear definitions of pastureland (and public land in general), as
well as often illegal usage of rural lands including the forests, the transferability restrictions are not
always enforced and followed either.
In terms of rural land use change, certain rural lands such as pastures, forests, agricultural land,
protected areas and other public land 416 , the restrictions over their use change exist. In fact, the
changes are not allowed in most of the cases according to the Afghan law. It is only arid and virgin land
that can encounter the land use change, however no clear mechanism for this purpose exists. Finally,
rural land use plans do not exist in Afghanistan to regulate the usage of rural lands.
Despite various efforts by MAIL such as National Resource Management Strategy launched in 2006,
natural resources including forests, pastures and protected areas are affected by the lack of a
comprehensive mechanism for effective and sustainable use of natural resources. For this purpose,
programmes have been developed in 2014 to manage and protect natural resources in co-operation
with the public so as to build community capacity in the area of sustainable utilisation, promote a
sense of ownership among the people and motivate people to contribute to the survival of these
resources. Communities and local governments, however, need further knowledge and skills through
practical training for user communities, in order to develop their ability and capacity for the
management of natural resources.

416   Please note the unclear definition of public land.


                                                           162
Afghanistan’s protected areas require special attention here. Afghanistan has only two national parks
and the suggestions for creation of more protected areas such as in Nuristan province, Badghis Forest
and Buddha Monuments in Bamyan were put forth to NEPA in 2002, however still pending. Furthermore,
the lack of enforcement of the protective regulations leads to the degradation of protected rural areas
in Afghanistan and although the mechanism of conversion of land to protected area exists,it is
cumbersome and takes long time.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
   • Identifying mechanisms to promote forest management in areas which are currently out of
       reach of the government such as developing and empowering community based adjudication
       groups (comprising of elders and influential figures in the community) to address rural land use
       restrictions violations
    •   Raising awareness of the local population about the importance of forests and the negative
        impacts of deforestation in order to encourage communities to take part in maintain the
        forests particularly in the areas where the presence of the central government is limited.
    •   Prompt approval of the Draft Rangeland Law, which provides the framework for the
        management of private, community and public rangeland.
    •   Addressing contradictory legal codes in terms of definition of public lands including clear
        distinction between arid & virgin lands and pasturelands by approving new draft LML prepared
        by ARAZI and Rangeland Law prepared by MAIL.
    •   Clear mechanism for arid and virgin land use change should be established. The database
        should be developed within ARAZI to collect the data about the arid and virgin land use
        changes.
    •   Adequate monitoring mechanisms should be established to monitor the compliance with land
        use restrictions in disaster prone areas.
    •   Expediting the process of land change to protected areas by mainstreaming the steps and
        organizations responsible.
    •   Prioritizing surveying of natural resources identified as in high risk of degradation.
b) Long term
    •   Explore the possibilities of allowing for a clear, transparent and publicly accessible process of
        rural land use change for other types of rural land
    •   The development of the rural land use plans by the MRRD through the participatory and
        transparent process, where public voice can be heard and the burdens are shared.
    •   Increased human and financial resources to NEPA in order to be able to implement its policies
        regarding Afghan national parks and protected areas.
                              Urban Land Use, Planning and Development
Restrictions on rights
Restrictions on the land use prescribed by the Kabul Master Plan are often not enforced. It is illegal to
convert residential to industrial area or construct buildings on arable land. However, the rampant
corruption in the ranks of government and land management authorities allows for uncontrolled usage
of the land. Examples of informal settlements built on the mountain slopes within and at the outskirts
of the cities is another example of the friction with urban use restrictions. Mountains and hills are
considered pastureland, as such being for the usage of the public. By appropriating technically public
land to private interests deprives other people from using the lands for grazing.
Although regulations on disaster risk management are developed on national level, these regulations
are not specific to each municipality. Additionally, MUDA, municipalities and MAIL put limited efforts



                                                   163
to implement DRR policies. Although Kabul Municipality stated that efforts are currently underway to
develop a policy on land use for disaster risk, they provided no further information.
Additionally, due to a thriving black market for looted historical and cultural artifacts coupled with
generally poor enforcement of protection measures, much of Afghanistan’s physical cultural heritage
can be considered at risk. Such legal measures are key in providing a legal foundation for heritage
protection. While natural heritage regulations exists in Afghanistan’s urban areas, little focus has been
put by the main urban actors – namely, the respective municipalities and representatives of the MUDA
and MAIL – towards the actual implementation of disaster risk regulations due to a presumed lack of
resources, high rates of corruption, focus on other issues (such as the lack of sufficient urban
infrastructure) and so on.
Finally, urban planning particularly in Kabul is irregularized because the most current.Third Master Plan
for Kabul was abandoned on the request of MUDA by the Karzai administration; hence no Master Plan to
regulate the urban development in Kabul exists. President Ghani’s decree allo wing no construction on
arable land also complicates the urban expansion in major cities. Since certain arable lands are
included in the city master plans dating sometimes 50 years back, the decree limits the
implementation of the master plans.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
    •   Clear mechanism for use change of each type of urban land should be devised including the
        requirement of permits to do so. Municipalities should establish a monitoring mechanism for
        this purpose, as well as a database of land used changes, which will be updated regularly
        including new spacial information.
    •   Zoning Law both for national and municipal purposes should be enacted.
    •   Recourses must be allocated towards restrictions on urban land use related to disaster risk.
        Government personnel should be trained in not only managing disasters but also in taking
        preventive measures in light of the available laws and regulations. Long-term, systematic
        training is also required together with the future recruitment of new employees and their
        training.
    •   A feasibility study for different cities in Afghanistan should be undertaken by MUDA to identify
        the enforcement mechanisms of National Disaster Risk Strategy.
    •   A feasibility study for different cities in Afghanistan should be undertaken by MUDA to identify
        possible enforcement mechanisms for protection of Afghan cultural heritage and prevention of
        looting.
    •   Long awaited National Urban Policy and new Municipality Law has to be enacted.
    •   New Master Plans have to be developed for biggest cities in Afghanistan as per MUDAs
        commitments within “Big Cities Master Plan” initiative with the support of international
        community.

    •   By devising new master plans for the biggest cities, the issue of the ban on constructions on
        arable lands has to be taken into account and the provisions of the Master Plan should be
        written in line with the Presidential Decree.
b) Long term
    •   Public should be capacitated on community-based disaster risk preparedness.




                                                  164
Transparency of land use restrictions
The process of urban expansion and infrastructure development is shared between local urban
municipalities (Kabul, Jalalabad, Kandahar, etc.) as well as the Ministry of Urban Development,
formally tasked with developing urban policy for the country. However, due to unclear delineation of
the responsibilities of these two main actors, actual collaboration has developed informally and
depends heavily on the individual municipal and ministerial objectives and ideologies. When shared
ideology and objective is weak, urban expansion and infrastructure development remains primarily
outside of the formal realm. Planning objectives differ by municipality and MUDA, with no specific
planning objective existing across the board in either group. Objectives remain overly individualized
and often in conflict with one another, resulting in numerous stalemates in policy planning.In Kabul
city, for instance, the responsibility is shared with the Municipality’s Plan Implementation Office and
the Ministry of Urban Development417. Due to a fundamental disagreement in the implementation of
the third and final Master Plan of Kabul between the Office and the Ministry, partially upheld by the
formal suspension of the Master Plan in 2005 through a Presidential Decree, urban expansion in Kabul is
littered with irregularities. Despite efforts to develop a fourth plan, no plan for the urban space inside
Kabul’s city limits has been established 418 . Focus has instead been placed on developing legal
mechanisms to change the urban landscape of Kabul, with a 2009 plan for urban expansion outside of
the city (‘Kabul Jadid’ – New Kabul City) attempting to incentive Kabul residents to move outside of
the city in hopes of reducing the population of the city to a more manageable amount. The lack of a
legal framework has resulted in a process that lacks transparency and can be dismissive of the facts on
the ground.
Formal planning mechanisms of the Ministry are to be shared with the public through official
announcements, and through local authorities such as the municipality, respecting all citizen rights
outlined in the Land Management Law of 2008, Constitution of Afghanistan and relevant articles in the
Civil Code. However, the information is not always shared with public in consistent manner. While
occasional announcements about urban expansion exist, these are limited to major urban changes (i.e.
the release of the plans for the new Kabul city) and are generally not detailed. The public is generally
unable to obtain more information about planned urban expansion without previously established social
networks with individuals working in relevant municipal or ministerial departments. Most discussion on
expansion and development thus remain inaccessible to the public. When people are not informed
about the planned urban expansion, those landless, returnees, IDPs or rural migrants are considerably
more tempted to build informal settlements outside of the Master Plan, as if the information was
available. Additionally, with the absence of the publicly available information on planned urban
expansion, the oversight in form of public scrutiny is missing when planning and implementing urban
expansion projects.
The decisions on changes in urban land use plans do not involve public in Afghanistan either.
Construction projects are developed based on the legal documents giving permission to the particular
organ for changing urban land use. The lack of public involvement in the decisions about land use
change often renders the implementation of the project impossible, due to the lack of ownership
among original landowners to allow the implementation.




417Calogero,   “Planning Kabul,” 79.
418   Calogero, “Planning Kabul,” 80.


                                                   165
The uncertain status of the Land Management Law of 2008 mentioned above, coupled with disputes
over the implementation of the Third Master Plan, and relatively weak authority of the government has
rendered the legal framework for changes in urban land use convoluted, under-developed and
disregarded by enforcement authorities. While exact figures of land use change and requests are not
possible to obtain419, requests for change in land use do not have a process to be followed, nor has the
proper land use changes mechanism or database been developed. Disputes between the Ministry of
Urban Development and local municipalities make it difficult to distinguish the appropriate authority
for such requests. Urban land use changes are most commonly visible through informal processes, with
formal requests hardly being the case in Afghanistan. Requests for changes in urban land use rarely
come from the public, and are typically put forth only by power-brokers who are able to manipulate or
better navigate the request process. Such changes thus provide little benefit to society in general.
Those lands with restrictions on land use change are in reality converted to different use by illegal
means.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
    •       An inter-agency commission between MUDA and municipalities should be established to clearly
            delineate the responsibilities between these two institutions in relation to the formulation,
            implementation and monitoring of the master plans. In future, this commission can serve as a
            forum for discussion various pressing issues such as status of informal settlements in Afghan
            cities.
    •       Focus of urban land authorities should shift from the “outsourcing” of urban space
            development outside of the city, to finding affordable and effective housing opportunities
            inside of the city. These efforts should be supported by the development of new master plans
            for the biggest Afghan cities.
b) Long term
    •       Efforts need to be put in place to streamline public input into all major initiatives, including
            providing platforms through which the public can get the information about projects, propose
            new projects, make complaints and so on.
Efficiency in the urban land use planning process
Currently, no clear commitment to low-cost housing and services for the poor exists apart from broad
declarations to the right to land. The provisions do not specify low-cost housing offers to the poor, but
instead rely on installment schemes that typically amount to the normal (not low) cost of the land.
Lack of payment can result in evictions. Focus has instead been placed on providing incentives for
families living in informal urban settlements to move outside of urban centers and into semi-urban
areas, rural lands or ‘new towns’ (such as the new Kabul city) or ‘small towns’ near urban centers
(locally known as sharaks).
Although, state land distribution schemes were developed by the government through the Presidential
Decrees 104 and 1091 during President Karzai regime, these are rather an exception from the general
policy of not distributing the state land. Additionally, the implementation of the distribution policies,
mirrored with rampant corruption and conflicts caused by unclear ownership claims of distributed land,
does not serve the interests of poor Afghan population.
In Kabul, the issues with rapid urban expansion persist. Given the reality of Afghanistan’s biggest city
population today (with estimated hovering between 5 and 5.5 million), it is reasonable to note that
there does not exist effective urban spatial expansion in Kabul.Kabul Municipality currently employs a
2011 Master Plan developed by JICA in partnership with the Afghan government related to the New City
Development Area (in Deh Sabz) as well as to the current boundaries of Kabul city. The status of this
plan, however, remains tenuous and is not implemented by the Ministry of Urban Development. Due to
absence of the updated Master Plan, rampant corruption, extensive land grabbing and a great influx of

419Please   see the explanation for the lack of data in the introduction.


                                                           166
refugees, IDPs and rural to urban migrants, building in Kabul throughout the 1990s and, more recently,
the 2000s largely remain outside of the Third Master Plan, and are thus considered ‘informal’ in nature.
Indeed, with the suspension of the Third Master Plan by then-President Karzai at the request of the
MUDA, the city has no clear functioning reference for planning purposes.
Other big cities of Afghanistan such as Herat, Jalalabad and Mazar e Sharif, suffer from an outdated
urban plan as well.Additionally, the carrying capacity of infrastructure has been long overloaded in
Afghan big cities. While proposals for piecemeal infrastructure development have been proposed
internally to the Government and by INGOs, no comprehensive strategy for the provision of new
infrastructure and services has been adopted or considered by the government primarily due to the
unresolved issue of informal settlements.
This being said, most new residential building construction in Kabul (and other big cities) today is
considered informal (constructed outside of the Third Master Plan framework). A range of settlement
types and deeds reveals a complicated landscape with squatters on public land, informal homes on
private land, grabbed land and more.The unregulated urban expansion, where people are building their
houses without an official building permit, is resulting in the decrease of available green spaces and
agricultural land in Afghan cities, myriad of informal land ownership claims and consequently a high
number of land disputes.
Recommendations
a) Short term
    •   A policy on low cost housing for the poor should be adopted. The policy should be developed in
        a consultative manner, with input from all stakeholders including civil society representatives,
        the government and the public in question itself. Additionally, anti-eviction laws should be
        designed (based on Forced Eviction Guidelines already existing within the National IDP Policy)
        with constitutional protections in mind and, in the case of eviction, a legal commitment to fair
        compensation should be established.
    •   Proposed new LML stipulating a creation of a Distribution Delegation (with representatives from
        ARAZI, AGCHO and MAIL) intending to provide housing opportunities for the poor should be
        promptly approved.
    •   The Presidential Decree 104 has to be amended (or annulled and new law should be adopted)
        that tackles the shortcomings of the Presidential Decree 104 such as the allocation of non-
        viable land and cumbersome eligibility criteria. National IDP Policy (including Forced Eviction
        Guidelines) has to be adequately implemented.
    •   The initiatives like Maslakh, where IDPs are given the land titles, should be supported and if
        possible reproduced.
    •   Electoral promises of NUG and current statements in particular by the Minister of MUDA stating
        that the focus of his term in the office will be to provide adequate low- cost housing for
        people, have to materialize such as, for instance, in form of a broader national housing
        programme that provides lower income populations with access to water wells, land and
        affordable financing strategies.
    •   Consideration should be given to the most appropriate planning and whether such a process is
        the best possible planning option for Afghanistan’s cities. In the case of Kabul, for instance, a
        more flexible planning and formalization of informal settlements mechanisms may be more
        suitable. A feasibility study to this end should be conducted.
    •   New Master Plans have to be developed for biggest cities in Afghanistan as per MUDAs
        commitments within “Big Cities Master Plan” initiative with the support of international
        community.




                                                  167
    •   With the development of new master plans for the biggest cities, the infrastructural needs of
        the population and the current state of the cities (considerably changed in comparison to
        1990s) needs to be taken into account and adequate mechanism to provide necessary
        infrastructure have to be developed.
    •   The policy on Upgrading of Informal Settlements has to be approved and implemented.
    •   General Directorate of Informal Settlements within each municipality should be established to
        mainstream the issues of the upgrade of informal settlements.
    •   The implementers of various upgrading projects (including NGO community) should create an
        adequate coordination mechanism to share the information and lessons learned. Municipality
        with technical support of international community should develop a database including all
        information about upgrading in each area, which will be publicly available on municipalities’
        website.
b) Long term
    •   The corruption in state land distribution efforts has to be curbed by increased efforts to
        implement the Anti-Corruption Strategy established by the President Karzai in 2008 and
        increased results-based support of the international donor community. Additionally, the past
        and yet unaddressed cases of corruption should be the priority of the Attorney’s General
        Office.
    •   Community savings and loan system should be introduced to mobilize the community and make
        the upgrading sustainable.
Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land uses
The current legal framework for building permits remains convoluted and no national-level policy has
been identified for residential building permits that are technically justified, affordable and complied
with. Compliance to land-related regulations have thus far remained tenuous at best, primarily due to
a lack of incentive, high government bureaucracy and corruption (thus resulting in relatively high
financial and temporal investment by local populations), and a lack of awareness of the procedures and
requirements related to building. The convoluted legal framework related to building permits – legal
text often littered with holes and opportunities for bribery (including texts like the LML which outlines
general requirements and goals but lacks specific procedures for implementation) – renders it rare that
building permits are obtained in strict compliance to the regulations in place.
Building permits are generally granted in three months in corruption-free environments, but the on-
the-ground realities in Afghanistan render the process filtered with corruption and typically extend the
required time.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
    •   A review of the effectiveness of the process for obtaining a building permit should be
        conducted.
    •   A mechanism for monitoring the existence of building permits should be established and non-
        compliance should be sanctionable by law. This however should be implemented only after the
        status of informal settlements is resolved.
b) Long-term
    •   The long-standing issue of corruption pervasive in administrative procedures in Afghanistan
        must be addressed in order to ensure that building permits are reviewed and fairly judged
        within a reasonable period of three months.




                                                  168
Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
As mentioned above, residential dwellings in Afghan cities are mostly informal while owners do not
have any legal documentation proving their ownership. Since the policy on Upgrading Informal
Settlements has not yet been approved by the Cabinet, the formalization of informal residential
dwelling is at best difficult, if not impossible. While strategies and, to an extent, regulations exist to
reduce incentives for new informal occupations (including leaving those in informal settlements in a
state of tenure insecurity and threatening informal settlers with forced eviction), the high demand for
urban housing and lack of understanding of regulations among the public counteracted some efforts
towards regularization. The imbalance between formal and informal residential dwellings in Afghan
cities has led to most informal homes lacking basic infrastructure.
Finally, apart from limited references in the LML, no regulations for the specific classification or
record-keeping, development or management of condominiums were identified. Legal regulations fall
short of detailed management guidelines, and are limited to the recognition of common property under
condominiums.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
    •   The Land Policy Draft of 2007 aiming to offset the ‘ongoing failure of the fo rmal land
        allocation, adjudication and registration systems’ that have ‘caused uncontrolled informal
        developments in urban and rural areas’ (see Draft Land Policy, 2.1.1) should be operationalized
        by the enactment of new laws grasping the realities in Afghanistan.
    •   The Policy on Upgrading Informal Settlements has to be approved and implemented.
    •   With the development of new master plans for the biggest cities, the infrastructural needs of
        the population and the current state of the cities (considerably changed in comparison to
        1990s) needs to be taken into account and adequate mechanism to provide necessary
        infrastructure have to be developed.
    •   A specific policy on common property under condominiums should be developed and enforced
        through a consultative process. Such a policy should encourage citizens to partake in the
        maintenance of common property through positive measures (i.e. incentives) instead of
        penalties.
b) Long term
    •   Community saving and loan system should be considered as an effective way to mobilize the
        community and make the upgrading activities sustainable.
                                       Public Land Management
Identification of Public Land and Clear Management
Although no clear definition of public lands exist in Afghan legal framework, based on the accounts of
various Afghan technical experts consulted for this study, public lands are the lands that have been
allocated for public use and are neither the property of the state nor the property of the individual.
The problem arises with the Art.3(8) of LML 2008, which stipulates that any land that is deemed public
but is not registered in the book of government lands, is considered state land. Additionally the
Presidential Decree 83 further blurs the boundaries between state and public land by putting emphasis
on formal documentary proofs of ownership. The fact, that Afghan legal framework does not define
public land and does not provide provisions on how to register public land and the registration of land
in general occurs rarely in Afghanistan, public land can be easily interchanged for the state land. In
other words, land that is under public use and not registered can easily be claimed by the state as its
property and be reassigned subsequently.




                                                   169
This is particularly problematic when it comes to the ownership rights over virgin and arid lands. As
mentioned already, virgin and arid land can be a pastureland 420, hence it cannot be sold nor leased 421.
However, based on the concurrent articles 46 - 49 of LML 2008, the state, providing certain conditions
are met, can allocate and distribute arid and virgin land to individuals and other legal persons. In the
current body of laws, it is not clear, which arid and virgin land is considered pastureland 422, and often,
visual characteristics are used to distinguish pastureland from arid and virgin land. However, in
extremely wet and similarly dry season for instance, arid and virgin land can look similar to
pastureland 423. In this case the testimonies of witnesses are used to distinguish between these two
types of land. However, the distinguishing factors being the visual characteristics and the testimonies
of witnesses, provides considerable room for corruption and creates a situation where, although public
land cannot be sold nor leased, it can indeed be distributed to individuals and other legal persons.
Another important feature of the definition of public land is the fact that the public lands are allocated
only for public use to serve the common interests and welfare of the residents of a particular area.
Using public lands for purposes that have not been set out by the law is not permitted. For example,
pastures that have been allocated for the grazing of animals and to be used as graveyards must not be
used for a different purpose. However, the current body of laws (LML 2008, Land Acquisition Law (LAL)
of 2000 with its amendments) does not clearly define the terms “public interest”, “public need”,
“public purpose”, “public reasons” or “public welfare”. The law uses these te rms interchangeably,
which creates space for numerous interpretations. Unclear definitions of public lands and the
restrictions on their ownership and consequently on their transferability and use results in various
illegal sales, leases and transfers of public land to private, at times, illegal use.
Even though the level of government responsible for the public land seems to be appropriate, public
land management faces a number of problems in the country. In general, land management is a low
priority for the government. A major issue across all ministries and ARAZI is lack of skilled human and
financial resources required to manage public land. 424 Furthermore, widespread corruption in the
government hampers transparency and accountability in land management in general. 425 To mention
one example, powerful individuals, often state actors themselves, acquire public land for lucrative
housing projects through “land grabbing.” 426
In terms of recording and mapping of public land, between the years 1966 and 1977 a national
cadastral survey was conducted which included 30% of all the land in Afghanistan. Since then 4 more
per cent of land was surveyed, while remaining 66% of Afghanistan’s lands have not been surveyed so
far at all. Additionally, the classification of different types of public lands in LML is not clear, making
the identification on the ground impossible. Furthermore, the determination of the limits and the
understanding of pastureland based on the audibility of the human voice are not compatible with
present-day conditions.
The information on public land in Afghanistan is not made public. Firstly, an unclear definition of
public lands and the fact that the public land cannot be registered as such based on current Afghan
framework renders access to information impossible. Secondly, the Presidential Decree 99, 2002 halted
survey and mapping of Afghan lands previously conducted by the Survey Department of the Afghan
Cadastre. President Karzai allowed the Survey Department to conduct surveys only on his request
and/or after his approval for the surveys done on demand (Article 15 (1)) and the Cadastre could not
make any survey information public (Article 15 (2)). This, however, led to the complaints that the

420Based  on the definition of pastureland in Art. 3(9) LML 2008
421LML  2008, Art. 82(1): „Pastures shall be kept unoccupied for the sake of public requirements of local villagers
(for cattle grazing, graveyard, threshing ground and etc.)“ and Pasture Law 2000, Art. 6: “Buying, selling and
leasing a pasture is prohibited.”
422Hence the very unclear definition of the pastureland in Art 3 (9.2).
423 Arid and virgin land can grow plants in wet season, so as the pastureland can dry out significantly during the dry

season.
424Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015.
425 In this regard, the opinions of low-ranking government officials, particularly ARAZI officials working on forests

and pasturelands and defending the public property, have been taken.
426Wily, “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 20.




                                                        170
survey offices were making records available to elite persons who then used the information to change
the ownership in their favour. This practice did not necessarily stop until today, adding to the extreme
gathering of power over land matters in the hands of the President. 427
While the responsibility over management of different types of public land is more or less
unambiguously assigned (taking into consideration a unclear definition of public lands and its different
types), lack of professional land experts and financial resources in Afghan land administration for the
implementation of day-to-day activities are some of the challenges that make it difficult to put in
practice their strategic and action plans. In ARAZI, for instance, although merging the Department of
Cadastral Survey of the Directorate of Geodesy and Cartography with ARAZI strengthened the latter’s
professional capacity, ARAZI continues to lack a sufficient technical structure that can address
countrywide land affairs. In specific terms, ARAZI’s provincial capacity is limited in terms of human
resources and integrated cadastral maps.428 Other problems facing ARAZI include the lack of modern
technical equipment for cadastral survey, insecurity in some provinces and the lack of provincial
departments of cadastral survey. For these reasons, the establishment of some new departments have
been proposed in ARAZI’s tashkil (organisational structure) for the coming year; in the estimation of
current ARAZI employees these departments are needed to effectively address land affairs in the
country.429
Only state land can be allocated (leased) to private and public interest in Afghanistan: private land can
be acquired by the State (through the acquisition) for public interest. Public lands, cannot be allocated
(sold, leased, transferred or exchanged) to private interests under any circumstances. However, the
ambiguity of the definition in particular of virgin and arid lands gives room for their illegal allocation to
private hands. According to the Article 46-49 of LML 2008, the state can allocate and distribute arid
and virgin land to individuals, while pasturelands can be arid and virgin lands at the same time without
any clear distinction between those two land types in Afghan legal code.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
      •    Newly proposed amended LML addressing the shortcomings of the public land definition,
           classifying 4 types of land including “land specific to village(s)”, containing a clear definition of
           “public interest”, classifying types of public land and delineating responsibilitie s between the
           institutions responsible for different types of public land should be enacted.
      •    Public land management should be prioritized on the government’s agenda.
      •    The plans of ARAZI to restart the cadastral survey of the remaining 66% of lands should be
           implemented promptly and adequately financed. The survey, as planned by ARAZI should start
           in Bamiyan province no later than end of 2015.
      •    A community-based management of public lands should be put in place (potentially thorough
           shuras, jirgas, CDCs), when the definition of public lands is clarified including raising
           awareness of the public about the public land, laws and regulations associated with its use.
      •    Criminalisation of land grabbing and other illegal use of public lands should be put on
           government’s agenda and operationalized.
      •    The capacities of public institutions including on provincial and district level dealing with
           public land such as ARAZI, MAIL and municipalities should be built.
      •    The activities of public land institutions dealing with public land should be adequately
           financed.



427Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 33.
428 Strategy to promote the Afghanistan Independent Land Authority as a modern state institution in the field of
land services, Afghanistan Independent Land Authority, 1392, p. 6.
429Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015.




                                                       171
      •    ARAZI should take over administrative responsibilities of establishing the title deeds of courts
           and become a one-stop-shop for the registration of private land creating a central land
           registry. Later on, this system should be computerized and made publicly available providing
           all information related to land.
Justification and Time-Efficiency of Acquisition Processes
The current Land Expropriation Law 2005 has numerous deficiencies that limit the justification and
time-efficiency of land acquisition processes in Afghanistan. Firstly, the current LEL does not require
the expropriating authorities to estimate the least amount of land needed for their projects. Secondly,
the state organisation is required to announce the implementation of project only 3 months before the
project start.Thirdly, the current law is not transparent as to which departments have powers of
expropriation or the limits of the powers of implementing officials, which encourages corrupt
practices.430Finally, no third party monitoring exists for verifying the compliance of the implementing
organization with the destined usage of the land.
There is no accurate statistical information on lands that have been acquired and whether or not these
acquired lands have been transferred to destined use in a timely manner. Various projects are
underway in various parts of the country and the lands acquired are recorded per project, but there is
no specific institution to gather and keep these records nation-wide. Although, ARAZI is in theory the
responsible institution to monitor the transfers of state land every six months to make sure that the
land is used for the purpose it was acquired, no regular monitoring takes place due to the lack of
financial and human resources and bad security in certain areas of Afghanistan. Furthermore,this
creates conflict of interest since ARAZI is both the transferring and the monitoring authority. 431
In some cases, land acquisition faces resistance from landowners, prolonging the three-month period
and delaying the implementation of public welfare projects. There are number of reasons for the
resistance to occur. Firstly, the LEL 2005, does not make any provisions for public consultation in
regards to the public welfare projects. This undermines the principle of transparency and
accountability as the local communities, who are most affected by the project, have no say in the
process. Secondly, “the owners cannot appeal against the expropriation, to receive payments in front
of a judge, to buy the property back if the land was not used in the manner intended and to choose
whether to be paid in cash or in kind.” 432 If the owners are not willing to give up their land, the
acquisition process starts and based on the transparency of the acquisition process, satisfaction with
the compensation and resettlement measures, the actions of the private owners is determined.
Thirdly, when the owners are not satisfied with the compensation, the acquisition process can be
lengthy and complicated and can create many conflicts with evicted owners. In such cases, people try
to obstruct the implementation of development projects and at time the residents even refuse to
vacate their houses to put pressure on the government to reach an agreement on a better
compensation price.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
      •    The proposed Land Acquisition Law (LAL), currently under review by the MoJ, including lists of
           19 different categories of public projects that can be implemented through the acquisition
           process, requirement that the organisation estimates the least amount of land required for the
           implementation of the project, announcement period of minimum of 9 months before the start
           of the project to all people affected by the acquisition directly or indirectly, provision of third-
           party monitoring, which can assess whether the leased and transferred land is used for their
           destined purposes and suggestion of public consultations before acquisition process should be
           promptly ratified.



430Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 49.
431Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015.
432Wily, “Land, People, and the State,” 49.




                                                      172
       •   An IT-based database system where all acquired land together with the cadastral maps and
           other related land documents will be recorded should be developed, kept with ARAZI and
           shared with other land institutions.
Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedures
Although the for land, residential buildings and fruit-bearing trees and other samplings is legally
prescribed in Afghanistan, in the majority of cases, the paid compensation is not sufficient for the
individual whose land has been acquired to be able to maintain his/her previous status of life.433 The
cases when the acquired land has been located in a central part of the city, but the exchanged land is
situated on the outskirts can serve as an example of this. Another problem in the applicable law is that
there is no deadline for the payment of compensations. Compensations may be made three or four
years after the acquisition. When the land prices go up in this time period, the landowner might find
himself not being able to afford the same standard of living as before. In light of the Art. 40 of the
Afghan Constitution, which states that the private land can be expropriated only in exchange for a
prior and just compensation, it can be argued that most of the acquisition processes in Afghanistan are
unconstitutional.
Furthermore, if grazing land is (by mistake or illegally) used for a construction of a public project (i.e.,
an airport), people who have formerly used the land as grazing land cannot use it any more, however
no provisions in the current legislation stipulate the provision of compensation for the loss of grazing
rights. Similarly, LEL does not have any provisions for providing fair resettlement options for people
whose land has been appropriated.
Finally, the acquisition process is lengthy in itself. It can take up to 120 weeks until the completion of
acquisition process. Since the actual payment of the compensation requires the landowner(s) to have
their land titles verified by court 434, it takes a few weeks to even call up all land valuation committee
members and convene a meeting. Since the price is rarely set up during one meeting and no clear
method is prescribed for how the committee sets the prices 435, the actual payment can turn out to be
inadequate and can come very late.
In terms of rights to compensation in case of land use change outside of acquisition process, none of
the land related laws include any provisions that would stipulate the rights for compensation. For
example, issues such as conversion of rural land to urban land and how this would affect secondary
rights such as access to grazing are not considered in the laws. Little is known about how land use
change influences the livelihood of citizens.
What is of particular importance is also the fact, that there is no particular authority where individuals
can lodge their complaints against acquisition and the compensation that has been paid to them.
Although those affected can ultimately approach the court system, resorting to courts should be the
last instance to launch a lawsuit as opposed to only present a common complaint. Furthermore,
rampant corruption and lengthy processes in the judiciary leaves lawsuits filed by such individuals
unaddressed for long time. At the same time, individuals whose lands have been acquired cannot easily
defend their rights against powerful figures and/or state institutions.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
       •   The amended LAL containing clear provision on fair and just compensation process including
           compensation paid prior to the project start, compensation of grazing and other rights,
           identification of the suitable exchanges for acquired land and provisions on resettlement of
           individuals who face losses as a result of acquisition of their lands should be promptly enacted.




433Interview   with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 11 2015.
434Peikar,   Olsen, Upadhyay, “Proposed Law on Land Acquisition.”
435
      Please see the detailed issues with the setting up the prices of land in the section 9.7.


                                                           173
       •   Proposed LAL stipulating the creation of a complaints hearing committee comprised of land
           experts, an expert engineer, a representative from the appropriating organization, a
           representative of the pricing committee and the person/or his/her representative whose
           land/property has been appropriated should be adopted and public awareness campaigns
           informing complaint hearing policies and regulations should be conducted.
       •   Establishment of a comprehensive dataset that keeps records of complaints regarding land
           acquisition and the outcome of those cases.
       •   Research and collecting information on unrecorded secondary rights, such as grazing, rights of
           passage and collecting forest products to determine how land acquisition can influence these
           rights should be conducted. Policies addressing issues related to unrecorded rights should be
           devised taking into account the recommendations of the study.
                                    Transfer of large tracks of land to investors
Transfer of state land to private use
There are various challenges when transferring state land in Afghanistan. The ambiguity of the Afghan
legal framework as to the sales of state land create situation where state land sales are happening in
unregulated manner with various state agencies such as AISA or powerful figures and warlords selling
previously acquired state land436 despite the presidential decree forbidding it.
Nevertheless, the leases of the state land are a major venue for providing large tracks of land to
investors. These are not always happening in an open and transparent manner through public auctions.
The valuation of state land intended for lease also encounters various problems. Although provisions
stated in Afghan legal framework set clear procedures for the land valuation, delays in assessing the
land and setting a price is an issue as the members of the valuation delegation often take time to
present themselves for the land valuation committee meetings. Sometimes it takes longer than one
year to get the lease contract signed off by both parties. Additionally, due to the high level of
corruption in Afghanistan, powerful strongmen and public officials at times put pressure on the
valuation committee to decrease the value of the land compromising the setting of the price of the
land based on market value. Finally, the results of the valuation are not publicly accessible creating
transparency issues within the process.
Finally, the implementation of relevant policies to enable public capture of benefits arising from
changes in permitted land use has largely been ignored; thereby resulting in some members of society
unduly benefitting from these. The benefits are not captured in real time mainly because the land
value assessment is not done systematically and regularly.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
       •   The possibility for state land sales should be clarified through the Cabinet Regulation clarifying
           current legal provisions on this matter. Clear categorization should be developed based on
           which the restrictions on transferability will be applied.
       •   The status of AISA and its activities should be clarified by clear rules of engagement interlinked
           with ARAZI Investment Policy.
       •   Increased financial resources, coupled with on the job long-term trainings should be provided
           to High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption to be able to better perform its duties such as
           verifying the usage of public auction for every land lease procedure.
       •   Devising mechanism for assessing performance of members of the valuation commission, with
           poor performance being addressed immediately.
       •   Addressing corruption in land valuation process.

436
      In the case of warlords the state land is often acquired illegally.


                                                            174
    •      The results of land valuation for land lease purposes and the information about the land leases
           for various projects particularly where it concerns the public should be made publicly
           available.
    •      Establishing clear monitoring system of application of lease contracts and benefit-sharing
           mechanisms, with participation of local communities.
Private investment strategies
Public consultations with the local communities regarding the lease of land and private investment
does not have any strong legal backing and does not take place. Hence, secondary right holders can
potentially be left out of the process.
Additionally, ARAZI has built-in some safeguards to prevent negative effects from large scale
investments into the requirements for bidders. However, due to the minimal monitoring that takes
place, the compliance with the safeguards is not possible to verify.
Based on the Art. 61 LML 2008 and Art. 31 of ARAZI Land Lease Procedure, the lease contractor is
obliged to consider and apply environmental protection principles. Also, it is one of the monitoring
obligations of ARAZI to assess environmental impacts and make sure that the project is not a threat to
the environment.437 However, although the environmental considerations are taken into account when
selecting the investment, rules for compensation of environmental damages have been changed to
apply only to owners of land, not the lease, compromising the leverage of ARAZI towards the leesee
actually using the land.
Although ARAZI is a main organization responsible for the lease of state land, various other state
organizations continue leasing state land on ad hoc basis without following proper procedures.
Furthermore, no regular monitoring by ARAZI takes place due to the lack of financial and human
resources and limited security in certain areas of Afghanistan. This means that there is little
information about whether the land is used for the purpose that it was leased for and if the terms of
the agreement are followed. The remedial action is almost never taken.
Finally, afghan legal framework does not provide for the resettlement and rehabilitation of people
affected by state land leases, despite the fact that many large-scale development projects, for
example in the mining sector, can lead to mass displacement of local communities.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
    •      Identifying practical mechanisms on how to involve local communities in the process of leasing
           state land for investment projects.
    •      Study to devise environmental and social impact assessment tools to identify best practices
           applicable in Afghanistan should be conducted. Based on the results, the mechanisms should be
           established and incorporated in ARAZI Land Lease Procedure.
    •      ARAZI should be established as only organization responsible for leasing state land.
    •      An in-house assessment should be conducted by ARAZI to find out what factors have prevented
           the organisation from monitoring land lease contracts so far including the study on alternative
           monitoring possibilities available in places where access is limited due to bad security
           situation.
    •      Based on the outcomes of the assessment, a clear monitoring system of application of lease
           contracts and benefit-sharing mechanisms conducted at least every six months and with
           participation of local communities should be established.
    •      Newly proposed LAL including the provisions for resettlement and rehabilitation should be
           adopted.

437Land   lease procedure page 108 article 13.5.


                                                     175
b) Long term
    •   Based on the assessment, training policies for ARAZI staff for effective monitoring of lease
        contracts should be devised. Additionally, people’s awareness regarding land lease procedures
        will have to be increased.
Policy implementation is effective, consistent and transparent
Although new ARAZI Land Lease Procedures have simplified the process to less time consuming one,
these steps cannot always be completed in the time required. In practice, it takes longer time than
specified due to corruption, limited technical capacities of ARAZI personnel and incomplete, incorrect
or missing information. One explanation for missing or incomplete information can be the fact that not
all the information related to land leases is on ARAZI website, rendering the access to information
difficult.
Finally, there is a gap between the legal framework in relation to benefit sharing of the state land
leases and practice due to many reasons such as the weak local governance at the provincial and
district level and absence of rule of law in many parts of the country. This is mainly because of
corruption, lack of public knowledge regarding the land lease procedure and inaccessibility of the
contracts to the public.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
    •   The newly proposed LML, which includes provisions for lease procedure such as determined
        prices for all types of land based on land size, type, category, grade, proximity to the road,
        market value and the province in which land is located should be adopted.
    •   Guidelines regarding bidding requirements should be easily made accessible to investors
        (preferably online) so they are able to provide complete project proposals at once, decreasing
        the time of the land lease procedure.
    •   Providing on the job training to increase capacity of ARAZI district and provincial officials to
        process applications in faster and more efficient manner and to be able to identify missing
        information before sending it to the higher levels.
    •   All investment contracts including benefit sharing modalities should be made publicly
        available. This should be done through different venues, such as online, public meetings and
        provision of hard copies upon request.
    •   A clear monitoring system of application of lease contracts and benefit-sharing mechanisms
        conducted at least every six months and with participation of local communities should be
        established.
b) Long term
   • Public awareness about the state land lease procedures and investments strategies should be
      increased.
Contracts involving state land are public and accessible
Spacial information and duration of contracts are not publicly available. Spacial information is at times
not available to the contracts at all because not all the leased lands have been surveyed. GPS
Department of ARAZI should take at least the GPS coordinates of each land before the transaction,
however this doesn’t happen in consistent manner.
No third monitoring of land lease contracts currently exists, therefore it is difficult to objectively verify
the compliance with contractual obligations and environmental and socio-economic safeguards.
Furthermore, due to the rare ARAZI monitoring of the compliance with contractual obligations, the
avenues to deal with non-compliance are very limited.
Recommendations:



                                                    176
a) Short term
      •   All investment contracts, including spacial and duration information, should be made publicly
          available. This should be done through different venues, such as online, public meetings and
          provision of hard copies upon request.
      •   A clear monitoring system of application of lease contracts and benefit-sharing mechanisms
          conducted at least every six months with participation of local communities and venues for
          dealing with non-compliance should be clearly established.
      •   Comprehensive policies should be devised to allow for third party monitoring, such as
          community monitoring and monitoring by the civil society.
b) Long term
      •   Public awareness about the state land lease procedures and investments strategies should be
          increased.
                      Public provision of land information: Registry and Cadastre
Mechanisms for recognition of rights
Formal registration seems to be the privilege of wealthy and well connected in Afghanistan, where it is
difficult to formalize land possession by the poor, mainly due to the largely informal nature of land
tenure in the country438 and the lack of opportunities for land possession formalization439.
One of the main and most valid ways to formalize land ownership (although of the new owner) is
through the courts when transacting the land. The registration with court while acquiring the title deed
during land transactions is a complicated process. When registering the property, the existing circular
form has to go through at least five different offices. This lengthy and time-consuming process can be
expedited by informal payments, however people who cannot afford or refuse to engage in corrupt
practices have to follow the proper procedure, which can take over a year to finalize. Additionally,
there are no effective and proper safeguard requirements for recoding rights to prevent the costs and
abuse.
Each step of the circular form verification process itself is often difficult to pass for ordinary Afghan
citizens.
1. The circular form goes first to the court archive (makhzan), where it is verified with the court
   records (konda). When title deed of the seller does not exist in kondas, the process of registration
   cannot continue. Taking into account that the majority of Afghan population does not possess
   formal title deeds, most of the population cannot go through courts to proceed with the land
   transaction. Additionally, based on the numerous accounts of land experts interview for this
   report, in recent praxis, the courts do not accept tax and water payments as a valid ownership
   documents although prescribed by the law due to fears of accepting forged documents.
2. Then, the circular form is taken to ARAZI, where the certification based on their Principal books is
   conducted. However, since the change of the owners of the land (who acquired new title deed
   through the court registration when buying the land) is not communicated in consistent manner to
   ARAZI (either by court or by actual owners voluntarily), ARAZI often cannot certify the ownership
   because often only the previous owner figures on their records. When one or part of a plot of land
   is sold more times using the court registration, ARAZI often does not have the information on
   current owner nor the size of land. However, based on accounts of ARAZI officials, as long as the
   seller has the tax or water payment receipts, the Presidential Decree or valid customary deed


438Although different levels of formaliaation exist between provinces.
439As mentioned in the first part of this section, the mechanism for formalization of customary land possession
does not exist, apart from when the owner is ready to sell the land. In this case, the new owner receives the
formal title deed document. The second way of formalizing land ownership is also not feasible, because the land
clearance Tasfia currently is conducted only in case of large development projects or when powerful people
involved.


                                                     177
      document based on which the ownership is claimed, they can proceed with the verification of the
      circular form.
3. After the circular form is certified by community experts, then it is taken to the Revenue Office of
   MoF (mustofiat) to verify if all taxes were paid. However, since the MoF tax records haven’t been
   updated since 1978 after Doud Khan’s assassination 440, and the communication between the courts
   when issuing title deeds to new land owners (either by sending an official letter or by actual land
   owners voluntarily) happens sporadically, most of the tax payers are not registered in MoF taxation
   books. If the tax payments are not registered, no certification can be accorded.
4. It is important to note as well, that the certification of the Cadastral Department is not necessary
   posing the questions about the land spatial information. In the past, the certification of the
   Cadastre was required (old circular form), however this requirement was abolished. Sometimes,
   however, when the person is not willing to pay a bribe or does not have good social connections or
   also, when the land is next to state land, the judges decide to use old circular form and the person
   needs to get the certification of Cadastre. Similarly the certification of Ministry of Energy and
   Water and was required in the past to verify the existence of water rights. Currently, the
   verification of MoEW is not required.
This is a very time-consuming and costly (mainly due to informal payments) process, not affordable for
considerable part of the Afghan population. Furthermore, while the formal registration of rights has
been compulsory in previous versions of the LML, this is not explicitly the case in the 2008 version or in
current proposed amendments of the law. 441 In the absence of an explicit legal obligation, people
prefer other venues of land registration (customary) or do not register their land at all.
As mentioned above, the majority of Afghan poor has only customary deed documents, or do not
possess any documents at all. The main issues with the formalization of customary deed documents and
ownership based on non-documentary evidence such as long term unchallenged possession was already
explained in the first part of this section. In theory, customary deed documents and long-term
possession, when meeting all the requirements stipulated by law, can facilitate valid ways of
formalizing the ownership. This process however, requires testimonies of at least two witnesses. Due to
the extensive migration of population caused by the decades of war, it does not provide effective way
to secure the ownership. There are many cases when the witnesses have moved from their place of
origin and the claimants for land ownership do not have any means to contact them.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
      •   The required information to be written on the title deed should be increased (such as cadastral
          map (or sketch), GPS coordinates, exact location (village, district, province), type of land) and
          columns for transfers to provide adequate specification of the land and prevent corruption. The
          format should be unified across all provinces and districts.
      •   Different registries in Afghanistan should be mainstreamed and interlinked (more details
          below) in order to prevent overlaps, outdated and missing information. ARAZI should be
          established as “one-stop-shop” for registering the land (both within or outside of the Master
          Plan): The land clearance process Tasfia should be done on large scale and should always
          include the members of the Cadastral Department to conduct the survey. Then the land is
          recorded to ARAZI Principal Books and formal title deed is given to the owner. Technical and
          financial support to ARAZI’s pilot project in Herat that, if successful, will be extended to all 34
          provinces, should be accorded. This process should be later computerized to allow for the inter
          linkages with other registries such as in courts and MoF tax books.

440During the Doud Khan’s regime (1973 – 1978) the so called Izharnamas –Land Declarations – were collected for
taxations and tenure security purposes. People had to declare (although often providing smaller size of the land to
prevent paying high taxes) how much land they own and based on that MoF tax books were developed. This process
stopped after Doud Khan’s death.
441Wily, “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 15.




                                                       178
       •   An Independent monitoring body should be created that will monitor the process of land
           formalization in order to maintain the process effective and transparent.
       •   In-house procedures and anti-corruption policies of ARAZI should be reviewed to prevent
           lengthy and costly process of land registration.
       •   Until ARAZI is established as one-stop-shop for the registration of land, as an interim measure
           the circular form should include column for cadastral verification.
       •   The registration of land should be made obligatory in newly amended LML.


Completeness of Land Registry
Although the total cost of recording of the property is low, the necessity of informal payments
increases the costs considerably.
Furthermore, the information held in registries are for most part not linked to updated maps. The only
office in Afghanistan which records the location with spatial information and maps is the Cadastral
Department. As mentioned already in this reports, only 34% of the land in Afghanistan has been
registered with its spatial specifications. Cadastral surveying information, however, have not been
updated since 1978. Taking into account that much of the land recorded and mapped have changed
drastically in recent years, such as currently 75% of the arable land is changed 442 to residential areas,
the records available in Cadastre cannot be considered reliable nor complete. Additionally, when
registering the land with courts, the courts are using two types of circular forms. One is the latest
version approved by Supreme Court and one is the old circular form. The decision is with the court to
which one they choose. The new circular does not include cadastral certification, whereas the old one
has the cadastral certification column. The fact that the new circular form does not contain the exact
spatial information about the land, provides room for corruption for potential land grabbers and illegal
usurpants. The old form is more often used, when the land transaction is happening adjacent to a state
land, where the courts are paying more attention to prevent the corruption.
Private encumbrances, such as conflicts over land and mortgage are recorded during surveying process
in cadastral ownership lists. The surveyors mark the forms as “not finalised”. However, since only 34%
of the lands is surveyed and recorded and yet not updated, the information cannot be considered
reliable. Also ARAZI and municipalities records all the information about land or houses including
encumbrances such as existence of the mortgage over the land. In case someone wants to buy a
property than they verify with ARAZI and municipality. The buyer can also verify with MoF if the
property is free of any charges or taxes. However, the obligation to verify the existence of any
encumbrances in not legally binding for the offices certifying the circular form during the process of
land registration. Therefore unless the individual proactively seeks this information, the possibilities of
buying the land with encumbrance is very high. Finally, public restrictions and charges are not
recorded in Afghan land registries.
For accessing records on land ownership people have to go to different public institutions for each type
of information or a copy of a document. The information is accessible to individuals, albeit often only
after informal payment is made; however the accessibility to information for third persons (e.g.
information about somebody else’s private land or state land) is rarely granted (unless it is a powerful
person acquiring the information).
The process, particularly in courts (2-3 months), is time-consuming and cumbersome due to the high
informal payments that have to be made to keep the process going. Additionally, the records are only
available for manual search, prolonging the access to information even more. To facilitate an easy
access to land records, the USAID LTERA project initiated computerisation of some of the archives in
courts. However, the land tenure records in Cadastral Survey Department and ARAZI are yet to be
computerized.


442   Interview with ARAZI official, Kabul, 1 September 2015.


                                                         179
Recommendations:
a) Short term
   •   Increased financial resources, coupled with on the job long-term trainings should be provided
       to High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption to be able to better perform its duties, in
       particular to provide external audit of courts’ land registration proc edure.
   •   ARAZI’s plans, based on their Operational Strategy, to establish national comprehensive
       cadastral registration programs should be technically and financially supported.
   •   Cadastral records have to be connected to both ARAZI Principal Books and courts title deed
       registration in consistent manner. Furthermore, uniform and standard format of circular form
       including the verification of the Cadastre should be developed stating all the personal
       information of the buyer and seller, photos, signatures (or fingerprints), physical specification
       of land etc.
   •   As an interim measure, all cadastral maps should be scanned, to expedite the manual search
       happening at present in the Cadastral Department, however with aim to be later included in
       the computerized system.
   •   When certifying the circular form by ARAZI, the absence of encumbrances should be verified at
       the same time.
   •   Newly amended LML included provisions to record the violations and charges should be
       adopted.
   •   As an interim measure, while awaiting fully computerized system, the process of acquiring the
       information from courts should be mainstreamed, clear step by step process should be
       developed and monitoring mechanism should be established to enforce the compliance with
       the process and curb corruption.
b) Long term
   •   Creation of centralized computerized system at ARAZI as one-stop-shop for land registration
       and information to mainstream the access to land information. People will be able to access
       the information through the website (without possibility of changing the information).
   •   Completing the computerization process that started in courts and proceeding to Cadastre and
       ARAZI.
Reliability of registry information
Afghanistan does not have one single registry and the information is scattered across various registries
with different ministries and agencies. Although there are at least 6 different registries collecting
various information, in reality only two of them serve as a uncontested prove of ownership – ARAZI
Principal Books and courts’ Title Deed Registry (Konda). Most of the registry books are not interlinked
in any way, causing overlaps and outdated or missing recordings:
1. Even though the ARAZI Principal Books are in a way connected with the court Land Title
   Registration Book (Konda) through the circular form (the process of acquiring of a title deed can
   only be finalized, when circular form is certified by ARAZI e.g. when ARAZI has the record of
   particular land in their Principal Books), courts do not inform ARAZI (nor Cadastre) about new
   owners of the land when new title deed is accorded consistently. Nor the actual new owners
   voluntarily go and inform ARAZI of a landowner change. ARAZI certification is therefore mere
   verification if the land is private (not state land) due to often missing information about new owner
   and size of owned land, which can also be sold only partially. Hence, it can happen that ARAZI
   cannot certify the circular form at all.
2. The Land Statistics Registration Book (cadastral registration) is only connected to ARAZI (based on
   current Cadastral Law, it is a responsibility of the Cadastral Department to send a copy of the
   survey report to ARAZI, when survey is done) not any other registries.



                                                  180
3. The MoF land taxation books are interlinked with other land registries only sporadically, are often
   outdated and don’t have an effective mechanism in place to update the records. Provincial district
   finance offices (mustofiat) of MoF collect land tax based on their taxation books, which contain
   information about eligible tax payers based on land declaration forms (Izharnamas) dating back to
   Doud Khan regime (1973 – 1978), sporadic exchange of official letters between courts and MoF
   informing about new landowners and even more rare voluntary reporting by new owners. Due to
   due to these reasons, the tax records are often not accurate. Additionally, a considerable number
   of Afghans do not go through official land registration channels, completely circumscribing the
   updating mechanism of courts and ARAZI. No effective enforcement mechanism exists to search
   for not registered tax eligible persons, people have themselves responsibility to go to Mustofiat
   offices and pay taxes. Therefore, when the land is transacted outside of the close family 443, nor
   record is written in MoF taxation books, nor the new owner registers with Mustofiat office, the MoF
   cannot trace the eligible tax payers, hence the land taxes are not paid in full.
4. When land clearance process (Tasfia) is conducted by ARAZI, the members of MoF and Cadastre are
   present, therefore certain sharing of information exist in that case, although the actual process of
   information sharing is unclear.
5. Nor are Municpal Safayi taxation books interlinked with MoF taxation books mainly because
   municipalities are allowed to spend their own revenues, standing outside of the whole tax
   collection process of MoF.
Furthermore, the reliability of registries is mainly compromised by the out-dated information it
contains. The cadastral survey records and maps have not been updated since 1978, as well as the MoF
tax records and ARAZI Principal Books lack an adequate mechanism for updating the data. Taking into
account that approximately 66% of the land is not surveyed yet at all and the customary land tenure is
often not formally registered, only further aggravates the situation. Finally, the fact that some
documents were destroyed during years of wars and forgery of documents are a recurrent issue,
renders updating of registries difficult compromising the reliability of registry information.
It is important to note, that even though the changes in land records, sometimes occur in the
provinces, they are not necessarily forwarded to the centre. Hence no centralized database of land
records exist in Afghanistan.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
      •   Before the creation of ARAZI as one-stop-shop is fully operationalized, as an interim measure,
          various registration books should be compared and the proper linkages should be developed
          including with the central level. This will also help to establish full database of land
          information, when ARAZI takes over as one-stop-shop.
      •   A formal mechanism has to be developed for courts to inform ARAZI and MoF about the new
          titled deeds they have accorded to new owners of the land.
      •   A formal mechanism has to be developed to connect MoF taxation books to ARAZI Principal
          Books.
      •   ARAZI’s plans, based on their Operational Strategy, to establish national comprehensive
          cadastral registration programs should be technically and financially supported.
Cost-effectiveness and sustainability of Land Administration Services
The fees collected by the land administration authorities are very limited (excluding the informal
payments). The only organ that can acquire registry fees are courts. These cannot be kept in court
accounts; however, the fees collected have to be sent to MoF central treasury account where they are
redistributed back to various state institutions (including courts). Although, the courts are able to gain

443
  When the land stays in the family, the tax payments can be traced back based on the father’s or grandfather’s
name. When the transaction happens outside of the family, this is not possible.


                                                     181
registry fees (4% of the total value of the property being registered), it is not enough to cover all their
expenses.
The service fee collected by the Cadastre are not part of the land registration fees but are rather
payments for different services such as provision of information, copies of the documents etc. These,
however, does not match the operation costs of Cadastral Department 444.
Finally, despite numerous efforts by the international community (IGOs, INGOs, NGOs, etc.) to support
this sector, the capital investment in land administration is not sufficient. Based on the Afghanistan
Statistical Yearbook prepared by Central Statistics Organization (CSO), total budget for ARAZI, for
instance, was 194 millions Afs, of which 15,5 milions Afs was on development budget and 178,5 on
operating budget. ARAZI’s operating budget constitutes only 0.06% of overall Afghan operating
budget445 and 0.01% of overall development budget.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
       •   ARAZI should devise a comprehensive financial strategy, which aims at securing stable, short-
           term financial solutions. It has already done so, however, this plans mainly aimed at securing
           funding from donors. The strategies such as introduction of service fees (similar to Cadastral
           service fees) and negotiating with the MoF to keep a portion of the revenues could be the
           option.
       •   An increase in a portion of National Budget accorded to land administration, in particular ARAZI,
           should be negotiated and further financial support should be ensured from the international
           community.
Fees are determined transparently
Cadastral Survey Department was the first state organization in the country to introduce cadastral
service charges. Cadastral services fees are set and clear; however, they are not publicly accessible.
The Bill of Cadastral Survey Services Fees is only available at Cadastral Survey Offices. In courts there
is no list of fees available to public.
The receipts are issued for all the transactions because the individuals have to go to the bank to
process the payments of court registration fee and MoF transaction tax. The receipt is issued in the
bank, which then serves as a proof of the payments, based on which the process of registration can
continue. When it comes to the receipts for service fees, the issuance is not that consistent.
Informal payments are widespread within government institutions. There are some measures and
policies in place for monitoring civil servants and dealing with corrupt issues. For instance, MEC (Joint
Commission for Monitoring and Evaluation) and High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption are the
most prominent organisations dealing with the issues of corruption. Nonetheless, due to limited
capacities of these institutions, HOO and MEC are not able to reduce rampant corruption in the
country. Additionally, the Operational Strategy of ARAZI, as the main organ responsible for land in
Afghanistan, does not address the issue of corruption and it contains no measures to ensure
transparency and accountability. 446 While ARAZI claims “Client Orientation” to be one of its main
organisational values, there are no procedures in place to get feedback from the clients based on
which the organisation can assess service delivery.
In terms of the existence and public availability of service standards, ARAZI is the only organ among
public institutions dealing with land issues that has certain service standards written in its Strategic
Plan and published them on their website. Other land administration organizations do not possess any
service standards.
Recommendations:

444   Based on discussion with ARAZI officials, 25 August 2015.
445   For comparison purposes, National Olympic Department received 0.06% of operational budget.
446   ARAZI, Operational Strategy to Become a Modern Public Land Services Institution.


                                                        182
a) Short term
   •   The Bill of Cadastral Service Fees should be made public and available online.
   •   All the other land related organs charging fees for their services (or forms) such as courts
       should have such a list of fees that is publicly available. ARAZI can provide their website, in
       case other institutions do not have the technical capacities.
   •   Increased financial resources, coupled with on the job long-term trainings should be provided
       to High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption to be able to better perform its duties, in
       particular to provide external audit of courts’ land registration procedure.
   •   The Operation Strategy for ARAZI should be amended to contain anti-corruption provisions.
   •   Establishing a system to receive customers’ feedback on land services within public land
       institutions.
   •   Setting service standards for all institutions dealing with land governance and making them
       public to ensure transparency and accountability of services provided.
                                     Land Valuation and Taxation
Transparency of valuations
There are four instances, when the valuation of land through the commission (of different members
and sizes) is conducted: a) land acquisition, b) transfer of state land to other governmental entity, c)
lease of state land to investors and d) land and property transaction tax. However, the actual valuation
processes are mirrored with various shortcomings. The valuation commission for acquisition and
transfer of state land, for instance, takes longer than one month to set the price, as it is not easy to
get all the members to attend the meetings. The process is only on time, if there is a pressure from
the leadership or those who have some economic interest. Sometimes members of the commission do
not cooperate and refuse to share information with each other. For example, the courts often refuse to
cooperate and send an assessment of the price. Additionally, when the real estate dealers provide
information about the land prices (also in the case of lease of the state land and property
transactions), they not always provide accurate assessment of the price. Corruption in all cases can
lead to valuation, which is not necessarily based on market values and strongmen and powerful
individuals whose economic interests are at stake can put pressure on the commissions to set the price
that benefits them. For the above-mentioned reasons, the land/property valuation does not necessarily
reflect the market value of the property/land.
The additional problem with the valuation for acquisition purposes is the fact that the process of
acquisition is announced and the budgets for the acquisition are approved one year in advance. The
moment the community is informed about the acquisition process, the people take various pre-emptive
measures (such as selling the land, lands are being grabbed etc.) for higher prices. Consequently, the
budgets are not enough to pay for the compensation.
The valuation when transacting land or propertyis conducted is sporadic, at times corrupted manner,
often leading to the discrepancies between prices written on the title deed and actual value of the
land. Many cases are brought to the Supreme Court when the actual price of the land is not written in
the legal title deed with aim to decrease the amount of taxes to be paid.
The calculation for land taxation is done based on the records of the land (Izharnamas) and sporadic
information from courts and ARAZI. This is mainly applicable to the registered land. Since the
procedure for tax calculation is fixed (based on size and grade of the land and does not involve the
valuation commission, nor the market value evaluation), there is no proper updating of the tax values
based on market prices.




                                                  183
Process of valuation of Safayi tax seems to be working well, when the implementing agencies are still
present in the area. When the implementing agencies finish the surveying, the majority 447 of the
municipalities don’t have the capacities to update the GIS maps th emselves. They use printed maps,
while putting red dots on the properties that already have paid the taxes 448. Often this information is
not brought to the center for the update in the central GIS system.
Finally, there are no legal provisions that would require making the valuation rolls public. State
organizations can provide information regarding the value of land or property upon request as long as
an individual have a legal basis for such a request such as a land dispute case that he/she is involved
in. Based on the accounts of various government officials involved in this project, given the prevalence
of corruption in the country and the fact that powerful individuals can easily use information to
promote their economic interests, lack of public availability of valuation rolls is rather a protective
measure. This assumption, however, can be challenged (similarly to the same argument related to the
information about cadastral survey) by the fact that although the information on valuation rolls is not
made public, the prevalence of corruption is still high.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
    •   There are four instances, when the valuation of land through the commission (of different
        members and sizes) is conducted. Mainstreaming of land valuation for different purposes
        through the Cabinet Resolution bringing all valuation practices under one regulation should be
        performed and the land valuation process should happen regularly, with each transaction.
    •   Increased financial resources, coupled with on the job long-term trainings should be provided
        to High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption to be able to better perform its duties, in
        particular to provide external audit of land valuation procedures.
    •   A clear mechanism should be developed for the activities of the various valuation commissions
        to expedite the valuation process. Additionally, performance-based evaluations should be
        introduced for the members and corresponding monitoring mechanism should be established to
        verify the compliance.
    •   Land valuation for acquisition should be done before the acquisition process is announced to
        prevent rapid increase of the land price and possible land grabbing by powerful individuals.
    •   Safayi collection of taxes should be made more sustainable by providing the adequate
        resources and capacity building for district and provincial municipal officers.
    •   Valuation rolls should be compiled in one national database and made public only after the
        adequate actions against land grabbing are implemented to prevent empowering the land
        usurpers from benefiting from this action.
b) Long term
    •   The procedure for land valuation for taxation purposes should include the assessment of the
        market value of the land.
Collection efficiency
The prevalence of corruption among the civil services can prevent transparent implementation of
policies of tax exemption. For example, land, which cannot meet the criteria to be exempted from
tax, can be recorded as exempted from tax, if the landowner makes a deal with the civil servants or
simply writes lower amount of land on the title deed. A farmer exempted from the tax due to the
natural disaster, can extend the exemption period by paying off state officials. Furthermore, farmers
who genuinely qualify for tax exemption might be asked for bribes so that their land is exempted from


447UN-Habitat is working in five big cities of Afghanistan (Kandahar, Mazar-i-Sharif, Herat, Jalalabat, Lashkar Gah).
Based on the interview with UN-HABITAT employee, only in Kandahar, the Municipality is using the GIS maps.
448Interview with the UN-Habitat employee, Kabul, 6 August 2015.




                                                        184
tax. Corrupt practices can continue and increase in rate, particularly in the absence of public’s
awareness of the tax exemption policies.449
As mentioned above, MoF tax rolls are often outdated and not all property/land holders are on the tax
rolls because they are either selling land outside of formal process (not through the courts), which
means that the MoF has only Izharnamasfrom 1978 as the last reference point or due to the limited
information sharing between the courts (who register new owners) and MoF or ARAZI district offices. In
some areas ARAZI or MoF offices are not present at all due to bad security situation.Since not all
property holders are registered and no enforcement mechanism exists to make new land owners to pay
taxes, not all the taxes are collected. Furthermore, tax evasion in land transaction (land and property
transaction tax) happens frequently, which is a major cause of revenue loss.450
In terms of the Safayi tax, there is a relatively low tax collection (although higher percentage than
land tax collection) because citizens do not see the benefit of how their tax is being spent.
Additionally, poor surveying or deliberate mis-surveyings have been reported to reduce tax
calculation.451Finally, because there is still certain portions of the properties in certain districts not
surveyed and because the Safayi system itself went through some changes in 2009 in the ways of the
tax calculation, some nahias (districts) within cities are using the old manual system, and some the
new system. Taking into account that the old method of tax calculation was based on the prize noted
on the land title document, while the new system calculates the tax amount based on the physical
characteristics of the land, there can be different tax rates for similar properties. This can be
confusing for citizens, and makes tax collection and enforcement difficult for municipal staff.
In addition to relatively low tax collection, the cost of collecting land tax in Afghanistan, particularly in
rural and remote areas of Afghanistan is high. Tax collection is done manually and the high number of
departments and institutions involved in the process make it time consuming and inefficient. 452
Additionally, long transportation routes from remote areas increase the costs considerably. For these
reasons, land taxes in rural areas are often not collected at all.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
      •   Responsible authorities should be capacitated on tax exemption procedures and legal provisions
          in different parts of the country to ensure consistency.
      •   Raising awareness of the local population of tax exemptions to increase accountability and
          transparency on the part of officials should be a priority.
      •   Devising and implementing effective anti-corruption policies is the major challenge in relation
          to the tax exemptions.
      •   A study should be conducted on the currant state of tax collection in Afghanistan and its
          deficiencies. Clear policy recommendations and guidelines should be devised to establish a well
          functioning system that is suitable for Afghan context. Lessons learned from other countries
          should be used as a guideline.
      •   The Land Taxation Law of 1988 should be reviewed, drafted by by MoF and approved by MoJ
          taking the findings of the study into account.
      •   Formal mechanism has to be developed for courts and ARAZI to inform MoF about the changes
          in ownership and land sizes and adequate enforcement mechanism have to be devised aiming
          to pursue possible tax evaders.
      •   Developing clear national framework/guidelines for Safayi taxation including proper monitoring
          to prevent deliberate mis-surveyings to increase transparency and accountability.

449 Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, April 2015.
450Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 11 March 2015.
451“Managing Land, Mobilizing Revenue.”
452Interview with ARAZI employees, Kabul, 27 March 2015.




                                                     185
b) Long term
      •   Formalization of largely informal land tenure in Afghanistan is a prerequisite for successful tax
          collection efforts (see the sections above for more details on land tenure recognition).
      •   The improvement of security situation is rather essential for the functioning of tax collection.
      •   Increasing public’s awareness regarding the taxing system, its benefits and how it works paired
          with affective anti-corruption policies mentioned above.
      •   Computerizing the tax system can expedite the process and become a cost-effective means of
          tax collection.
                                               Dispute resolution
Assignment of responsibility
There are multiple venues for conflict resolution that can exist in parallel in Afghanistan. The courts
were given the primary responsibility for conflict resolution, however other formal dispute resolution
forums exists such as Huqooq department and Government Cases Department in MoJ, while ARAZI land
clearance (Tasfia) delegations can also resolve the disputes between the claimants of the land.
However, to this point, these institutions have not significantly affected the primacy of the courts and
serve more as channels through which some cases are referred to the courts. However, due to various
reasons such as corruption, absence or lack of access to courts, costliness and perceived distance from
the community, the majority of Afghans prefers solving their disputes in informal dispute resolution
fora such as shuras and jirgas. The sharing of evidence and rulings between formal and informal justice
systems occurs rarely and on ad hoc basis.
The majority of Afghans lack access to conflict resolution mechanisms for land disputes.453 However,
the level of access varies dramatically between demographic groups. Adult men of majority
populations454 enjoy the greatest degree of access, whether it is to formal or informal justice systems,
while men from marginalised population groups and women face additional barriers to accessing
conflict resolution services. Strong and strictly enforced social norms discourage women from
approaching any dispute resolution forum.
Even though the informal justice system is widely used in Afghanistan, it does not enjoy full legal
recognition. Various state justice providers such as judges and Huqooq officials differ in their opinions
about accepting the decisions made by non-state justice mechanisms, consequently actual praxis
differs considerably from district to district.
Finally, the process of appeal for ruling takes long (at times 3-4 years) if it’s done without any informal
payment and/or good social network. The legal process for appealing stipulated in the law is 15
days455, however judges and other employees of the court often make it long in order to be able to
collect informal payments for the speedy resolution of the case.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
      •   Computer Management System (CMS) – implemented by the USAID is already being rolled out,
          however this system needs internet and it does not connect all the conflict resolution bodies
          such as police. The adequate solutions for remote areas should be found to be able to benefit
          from this system. Additionally, the access to this system should be granted to all conflict
          resolution institutions such as Huqooq and ARAZI.

453    See     Luccaro      and     Gaston,     “Women’s       Access       to      Justice      in    Afghanistan,”
http://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/PW98_Women's-Access-to-Justice-in-Afghanistan.pdf, (detailing how most
women do not have access to any dispute resolution forum. More precisely, if virtually no women have access to
dispute resolution forums, then only a small number of men lacking access would constitute a majority).
454 Given that Afghanistan’s demographics vary by region, and reliable statistics to establish them do not generally

exist, here we use “majority” to mean the population locally perceiv ed to be the majority.
455Criminal Procedure Law




                                                       186
      •   Computer databases such as Oracles that are cheaper and take less time to implement, should
          be considered as an interim measure before fully operational computerized system is in place
          to create a database of all land disputes within each formal conflict resolution body’s central
          office.
      •   Fighting corruption, particularly in courts, should become the priority of the NUG. The Anti-
          Corruption Strategy established by the President Karzai in 2008 should be implemented through
          the stronger engagement of the President himself and increased results-based support of the
          international donor community. Additionally, the past and yet unaddressed cases of corruption
          should be the priority of the Attorney’s General Office.
      •   The auditing capacities of the High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption should be increased
          by the provision of technical and financial support and internal audits should be conducted to
          prevent corruption within formal justice system.
      •   Internal audits of all land administration institutions should be conducted on regular basis.
      •   Mechanisms to encourage women to approach formal justice system, while sensitizing the rest
          of the community about the right of women to equal access to justice should be devised.
      •   The law devising more effective linkages between formal and informal conflict resolution
          mechanisms (taking into account lessons learned fro m projects like NRC’s Information and
          Legal Assistance Centers (ILACs), PEACE, LC Project and USIP/ARAZI sponsored pilot) should be
          broadly and inclusively consulted with the public and approved 456.
      •   Capacity building of ARAZI employees and community Shura and Jirga members on land dispute
          resolution mechanisms, women’s rights, relative laws and regulations including the Land
          Dispute Resolution Regulation needs to be conducted.
      •   In order to prevent the accumulation of cases in front of courts and provide an accessible,
          affordable and timely appeals process, the decision to take the role to issue title deeds from
          the Supreme Court should be promptly operationalized.
      •   The draft Land Dispute Resolution Regulation prepared by ARAZI, which includes provisions on
          appellate procedures establishing the district level commission as a first instance and the
          provincial level commission as an appellate stage, should be promulgated and effectively
          implemented taking into account the new draft law on Shuras and Jirgas.
b) Long term
      •   The measures should be taken by the National Unity Government of Afghanistan in order to
          improve the security situation in remote and insecure areas so as to facilitate the presence of
          the state justice system.
      •   The focus should be put on the establishment of well-capacitated special courts on land
          dispute resolution, while taking into account past lessons learned of similar courts, with an
          accessible, affordable and timely appeals process.
      •   If necessary, mobile courts should be established consisting of land clearances (Tasfia) teams
          and judges in order to be able to deal with land disputes on the spot and in timely manner.
Share of land affected by pending conflicts
The most common reason for disputes in Afghanistan is land. Despite the decrease in land disputes,
several causes point toward the share of disputes of conflicted land in relation to other types of
conflicts continues to be high (42%). In rural areas, lands such as mountains, forests, and pastures tend
to be communally held. Frequent migration and displacement in recent decades accompanied by
dramatic population increase have created pressure over resources, particularly constructible land such

456
   As mentioned in this report already, there are currently two draft laws with this objective at the MoJ awaiting
the decision. The efforts to adequately publicly consult the content of both draft laws is of utmost importance as
the enactment of such law is a highly sensitive and political issue.


                                                      187
as housing plots and land used for any type of constructions. This, combined with the lack of
documentation on both communal and private land and unclear boundaries demarcation, has created
situations particularly susceptible to land disputes. Land in peri-urban areas also appears particularly
prone to frequent disputes involving large lands in size. In these rapidly urbanising areas, land records
are likewise scanty, while, due to their proximity to major cities, the last ten years has witnessed a
rapid increase in land values. For these reasons peri-urban areas appear particularly prone to land-
grabbing 457 by significant power-holders. In some instances, communities report the seizure of
hundreds of hectares of land. If another power-holder contests control of the land, land disputes over
very large tracts can thus emerge. In addition, while communities themselves rarely confront power-
holders over land seizure, research has uncovered instances of original owners raising land disputes
when the land is re-sold to less powerful third parties458.
Although land disputes constitute the plurality of disputes in the country (not more than 50% but 42%,
which is the highest percentage from all the other disputes), they seem to proceed to the formal
justice system infrequently. Research from various parts of the country has indicated that land disputes
in any given court make up less than 10% to about 50% of disputes. 459
Based on legal provisions of Afghan Civil Procedure Law, primary and appellate judicial processes
(except perhaps for a ruling from the Supreme Court) should take place within more or less one year
after the initiation of a claim. In reality, judicial proceedings seem to rarely conclude in this amount of
time. Both state officials and dispute parties describe resolution within 3-5 years as more typical, with
the resolution in the first instance court taking approximately 1 year, however varying from province to
province and district to district.
Several factors appear to increase the length of court proceedings. Firstly, the adversarial court
proceedings disrupt community relations and relations between plaintiff and defendant, triggering a
sort of (non-violent) cycle of revenge. Secondly, courts are reporting to be over-burdened and lack the
capacity to adjudicate in a timely manner. Many sources, however, also report courts delaying
proceedings in lieu of bribes influencing how parties interact with the court system.
Finally, there are few long standing land disputes in Afghan formal justice system. However, long-term
land disputes that exist can drag on for decades or even over a century in length, while the disputes
typically cycle through a series of government and non-government forums, not remaining with any one
forum for the prolonged length of time. However, the absence of long-term disputes in government
forums as evidence of these forums’ efficiency. If a government (or other) forum does not prove
efficient, parties usually remove their cases from that forum and proceed with another one.
Recommendations:
a) Short term



457The  term is defined as “use, control, occupation or ownership of land by one without bona fide right” (in
“Stolen Lands.” The definition includes different waysthe land grabbing is performed, such as “use of physical
force, intimidation or violence by powerful people to remove others from land, occupation of empty lands;
obtaining the title through a land allocation scheme that fails to meet the legal requirements [and] obtaining the
title through fraud” (in Policy Advisory Group on Land, “Draft Policy Paper on Addressing Land Grabbing through
Criminal Justice System, 2014). According to the statistics compiled by ARAZI, more than 1.2 million jeribs of land
(a jerib is equal to 2000 square meters or 0.2 hectares) were grabbed in the past decade (in Independent Joint
Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation Committee, “Public Inquiry into Land Usurpation, Kabul: MEC C, 2014) by
over 15,000 individuals (in “Stolen Lands of Afghanistan”).
458 “Major Land Disputes and Land Titling Systems of Khost Province: Implications for Collaboration between

Traditional Dispute Resolution Mechanisms and ARAZI” (Kabul: The Liaison Office, 2014); representative of NRC,
pers. comm., 16 March 2015; and Afghan civil society actor, pers. comm., 18 March 2015.
459See The Liaison Office, “Formal and Informal Justice in Paktia and Nangarhar: a TLO Working Paper” (noting

especially a high number of land conflicts in the court of Mohmand Dara district); and The Liaison Office, “Formal
and Informal Justice in Southern Afghanistan: Evidence from Helmand, Uruzgan, and Nimruz” (noting that the
court of Grishk district appears to hear exclusively criminal matters).


                                                       188
    •      The newly drafted Rangeland Law, containing provisions on usage of pastures should be
           approved and implemented.
    •      Relevant authorities should work together to operationalize already existing efforts to
           incorporate a provision on land usurpation into the Criminal Code. Where appropriate donors
           and civil society stakeholders should provide technical assistance to the drafting process.
    •      Approval and support of the draft Restitution Policy on Land Grabbing.
    •      In order to prevent the accumulation of volume of work in front of courts and to provide
           accessible and timely process, the decision to take the role to issue title deeds from the
           Supreme Court should be promptly operationalized. Additionally, a capacity building of ARAZI is
           needed if the administrative tasks will be transferred from the Supreme Court to ARAZI.
    •      The National Unity Government should initiate a national land survey and registration in the
           country (the 66% of land still needs to be surveyed and registered) in order to determine the
           state, private and public land and to establish clear boundaries.
b) Long term
    •      Establishment of well-capacitated, transparent and accountable special courts on land dispute
           resolution in the country, which address only land and property disputes in an effective and
           timely manner.
    •      If necessary, mobile courts should be established consisting of land clearances (Tasfia) teams
           and judges in order to be able to deal with land disputes on the spot and in timely manner.
                                     Institutional Arrangement and Policies
Clarity of mandates and practice
There is reportedly good enough division of responsibilities between policy formulation,
implementation and arbitration. The issue arises when it comes to the supervision and monitoring of
policy implementation. ARAZI, for instance, makes decisions about the lease of the state land, as well
as it is responsible for its monitoring. The ‘control and supervision of implementation o f Master Plans is
the responsibility of Master Plan designer (MUDA) and municipalities’ 460 as a joint task, while the
implementation of the plan is fully under the responsibility of the municipality. The obvious conflict of
interest exists here, when the implementing body– municipalities – is also responsible for their own
control and supervision. This significantly compromises the impartiality of the monitoring. This
becomes further muddled when looking more carefully at the Municipality law, which notes, that
‘[m]unicipalities can formulate their own Master Plan and submit them for Government approval’ 461.
Finally, a perceived conflict of interest exists between courts administrative function of registering
land and providing formal title deeds and judicial function of resolving land related disputes.
Additionally, greater clarity over the role over dispute resolution between ARAZI, courts, Huqooq and
other dispute resolution bodies is needed. ARAZI’s Department of Addressing Land Disputes provides
necessary documentation when a case comes before a court. Additionally, it can informally resolve the
dispute, which is then recorded at ARAZI. This adds to the myriad of conflict resolution bodies existing
in Afghanistan creating further complexity to the conflict resolution mechanisms.




460Wily,   “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 19.
461Wily,   “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 8.


                                                      189
In urban setting, significant horizontal overlap exists between the Ministry of Urban Development
Affairs and local municipalities. The process of urban expansion and infrastructure development is
shared between municipalities and MUDA, However, actual collaboration has developed informally and
depends heavily on the individual municipal and ministerial objectives and ideologies. Shared ideology
and objective is weak, often in conflict with one another, resulting in numerous stalemates in policy
planning. This is particularly true for MUDA and Kabul Municipality, where strong disagreement exists
about the implementation of Third Kabul Master Plan, resulting in lack of regularized urban expansion
in Afghanistan largest city.
In terms of public availability of land information, although information on land right and use is
available to individuals, complicated, costly and time-consuming processes (in particular in courts),
renders the access to information difficult for private persons. Due to better social networks and
leverage, government officials and prominent individuals can access information lot easier, even when
in case of government officials requiring the information as private, not public persons, for their
personal use. Lacking an adequate data collection and established linkages between various land
governance institutions though, is making the process of information sharing difficult. As such, various
land registries are for most part not interconnected, creating major overlaps in certain types of
information, however gaps in other. Land information is not widely publicly available, mostly limited to
the owners of the particular land; third persons are mostly not provided the access to information.
Information on state land is particularly well protected and certainly not publicly available. Finally, no
reporting on land rights and use by public institutions exists in Afghanistan.
The types of ownership are well differentiated, with the exception of public land. The lands that have
been allocated for public use and are neither the property of the state nor the property of the
individual are considered as public lands based on accounts of various technical Afghan experts
involved in this project. The issue arises with the Art.3(8) of LML 2008, which stipulates that any land
that is deemed public but is not registered in the book of government lands, is considered state land.
Additionally the Presidential Decree 83 further blurs the boundaries between state and public land by
putting emphasis on formal documentary proofs of ownership. The fact, that Afghan legal framework
does not define public land and does not provide provisions on how to register public land and the
registration of land in general occurs rarely in Afghanistan, public land can be easily interchanged for
the state land. In other words, land that is under public use and not registered can easily be claimed by
the state as its property and be reassigned subsequently 462. This can lead to numerous land claims over
one plot of land, leading to long lasting protracted conflicts.
Additionally, the land tenure in Afghanistan is rarely based on formal ownership documents. A majority
of people claim rights over land based on customary land tenure, which often contributes to the
overlapping ownership claims. However, no comprehensive solution has been developed for duplicate
ownership (i.e., two individuals having valid ownership claims for a single piece of land), an important
issue given the history of wars in Afghanistan and the culture of land grabbing throughout the country.
Based on the account of some experts, this is because the legal framework has been unable to find a
way to address the discrepancies between the tenure typology of previous regimes and current one
such as the collective/communal ownership based on decrees of the past regimes (i.e. Kuchis and
various Afghan tribes that were given the land, collective tenure particularly in rural areas with
customary claims on land etc.).
Recommendations:
a) Short term
      •   An inter-agency commission between MUDA and Municipalities should be established to clearly
          delineate the responsibilities between these two institutions in relation to the formulation,
          implementation and monitoring of the master plans. In future, this commission can serve as a

462
   Please note that the conversion of public land into private land (not only state land) , especially in the peri-
urban areas is happening as well.




                                                         190
           forum for discussion various pressing issues such as status of informal settlements in Afghan
           cities.
    •      The newly proposed LML, including clear delineation of responsibilities between land
           governance institutions including ARAZI, which was not mentioned in the current LML 2008,
           should be promptly ratified.
    •      The role of ARAZI as a dispute resolution body has to be decided making sure not to replicate
           the same conflict of interest as currently courts inhibit (being the issuer of title deeds as well
           as the adjudicator of land conflicts)
    •      Addressing contradictory legal codes in terms of definition of public lands including clear
           distinction between arid & virgin lands and pasturelands by approving existing new draft of LML
           developed by ARAZI and Pastureland Law by MAIL
b) Long term
    •      Creation of centralized computerized system at ARAZI as one-stop-shop for land registration
           and information to mainstream the access to land information. People will be able to access
           the information through the website (without possibility of changing the information).
    •      A comprehensive solution must be find to develop the current tenure typology further in such a
           way that addresses the realities of Afghanistan (e.g. collective ownership).
                       Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process
The contents of the National Land Policy (NLP) 2007 are largely considered to hold up to international
best practices 463 . Although various inter-ministerial and technical working groups were established
aiming at development of NLP, no formal public consultations took place. Additionally, most of the
pledges of the National Land Policy of 2007 have not yet been ‘absorbed’ 464 into the legal framework of
the country. The ‘current legal framework still has remnants of past land rights reforms’ and
‘customary law … remains poorly integrated with formal law and policy’ 465. The Land Policy, while
developed in a semi-participatory manner (only among public institutions) has been left without a
matching legal framework to support it, and thus remains as an aspirational reference document.
Public institutions are not required by law to consult the public. The lack of a requirement translates
to the situation where the most relevant actors – the affected public – are often left out of the
consultation and drafting process. The affected public may be involved in small-scale rural projects
(i.e., through the NSP) but they are not widely included in the process of drafting regulations related
to the programs themselves. This is particularly visible in the case of urban planning where the on-the-
ground realities of cities like Kabul are not considered in drafting plans.
While the National Land Policy is generally intended to alleviate poverty and increase equity among
citizens of Afghanistan, the objectives of the policy have not been sufficiently incorporated into the
legal framework, nor have the monitoring mechanism put in place to measure those. The Land
Management Law of 2008, for instance, is not pro-poor apart from an indirect mention of the poor and
marginalized in its objectives. The section on restitution containing a government obligation to
allocate lands to the poor was removed from the 2008 version of LML, the definition of eligible persons
to include large landowners was expanded and did not include housing needs of urban citizens. It also
provides limited support for informal dispute resolution, an important avenue for resolution especially
among the poor who may not be able to afford to resolve problems in court. Other laws and policies,
including the Presidential Decree 104 and National IDP Policy, which legalised the distribution of land
to IDPs and returnees, have simply not been successfully implemented.
Additionally, existing land laws have been inconsistent on the issue of discrimination against women
and girls. Women and girls, often deprived of their inheritance rights to land and property (although
the Article 40 of Afghan Constitution is stating their right to inheritance and EVAW law stipulates the

463Wily,  “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 9.
464Wily,  “Land Governance at the Crossroads,” 1.
465Ibid., 1.




                                                     191
right to property), are left without sufficient protection. They are further more vulnerable to domestic
violence within greater conflicts on land.
While the land policy addresses ecological and environmental goals and concerns, the policy lacks
corresponding laws to ensure proper implementation and contains no provisions for public monitoring.
In practice, the environmental and ecological concerns are typically overlooked by government
agencies and private individuals in the interest of other objectives (such as construction and
expansion).
The communication with the MoF in terms of the financial resources needed has been limited or non-
existent in the drafting of policies resulting in the absence of a cost-benefit analysis or accompanying
review of resources and institutional capacity for the implementation. As a result, Afghan land policies
often remain under-resourced with limited capacities to implement the policies and regulations.
Neither the Land Management Law of 2008 nor the Land Policy of 2007, contains a requirement for
public reporting indicating process of implementation. Public reporting has thus far occurred at the
initiative of the relevant government agencies (ARAZI reports their achievement in their website, for
instance).
The National Land Policy makes significant strides in laying the foundation for disaster risk reduction
(DDR) language in its text. While the section’s focus is on environmental protection, clear linkages to
disaster risk exist (i.e., reference to floor controls and mining techniques). However, the actual laws
aiming to improve the disaster risk management have not followed the adoption of the National Land
Policy. Additionally, Afghanistan National Disaster Management Authority (ANDMA)’s resources, remain
severely limited.
Recommendations:
a) Short term
    •   The current draft of LML 2014 should be promptly ratified by the Afghan Parliament and
        enforced by the Afghan National Unity Government because it builds on the National Land
        Policy 2007. If necessary, the law should be adopted through the Presidential Decree.
    •   The new Land Acquisition Law should be ratified promptly to address the undue evictions and
        loss of moveable and immoveable property of the poor.
    •   Criminalization of land grabbing in Afghan Penal Code should be promptly put in place and
        perpetrators have to be brought to justice.
    •   The National Land Policy 2007 that includes the provisions for the ecological and environmental
        objectives should be promptly enforced by implementing existing and enacting new laws, if
        necessary, mirroring its objectives.
    •   The implementation of Environment law should be enforced.
    •   The expenses for the implementation of National Land Policy should be fully and properly
        budgeted in Afghanistan National Budget through the extensive consultations with the Ministry
        of Finance.
    •   It is of utmost importance that a land policy be enforced, and associated with mechanisms for
        monitoring the adherence to the policy by the government and non-governmental actors.
    •   The obligation of public reporting on the land policy implementation should be amended in new
        draft of LML.
    •   Prompt ratification of the 2014 draft on the LML that builds strongly on the Land Policy 2007,
        which included DDR in its purview is recommended.
    •   The Plans of ARAZI to conduct a conference on Land Policy 2007 and its possible amendments
        should be supported.
b) Long term



                                                  192
•   Any policy and law related to land in the future should be developed with the extensive formal
    and informal consultations with the land governance stakeholders including the public.
•   Greater prioritization of ecological and environmental issues must be established across the
    board by the Afghan government, and accompanied by monitoring and enforcement measures.
•   The continuous support of the international development community in the field of land
    governance should be ensured.




                                             193
         11. Policy Matrix
         *Please note that the list of issues and indicators is not exhaustive. The issues and corresponding policy recommendations were selected based
         on the priorities identified during the Technical Validation Workshop and Policy Dialogue.

      Policy issue                Proposed action                                                                Responsible       Monitoring indicator
                                                                                                                 agency
Recommendations on Panel 1
LG1: Recognition of continuum    of rights
1     Customary           and     The minimal limit of continued ownership and cultivation of the land           ARAZI, MoJ and    Increased % of land recognized and
      undocumented      rights    needed in order for the long term unchallenged possession be formally          parliament (if    registered.
      recognized only into        recognized should be decreased through the amendment of current LML.           not possible
      certain extent, hence                                                                                      through
      the majority of people      Customary deed documents prepared after August 1975 and meeting all the        Presidential
      do not possess valid        other requirements as per Art. 5 of LML 2008 should be formally recognized     Decree), CDCs,
      ownership documents.        through the amendment of current LML.                                          shuras, jirgas,
                                                                                                                 religious
                                                                                                                 figures, civil
                                  The efforts of various NGOs (such as TLO and Checci) to capacitate Afghan
                                                                                                                 society, media
                                  citizens on what information a customary deed document should include in
                                  order for it to be formally recognized should be further enhanced involving
                                  the government in these efforts.
                                  Awareness of public, Afghan National Police and Army on the land issues
                                  and land rights has to be increased. The land governance has to be included
                                  in the teaching and training curricula for these target groups.
                                  Creation of centralized (gradually computerized) system at ARAZI as one-
                                  stop-shop for land registration.

                                  As an interim measure, community-based land recording system should be
                                  developed, which will be later on connected to ARAZI registering system
                                  (when transferred from courts to ARAZI) and their Principal Books.
      Extensive land grabbing     Relevant authorities should work together to operationalize already existing   MoJ, ARAZI;       The increased number of cases of
      and lack of measures to     effort to incorporate a provision on land usurpation into the Criminal Code.   MoI, courts,      land grabbing resolved in courts
      prevent and/or punish       Where appropriate donors and civil society stakeholders should provide         international
      it compromises land         technical assistance to the drafting process.                                  donor
      tenure         security,                                                                                   community,
                                  Approval and support of the draft Restitution Policy on Land Grabbing.
      particularly in urban                                                                                      civil society;
      areas.                      Prosecution of land grabbers should be made a priority within the Attorney     Attorney’s
                                 General’s office. Similarly investigation and technical capacity to do so       Genera Office,
                                 should be enhanced within the Afghan National Police (ANP) with the             ANP
                                 possibility to establish a special police force tasked with the protection of
                                 lands against the land grabbing.
LGI 2: Respect for and enforcement of rights
4      Land clearance process   ARAZI’s plans to implement National Demarcation Project identifying the          ARAZI, MoF (for   Increased % of land cleared
       (Tasfia) allowing for    boundaries of villages and Gozars (administrative units smaller than             budget
       land registration in     districts in urban areas) should be materialized. As a follow-up step the        allocation),
       ARAZI Principal Books is land clearance process on large scale should be restarted. The judge should      courts; IDLG,
       conducted rarely.        be included in Tasfia delegation to deal with the land disputes, if              MUDA, MRRD,
                                necessary. In case of more complex land disputes, the fact that the              CDCs, MoBTA,
                                ownership of land is disputed, should be indicated on the Tasfia report and      UN-HABITAT,
                                forwarded to courts. Adequate financial resources should be allocated for        UNHCR
                                this purpose from the national budged. The support in form of financial
                                means, as well as technical expertise should be sought with international
                                community and civil society.
                                 The possibility of a first-stage land clearance done by communities to
                                 enable nationwide land identification should be explored.
                                 The regulation proposed by ARAZI that allows for registering of urban
                                 properties should be approved promptly.
Recommendations on Panel 2
LGI 1: Rights to Forest and Common Lands
       Management of forests Identifying mechanisms to promote forest management in areas which are              MAIL, ARAZI,      Mechanisms for promotion for forest
       in Afghanistan faces a currently out of reach of the government such as developing and                    IDLG, NEPA,       management in areas out of reach
       number of issues.        empowering community based adjudication groups (comprising of elders             MoBTA; MRRD,      of government control devised
                                and influential figures in the community) to address rural land use              CDCs, Shuras      including establishing of
                                restrictions violations. One possible option would be channelling the rural                        community-based adjudication
                                land management through CDCs.                                                                      groups

                                 Raising awareness of the local population about the importance of forests
                                 and the negative impacts of deforestation in order to encourage
                                 communities to take part in maintain the forests particularly in the areas
                                 where the presence of the central government is limited.
LGI 2: Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
       There are no rural land   The development of the rural land use plans by the MRRD through the             MAIL, IDLG,       % of rural land covered by rural land
       use plans existing in     participatory and transparent process, where public voice can be heard and      MoF, NEPA,        use plans
       Afghanistan.              the burdens are shared.                                                         MRRD



                                                                                195
      The lack of                 Identifying mechanisms to promote protected areas management in areas          NEPA, MAIL,       % of rural land brought under NEPA
      enforcement of              which are currently out of reach of the government such as developing and      IDLG, Cadastral   protection regime
      protective regulations      empowering community based adjudication groups (comprising of elders           Department of
      leads to the                and influential figures in the community) to address rural land use            ARAZI
      degradation of              restrictions violations
      protected rural lands.
                                  Prioritising surveying of natural resources, which are identified as in high
                                  risk of degradation.

                                  Expediting the process of land change to protected area by mainstreaming
                                  the steps and organizations responsible.
Recommendations on Panel 3
LGI 1: Restrictions on rights
       Restrictions on the land   Clear mechanism for use change of each type of urban land should be            MUDA, Kabul       % of land used in line with new
       use prescribed by          devised including the requirement of permits to do so. Municipalities should   Municipality,     Master Plans for Afghan biggest
       Master Plans of big        establish a monitoring mechanism for this purpose, as well as a database of    ARAZI, IDLG,      cities
       cities are often not       land used changes, which will be updated regularly with new spacial            MoJ, NEPA,
       enforced.                  information.                                                                   UNHCR

                                  Municipality Law should be amended and unified practices of each
                                  municipality should be anchored in the law.

                                  Zoning Law both for national and municipal purposes should be enacted.
       Urban planning in          New Master Plans have to be developed for biggest cities in Afghanistan as     MUDA,             % of land used in line with new
       Afghan largest cities      per MUDAs commitments within “Big Cities Master Plan” initiative with the      Municipalities,   Master Plans for Afghan biggest
       does not follow a clear    support of international community.                                            UN-HABITAT and    cities
       reference for urban                                                                                       the World Bank
       planning.                  Long awaited National Urban Policy has to be enacted.
LGI 2: Transparency of land use  restrictions
       Unclear delineation of     An inter-agency commission between MUDA and Municipalities should be           MUDA,             % of land used in line with Kabul
       the responsibilities of    established to clearly delineate the responsibilities between these two        Municipalities    Master Plan
       the municipalities and     institutions in relation to the formulation, implementation and monitoring     (Kabul
       MUDA                       of the master plans. In future, this commission can serve as a forum for       Municipality in
                                  discussion various pressing issues such as status of informal settlements in   particular)
                                  Afghan cities.
LGI 3: Efficiency in the Urban Land Use Planning
       Currently, no clear        A policy on low cost housing for the poor should be adopted. The policy        ARAZI, MoJ,       Increased number of low-cost
       commitment to low-         should be developed in a consultative manner, with input from all              MUDA              housing
       cost housing and           stakeholders including civil society representatives, the government and



                                                                                  196
      services for the poor      the public in question itself. Additionally, anti-eviction laws should be
      exists.                    designed (based on Forced Eviction Guidelines already existing within the
                                 National IDP Policy) with constitutional protections in mind and, in the case
                                 of eviction, a legal commitment to fair compensation should be
                                 established.
      Kabul urban expansion      The policy on Upgrading of Informal Settlements has to be approved and           MUDA, Kabul       % of land used in line with Kabul
      largely remain outside     implemented.                                                                     Municipality;     Master Plan
      of the Third Master                                                                                         MoRR, ANDMA,
      Plan.                                                                                                       UNHCR
                                 The Presidential Decree 104 has to be amended (or annulled and new law
                                 should be adopted) that tackles the shortcomings of the Presidential Decree
                                 104 such as the allocation of non-viable land and cumbersome eligibility
                                 criteria. National IDP Policy (including Forced Eviction Guidelines) has to be
                                 adequately implemented.
                                 The initiatives like Maslakh, where IDPs are given the land titles, should be
                                 supported and if possible reproduced.
      The carrying capacity of   With the development of new master plans for biggest cities, the                 MUDA,             % of land used in line with Kabul
      infrastructure has been    infrastructural needs of the population and the current state of the cities      Municipalities    Master Plan (including necessary
      long overloaded.           (considerably changed in comparison to 1990s) needs to be taken into                               infrastructure)
                                 account and adequate mechanism to provide necessary infrastructure have
                                 to be developed.
Recommendations Panel 4
LGI 1: Identification of public land and clear management
       Unclear definition of       Newly proposed amended LML addressing the shortcomings of the public           High Council on   % of public land surveyed
       public land is resulting    land definition and classifying 4 types of land including “land specific to    Land and
       in illegal transactions     village(s)”, containing a clear definition of “public interest” classifying    Water, ARAZI      % of public lands used according to
       and uses.                   types of public land and delineating responsibilities for different types of   (Cadastral        the regulations
                                   public land should be ratified.                                                Department),
                                                                                                                  MAIL, MoJ; MoF;
                                 The plans of ARAZI to restart the cadastral survey of the remaining 66% of
                                                                                                                  IDLG; MoI, ANP,
                                 lands (including public lands) should be implemented promptly in stepwise
                                                                                                                  international
                                 manner and adequately financed. The survey, as planned by ARAZI should
                                                                                                                  community
                                 start in Bamiyan province no later than end of 2015.
                                 A community-based management of public lands should be put in place
                                 (potentially thorough shuras, jirgas, CDCs), when the definition of public
                                 lands is clarified including a raising awareness of the public about the
                                 public land, laws and regulations associated with its use.
LGI 2: Justification and Time-Efficiency of Acquisition Processes



                                                                                 197
       There is no accurate      An IT-based database system where all acquired land together with the              ARAZI,            % of acquired land entered into the
       statistical information   cadastral maps and other related land documents will be recorded should            Municipalities,   database
       on lands that have been be developed, kept with ARAZI and shared with other land institutions.               MUDA
       acquired.
LGI 3: Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedures
       In majority of cases,        Prompt ratification of the amended LAL containing clear provision on fair       ARAZI, MoJ        % of land acquisition cases where
       paid compensation is         and just compensation process.                                                                    the adequate and timely
       not sufficient for the                                                                                                         compensation was provided
       individual to be able to
       maintain his/her
       previous status of life.
       There is no deadline for     Prompt ratification of the amended LAL containing compensation paid prior       ARAZI, MoJ        % of land acquisition cases where
       the payment of               to the project start.                                                                             the adequate and timely
       compensation for land                                                                                                          compensation was provided
       acquisition.
       No provision on              Adoption of the proposed LAL, that provides for the compensation of             ARAZI, MoJ;       % of land acquisition cases where
       compensation for the         grazing and other rights, which incurred losses due to acquisition.             MAIL              the adequate and timely
       loss of grazing rights                                                                                                         compensation was provided
       exists.
Recommendations on Panel 5
LGI 1: Transfer of state land to   private use
       State land sales are         The possibility for state land sales should be clarified through the Cabinet    ARAZI, Ministry   % of state land sold
       happening in                 Regulation clarifying current legal provisions on this matter. Clear            of Commerce
       unregulated manner.          categorization should be developed based on which the restrictions on           and Industries,
                                    transferability will be applied.                                                AISA,
                                                                                                                    Municipality
                                    The status of AISA and its activities should be clarified by clear rules of
                                    engagement interlinked with ARAZI Investment Policy.
      State Land Leases are         Increased financial resources, coupled with on the job long-term trainings      ARAZI, Council    % of state land leases which
      not always happening          should be provided to High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption to be        of Ministers,     happened based on public auction
      through the public            able to better perform its duties such as verifying the usage of public         HOOAC
      auction.                      auction for every land lease procedure.
      Land valuation                Devising mechanism for assessing performance of members of the valuation        ARAZI,            % of land valuations happening in
      encounters delays and         commission, with poor performance being addressed immediately.                  President, NUG,   timely and transparent manner
      the results are not                                                                                           Municipalities,
                                    Addressing corruption in land valuation process.
      made public.
                                    The results of land valuation for land lease purposes and the information
                                    about the land leases for various projects particularly where it concerns the



                                                                                   198
                                   public should be made publicly available.
LGI 4: Contracts involving state   land are public and accessible
       No ARAZI, nor third          A clear monitoring system of application of lease contracts and benefit-        ARAZI             Third party monitoring conducted at
       monitoring of land lease     sharing mechanisms conducted at least every six months with participation                         least once a year per each lease
       contracts currently          of local communities and venues for dealing with non-compliance should be                         contract.
       exists.                      clearly established.
Recommendations on Panel 6
LGI 1: Mechanisms for recognition of rights
       The registration with    Different registries in Afghanistan should be mainstreamed and interlinked          ARAZI; courts;    Increased % of land registered
       court while acquiring    (more details below) in order to prevent overlaps, outdated and missing             MoF, MoJ,
       the title deed during    information. ARAZI should be established as “one -stop-shop” for registering        courts,
       land transactions is     the land (both within or outside of the Master Plan): The land clearance            international
       lengthy and complex      process Tasfia should be done on large scale and should always include the          community;
       process.                 members of the Cadastral Department to conduct the survey. Then the land            High Council on
                                is recorded to ARAZI Principal Books and formal title deed is given to the          Land and Water
                                owner. Technical and financial support to ARAZI’s pilot project in Herat
                                that, if successful, will be extended to all 34 provinces, should be
                                accorded. This process should be later computerized to allow for the inter
                                linkages with other registries such as in courts and MoF tax books.
                                   An Independent monitoring body should be created that will monitor the
                                   process of land formalization in order to maintain the process effective,
                                   consistent and transparent.
                                   In-house procedures and anti-corruption policies of ARAZI should be
                                   reviewed to prevent lengthy and costly process of land registration.

LGI 2: Completeness of Registry
       Cadastral surveying         ARAZI’s plans, based on their Operational Strategy, to establish national        ARAZI –           % of land surveyed
       information, have not       comprehensive cadastral registration programs should be technically and          Cadastral
       been updated since          financially supported.                                                           Department,
       1978 and took place                                                                                          MoF, NUG,
                                   Cadastral records have to be connected to both ARAZI Principal Books and
       only on 34% of Afghan                                                                                        international
                                   courts title deed registration in consistent manner. Furthermore, uniform
       land.                                                                                                        community,
                                   and standard format of circular form including the verification of the
                                                                                                                    courts
                                   Cadastre should be developed stating all the personal information of the
                                   buyer and seller, photos, signatures (or fingerprints), physical specification
                                   of land etc.
                                   As an interim measure, all cadastral maps should be scanned, to expedite



                                                                                  199
                                the manual search happening at present in the Cadastral Department,
                                however with aim to be later included in the computerized system.
LGI 3: Reliability of Registry Information
       Afghanistan does not Before the creation of ARAZI as one-stop-shop is fully operationalized, as an       High Council on   Increased % of land registered
       have      one      single interim measure, various registration books should be compared and the         Land and
       registry. Additionally, proper linkages should be developed including with the central level. This       Water, ARAZI
       changes in land records will also help to establish full database of land information, when ARAZI
       are    not    necessarily takes over as one-stop-shop.
       forwarded from the
       provinces to the centre.
       Hence no centralized
       database      of     land
       records      exist      in
       Afghanistan.
      The synchronization of    A formal mechanism has to be developed for courts to inform ARAZI and           ARAZI, courts,    Increased % of land registered
      data from various         MoF about the new titled deeds they have accorded to new owners of the          MoF
      registries does not       land.
      happen in consistent
                                A formal mechanism has to be developed to connect MoF taxation books to
      manner hence the
                                ARAZI Principal Books.
      registries contain out-
      dated information.
      Informal payment is       Mainstreamed process (in form of ARAZI as one-stop-shop) of land                ARAZI, HOOAC      Increased % of land registered
      widespread within         registration and computerized land register will decrease the opportunities
      government                for corruption.
      institutions.
                                Increased financial resources, coupled with on the job long-term trainings
                                should be provided to High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption to be
                                able to better perform its duties, in particular to provide external audit of
                                courts’ land registration procedure.
Recommendations on Panel 7
LGI 1: Transparency of valuations
       Process of land          Mainstreaming of land valuation for different purposes should be performed      MOF, ARAZI,       % of land valuations happening with
       valuation for different  through the Cabinet Resolution bringing all valuation practices under one       Municipalities,   each transaction
       purposes does not        regulation and the land valuation process should happen regularly, with         MAIL, IDLG,
       happen with each         each transaction.                                                               MUDA
       transaction
       The process of land      A clear mechanism should be developed for the activities of various             High Council on   % of land valuations happening in
       valuation for various    valuation commission to expedite the valuation process. Additionally,           Land and          timely and transparent manner



                                                                               200
      purposes is mirrored       performance-based evaluations should be introduced for the members and           Water, ARAZI
      with shortcomings.         corresponding monitoring mechanism should be established to verify the
                                 compliance.
      People take various pre-   Land valuation for acquisition should be done before the acquisition process     High Council on   % of land valuations happening in
      emptive measures after     is announced to prevent rapid increase of the land price and possible land       Land and          timely and transparent manner
      the process of             grabbing by powerful individuals.                                                Water, ARAZI
      acquisition is
      announced.
      Valuation rolls are not    Valuation rolls should be compiled in one national database and made             High Council on   % of valuation rolls made public
      made public.               public only after the adequate actions against land grabbing are                 Land and
                                 implemented to prevent empowering the land usurpers from benefiting              Water, ARAZI
                                 from this action.
LGI 2: Collection Efficiency
       MoF tax rolls are often   A study should be conducted on the currant state of tax collection in            MoF, ARAZI,       % of all eligible tax payers included
       outdated and not all      Afghanistan and its deficiencies. Clear policy recommendations and               courts            in tax rolls
       the property/land         guidelines should be devised to establish a well functioning system that is
       holders are on the tax    suitable for Afghan context. Lessons learned from other countries should be
       rolls.                    used as a guideline.
                                 As an interim measure, formal mechanism has to be developed for courts
                                 and ARAZI to inform MoF about the changes in ownership and land sizes and
                                 adequate enforcement mechanism have to be devised aiming to pursue
                                 possible tax evaders.
      Not all the taxes are      The formalization of largely informal land tenure in Afghanistan is a            NUG,High          % of taxes land and property taxes
      collected.                 prerequisite for successful tax collection efforts (see the sections above for   Council on Land   collected
                                 more details on land tenure recognition).                                        and Water,
                                                                                                                  ARAZI, courts,
                                 The Land Taxation Law of 1988 should be reviewed, drafted by by MoF and
                                                                                                                  MoF, MoJ, MoI,
                                 approved by MoJ taking the findings of the study into account.
                                                                                                                  MUDA,
                                 The improvement of security situation is rather essential for the functioning    Municipalities,
                                 of tax collection.                                                               international
                                                                                                                  community
Recommendations on Panel 8
LGI 1: Assignment of responsibility
       Although land disputes    Computer Management System (CMS) – implemented by the USAID is already           ARAZI, MoJ,       % of land disputes in formal justice
       constitute the majority   being rolled out, however this system needs internet and it does not             MoF,              system
       of disputes in the        connect all the conflict resolution bodies such as police. The adequate          international
       country, they seem to     solutions for remote areas should be found to be able to benefit from this       community



                                                                                201
      proceed to the formal       system. Additionally, the access to this system should be granted to all
      justice system              conflict resolution institutions such as Huqooq and ARAZI.
      infrequently.
                                  Computer databases such as Orcles that are cheaper and take less time to
                                  implement, should be considered as an interim measure before fully
                                  operational computerized system is in place to create a database of all land
                                  disputes within each conflict resolution body’s central office.
      Alleged corruption in       Fighting corruption, particularly in courts, should become the priority of       NUG, President,   % of land disputes in formal justice
      courts and consequently     the NUG. The Anti-Corruption Strategy established by the President Karzai        HOOAC, MEC,       system
      costliness is most          in 2008 should be implemented through the stronger engagement of the             international
      commonly cited among        President himself and increased results-based support of the international       community,
      Afghan population,          donor community. Additionally, the past and yet unaddressed cases of             Attorney’s
      preventing them from        corruption should be the priority of the Attorney’s General Off ice.             General Office
      reaching to formal
                                  The auditing capacities of the High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption
      justice system.
                                  should be increased and internal audits should be conducted to prevent
                                  corruption within formal justice system.
                                  Internal audits of all land administration institutions should be conducted
                                  on regular basis.
      Men from marginalised                                                                                        MoJ, MoWA         % of land disputes including women
                                  Mechanisms to encourage women to approach formal justice system should
      population groups and                                                                                                          in formal justice system
                                  be devised while sensitising the rest of the community about the right of
      women face barriers to
                                  women to equal access to justice.
      accessing conflict
      resolution services.
      Informal justice system     The law devising more effective linkages between formal and informal             MoJ, ARAZI        % of land disputes resolved by the
      does not enjoy full legal   conflict resolution mechanisms (taking into account lessons learned from                           informal justice system registered
      recognition.                projects like NRC’s Information and Legal Assi stance Centers (ILACs),                             in the formal justice system
                                  PEACE, LC Project and USIP/ARAZI sponsored pilot) should be broadly and
                                  inclusively consulted with the public and approved.
Recommendations on Panel 9
LGI 1: Clarity of Mandates and Practice
       Greater clarity over the The role of ARAZI as a dispute resolution body has to be decided making            ARAZI, MoJ,       Roles of ARAZI and courts clearly
       role over dispute         sure not to replicate the same conflict of interest as currently courts inhibit   courts, IDLG,     defined
       resolution between        (being the issuer of title deeds as well as the adjudicator of land conflicts)    MAIL, Shuras,
       ARAZI and other dispute                                                                                     Huqooq
                                 The draft Land Dispute Resolution Regulation prepared by ARAZI, which
       resolution bodies is
                                 includes provisions on appellate procedures establishing the district level
       needed.
                                 commission as a first instance and the provincial level commission as an
                                 appellate stage, should be promulgated and effectively implemented taking



                                                                                 202
                                into account the new draft law on Shuras and Jirgas.




       Complicated, costly and Creation of centralized (gradually) computerized system at ARAZI as one-       President,       Increased % of land registered
       time-consuming           stop-shop for land registration and information to mainstream the access to   ARAZI, courts,
       processes render the     land information.                                                             MoF,
       access to information                                                                                  international
       difficult for private                                                                                  community
       persons.
LGI 2: Equity and Non-discrimination in the Decision-Making Process
       Most of the pledges of                                                                                 ARAZI, MoJ,      % of National Land Policy pledges
                                The current draft of LML 2014 should be promptly ratified by the Afghan
       the National Land Policy                                                                               international    turned to laws
                                Parliament and enforced by the Afghan National Unity Government because
       of 2007 have not yet                                                                                   community
                                it builds on the National Land Policy 2007.
       been ‘absorbed’ into
       the legal framework of   The Plans of ARAZI to conduct a conference on Land Policy 2007 and its
       the country.             possible amendments should be supported.




                                                                              203
12. Conclusion and next steps
Afghanistan went through a number of changes related to the land governance in the course of its
modern history. With each change in the administration, different sets of rules applied as to how the
land issues were dealt with. The three decades of war resulting in the destruction of a considerable
number of documents, also contributed to the myriad of land related issues. Although in recent years,
various legal texts and drafts were produced, aiming to rectify the shortcomings of current land
administration, the legal framework falls short of corresponding to the Afghan realities.
There is number of factors that affect the recognition of tenure rights in reality:
•     The impact of conflict over the past three decades on land administration and management remain
      to be acknowledged and addressed. Return of exile populations, 466 internal displacement of
      populations, 467 the rapid urbanization of the country, and on going conflict over rights to
      pasturelands between nomadic and settled communities have drastically impacted the tenure
      situation.
•     Widespread land grabbing by power holders was reported as one of the greatest challenges faced
      by land authorities, according to ARAZI and municipalities interviewed for the study. Current
      estimates suggest that over 1.5 million jeribs of land, including nearly 15% of all arable land has
      been illegally usurped in Afghanistan.468The lands were usurped by a range of actors including
      local armed commanders, ethnic leaders, village leaders, wealthy individuals, Afghan National
      Police as well as government officials. Land has been usurped both through the use of force, as
      well as through forged documents and corrupt practices with the involvement of government
      officials.469ARAZI has proposed legislative reforms to prohibit land grabbing as part of the reforms
      to the LML. Proposed amendments aim to define land grabbers and specify punishments for land
      grabbers; however, the relevant provisions were removed by Taqnin department of MoJ.
      Additionally Arazi has developed a draft five year strategy for prevention of land grabbing and
      restitution policy both of which were sent to cabinet for approval.
•     Rampant corruption present at all levels of government including the institutions dealing with the
      land management. Afghanistan is on 172nd place (out of 175 countries participating in the survey)
      in the Transparency International Corruption Perception Index 2014470 being perceived among the
      three most corrupt countries in the world. The perceptions of people in Afghanistan deteriorated in
      comparison with past years. According to the 2014 Integrity Watch Afghanistan (IWA) National
      Corruption Survey, respondents reported increase in their experience with corruption in 2014 and
      stated that the corruption is the second biggest problem in Afghanistan after the security471. The
      justice sector and police is perceived among the most corrupt public institutions472.
Unless Afghan land administration recognizes the importance of these (some of them relatively new)
factors and takes them into account in its land policies, the land tenure security in Afghanistan will
remain tenuous at best.


466 It is estimated that there are 5.7 million former refugees that are in-need of reintegration in
Afghanistan, see Caroline Howard and Jelena Madzarevic, “Security of tenure and the forced eviction
of IDPs and refugee returnees in Afghanistan” (Kabul: Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre and
Norwegian Refugee Council, 2014), 5.
467In 2014, 630,000 Afghans were estimated to be internally displaced, see Ibid.
468UNAMA Rule of Law Unit, “The Stolen Lands of Afghanistan and its People The Legal Framework Part

1 of a 3 Part Series” (2014), 10. There is currently no data available on how many people are affected
by the issue of illegally usurped land.
469Ibid.
470
     Corruption Perception Index 2014: Results, http://www.transparency.org/cpi2014/results (accessed
on 3 September 2015).
471
     Corruption was considered the third biggest problem in 2012.See Mohammad Razaq Isaqzadeh,
“National Corruption Survey 2014” (Kabul: Integrity Watch Afghanistan, 2014), 2.
472
    Ibid.4.
The goal of this project was to establish a consensus and priority actions for each of the nine land
governance areas about a) gaps in existing evidence as to the strength of Afghan land governance; b)
areas for regulatory or institutional change; c) new approaches to be piloted, interventions to improve
land governance on a broader scale (e.g. by strengthening land rights and improving their
enforcement); and d) criteria to assess the effectiveness of these measures. Below is the summary of
main points, as established through the national Technical Validation Workshop:
Gaps in existing evidence as to the strength of Afghan land governance

There are number of areas, where the evidence and sufficient data does not exist to be enable the
policy-makers and other stakeholders such as practitioners and NGO community to adequately devise,
plan and implement their policies and actions. One of these areas is the rural land use change. There is
no data available on the amount of the rural land which undergone a use change, how long this process
takes and if the lands are changed to destined use. Similarly, there is limited information on the rural
lands, the use of which is identified for rehabilitation, are the swiftness of the transfer to the destined
use. Finally, little is known about if approved requests for change in urban land use are swiftly
followed by development on these parcels of land.
Secondly, an opacity of Afghan land acquisition procedures coupled with lack of data seriously
undermines the transparency of state acquisition processes. Although the acquired lands cannot be
transferred to private interests according to the Afghan Land Expropriation Law, due to the lack of
appropriate monitoring and rampant corruption in Afghan land administration institutions, the
development of these parcels of land remains murky. Due to the illegal character of these transfers, no
data is available on transfer of acquired land to private interests. Additionally, due to the non-
existence of a single central database of acquired land, limited information exists about the timeliness
of the land transfers to its destined use. People loosing their user and ownership rights through
acquisition processes are not consulted about future development projects and there is no specific
complaint-response mechanism to challenge the acquisition process. Thus little is known about what is
the impact of these arbitrary decisions on actual population.
Finally a need for a number of studies was identified in the course of this project in order to provide
evidence-based information to inform policy decisions:
    •   A feasibility study for different cities in Afghanistan should be undertaken by MUDA to identify
        the enforcement mechanisms of National Disaster Risk Strategy and for protection of Afghan
        cultural heritage and prevention of looting.
    •   Consideration should be given to the most appropriate planning and whether Master Planning
        process is the best possible planning option for Afghanistan’s cities. In the case of Kabul, for
        instance, a more flexible planning and formalization of informal settlements mechanisms may
        be more suitable. A feasibility study to this end should be conducted.
    •   Research and collecting information on unrecorded secondary rights, such as grazing, rights of
        passage and collecting forest products to determine how land acquisition can influence these
        rights should be conducted. Policies addressing issues related to unrecorded rights should be
        devised taking into account the recommendations of the study.
    •   Study to devise environmental and social impact assessment tools to identify best practices
        applicable in Afghanistan should be conducted. Based on the results, the mechanisms should be
        established and incorporated in ARAZI Land Lease Procedure.
    •   An in-house assessment should be conducted by ARAZI to find out what factors have prevented
        the organisation from monitoring land lease contracts so far including the study on alternative
        monitoring possibilities available in places where access is limited due to bad security
        situation.




                                                   205
    •   A study should be conducted on the currant state of tax collection in Afghanistan and its
        deficiencies. Clear policy recommendations and guidelines should be devised to establish a well
        functioning system that is suitable for Afghan context. Lessons learned from other countries
        should be used as a guideline.
Areas for regulatory or institutional change

There has been numerous land related laws enacted in last couple of years (such as LML 2008),
however the provisions not always mirror the Afghan realities. As a reaction to this, various laws and
policies (such as amended LML, LAL etc.) were drafted, those, however, were never properly
promulgated and put in practice. In 2007, Afghan National Land Policy that meets international best
practices was developed, lacking corresponding laws and regulations for its operalisation. Based on the
accounts of various land experts consulted in the course of this study, the current draft of LML 2014
should be promptly ratified by the Afghan Parliament and enforced by the Afghan National Unity
Government because it builds on the National Land Policy 2007. If necessary, the law should be
adopted through the Presidential Decree. The expenses for the implementation of National Land Policy
should be fully and properly budgeted in Afghanistan National Budget through the extensive
consultations with the Ministry of Finance.
The enactment of this important piece of legislation such as LML, will, however, not be sufficient.
Customary land tenure, widely used in rural Afghanistan, is recognized only to a certain extent in
Afghan body of law, prescribing the requirements that are difficult to attain. Due to the inability of
Afghan government to deal with rapid expansion in urban cities and provide adequate housing for the
poor, most of the urban land tenure rights remain unrecognized, keeping the citizens living in informal
settlements at risk of eviction. Numerous conflicts over ownership and use of lands also exist between
Kuchi nomad tribes and local communities, not having the opportunities for indigenous populations to
secure their rights. Furthermore, collectively held lands are very common in Afghanistan, however
Afghan legal framework does not provide for the collective rights. Public lands, available for the usage
of the public are not clearly defined in Afghan land laws, resulting in lack of clarity over their
ownership, transferability and usage restrictions.
Widening of the scope of customary land tenure recognition (while preventing extensive land grabbing)
and clarifying the status, legal recognition and ways of registration of collective rights is necessary to
be able to increase the land tenure security of the majority of the Afghan population. Additionally,
draft Customary Deed Registration Law, drafted by the Judicial Reform Commission in 2005, should be
reviewed and approved, as well as new law, stipulating the possibilities of formalization of non-
documentary land ownership evidence should be enacted. Furthermore, the Presidential Decree 104
enacted in 2005, which puts the provisions in place on the distribution of land for housing to eligible
returnees and IDPs, and the National Policy on Internal Displacement, approved in November 2013,
which addresses the right to adequate housing and access to land (Article 7.1.3), should be adequately
implemented and policy on Upgrading Informal Settlements, currently awaiting Cabinet approval,
should be promptly enacted.
The ambiguity between the definitions of state and public land in Afghan body of law and the absence
of the public lands registration mechanism puts land user rights of a considerable part, mainly landless,
population at risk. The Draft Rangeland Law, which provides the framework for the management of
private, community and public rangeland, should be promptly adopted. Additionally, contradictory
legal codes in terms of definition of public lands including clear distinction between arid & virgin lands
and pasturelands should be by addressed by approving existing new draft of LML currently blocked at
MoJ. The process for the recognition and most importantly registration of public lands has to be
established to protect rights of public over public lands.
Finally, the enactment of long awaited National Urban Policy and new Municipality Law as well
development of New Master Plan for Kabul and other big cities has to be prioritized by MUDA in
cooperation with Kabul Municipality, while the responsibilities over its formulation and implementation
have to be clarified. By devising new master plans for the biggest cities, the issue of the ban on




                                                   206
constructions on arable lands has to be taken into account and the provisions of the Master Plan should
be written in line with the Presidential Decree.
The opportunities for formal tenure regularization are limited in Afghanistan as well. There are two
possibilities for individual land registration in Afghanistan – through land clearance (Tasfia) or courts,
when transacting (selling, buying or mortgaging) the land. Taking into account that the customary land
tenure rights are recognized in the formal justice system only into limited extent and land clearance
(Tasfia) is conducted mostly in cases of major transfers of land such as state land leases, the
opportunities for ordinary Afghan citizens to record their land are limited. The national cadastral
survey, that was paused in 1978 and surveyed only 30% of land (later 4 more per cent were surveyed),
can currently be conducted only on an approval of the president and provides only the proof of
“probable” ownership. Furthermore, no single mecha nism for recognition of formal and customary land
rights exists without having to transact the land (at courts). This, combined with the tendency of
Afghan land laws to prioritize formal land tenure documentation, leads to the large number of lands
falling into hands of state (including public lands), numerous illegal sales (land grabbing) and leases.
Women property rights are not recognized fully of those of men, despite the existence of clear laws
providing for fair and equal rights for women in Afghanistan. The reliability of registry information is
also compromised by outdated and missing information, mainly because of limited information sharing
between different land registries, lack of formalized updating mechanism and prevalence of informal
land transactions outside of formal registration system.
In order to mainstream the formalization of land tenure in Afghanistan, ARAZI should take over
administrative responsibilities of establishing the title deeds of courts and become a one-stop-shop for
the registration of private land. Simultaneously, the registration system should be gradually replaced
by a computerized one, including the GPS coordinates, GIS imaginary and the cadaster map. This will
also enable to compare the names of the seller and buyers in previous transactions of the same plot of
land to prevent the acceptance of forged documents. The expenses for computerized registration
system have to properly budgeted taking account the licensing fees. Extensive public campaigns should
be conducted to inform ordinary citizens about the new system and the steps required for registration
of your property. Additionally, ARAZI’s plans to restart the land clearance process ( Tasfia) and
cadastral (or inventory) survey gradually conducted on large scale should be materialized. The support
in form of financial means, as well as technical expertise should be sought from National Budget,
international community and civil society.
Finally, relevant authorities should work together to operationalize already existing efforts to
incorporate a provision on land usurpation into the Criminal Code. Where appropriate donors and civil
society stakeholders should provide technical assistance to the drafting process. Additionally, the draft
Restitution Policy on Land Grabbing has to be promptly approved and prosecution of land grabbers
should be made a priority within the Attorney General’s office. Similarly investigation and technical
capacity to do so should be enhanced within the Afghan National Police (ANP). By doing so, the land
tenure security of most vulnerable population will be increased and land usurpers will be adequately
sanctioned, increasing the trust and ultimately legitimacy of the population towards the government.
Another big area of regulatory change is acquisition. Acquisition procedures are also mirrored with
shortcomings, such as lack of transparent land valuation process, late compensation payments, absence
of opportunities for appeal and no compensation for loss of rights resulting from the land use change
(such as grazing rights). Nevertheless, lease of state land to investors is one of the areas that has made
a good progress in identifying clear and transparent procedures, although not always implemented is
such way missing the provisions for adequate and fair resettlement and rehabilitation. The proposed
Land Acquisition Law (LAL), currently under review by the MoJ, including lists of 19 different categories
of public projects that can be implemented through the acquisition process, requirement that the
organisation estimates the least amount of land required for the implementation of the project,
announcement period of minimum of 9 months before the start of the project to all people affected by
the acquisition directly or indirectly, provision of third-party monitoring, which can assess whether the
leased and transferred land is used for their destined purposes, suggestion of public consultations
before acquisition process, compensation paid prior to the project start, compensation of grazing and




                                                   207
other rights and the creation of a complaints hearing committee should be promptly ratified to
rectified above mentioned shortcomings.
Land is the most cited reason for disputes in Afghanistan. Although there is a myriad of dispute
resolution mechanisms (formal and informal) existing in parallel, they share the information in ad hoc
manner and informal dispute resolution fora do not enjoy full legal recognition, despite the fact that
used by the considerable number of Afghan citizens. Formal justice system is considered costly (often
due to the need of informal payments), time-consuming and cumbersome; hence few cases make it to
courts. The law aiming at creating more effective linkages between formal and informal justice system
has to be broadly and inclusively open to public discussion, approved and implemented by all relevant
institutions to create practical and more effective linkages between formal and informal conflict
resolution mechanisms (taking into account lessons learned from projects like NRC’s Informat ion and
Legal Assistance Centers (ILACs), PEACE, LC Project and USIP/ARAZI sponsored pilot).
Finally, land taxation constitutes one of main problems in revenue collection in Afghanistan, lacking
clear procedures for updating of tax rolls and enforcement mechanisms preventing tax evasion. This
combined with relatively low investment in land administration and low prioritization of land issues on
the side of the National Unity Government, results in limited financial and human capacities of land
administration institutions. Furthermore, more clarity is needed in division of responsibilities between
certain land administration institutions mainly ARAZI and courts in terms of land registration and
dispute resolution and MUDA and municipalities in formulation and implementation of Master Plans.
One way to address these issues would be a clear communication strategy explaining the community
benefits of collecting taxes to the citizens, in particular in rural areas. The government has to assure
proper spending of collected taxes back to the community. The plans for such public campaign were
already planned by the MoF, however, they need to materialize.
During this LGAF exercise, some of the crosscutting recommendations transpired:
1. An increase in a portion of National Budget accorded to land administration, in particular for
   ARAZI, should be negotiated. The continuous support of the international development community
   in the field of land governance should be ensured.
2. Fighting corruption should become the priority of the NUG. The Anti-Corruption Strategy
   established by the President Karzai in 2008 should be implemented through the stronger
   engagement of the President himself and increased results-based support of the international
   donor community. Additionally, the past and yet unaddressed cases of corruption should be the
   priority of the Attorney’s General Office. Furthermore, the auditing capacities of the High Office of
   Oversight and Anti-Corruption should be increased and internal audits should be conducted to
   prevent corruption within formal justice system.
3. The measures should be taken by the National Unity Government of Afghanistan in order to
   improve the security situation in remote and insecure areas so as to facilitate the presence of the
   state.
4. Increased capacity-building of land administration personnel particularly on district and provincial
   level in the field of legal provisions related to land including dispute resolution, land valuation and
   taxation, public land management and land lease and acquisition procedures.
5. Increased capacity building of Afghan population on their obligations and rights related to land
   including the ways of registering the land and benefits of taxation.
New approaches to be piloted, interventions to improve land governance on a broader scale

The above mentioned regulatory and institutional actions to rectify the shortcomings of the current
land administration are not to be finalized in short term, although their implementation has to start
urgently. To accelerate the implementation of various complex processes mentioned above and to fill
the gap before the formal processes will be put in place nationwide, the possibility of innovative and
community-based mechanisms should be considered. A possibility of a pasture land administration (for
example as used by RLAP or SALEH projects) should be studied, as well as Land Administration



                                                   208
Management Project (LAMP) prepared in cooperation with MAIL in 2007 should be reconsidered to
prevent numerous conflicts over pastures in Afghanistan.

Also as an interim measure, community-based land recording and boundaries demarcation system,
which will be later on connected to ARAZI registering system and their Principal Books should be
established. Efforts need to be undertaken to ensure the acceptance of judges to use established
boundaries by the community to locate the lands registered with courts and during Tasfia process.
Additionally, the possibility of a first-stage land clearance done by communities to enable nationwide
land identification should be explored.

Criteria to assess the effectiveness of these measures.

Based on the specific methodology, the aim of this report was to broadly access the state of land
governance in Afghanistan without going into much details and district variations, although those would
certainly reveal new realities and different sets of issues. A collection of policy recommendations was
established, with the inputs from Afghan land experts, aiming to provide guidance for Afghan land
governance stakeholders on possible ways forward. Clear indicators for each recommendation and
suggested action are included in the Policy Matrix (please see the section 11).

Next steps

Various stages of LGAF implementation identified a number of issues that require immediate attention.
Clear policy recommendations and responsible institutions for implementing these recommendations
were also identified to provide the ways forward on each of the pressing issues. Monitoring indicators
of success/failure of the approaches were devised as well. All of this information was put in one Policy
Matrix (section 11 of this report), which will serve as a Roadmap for Afghan policy-makers and
international community to improve the land governance in Afghanistan.

Based on the discussions during the Policy Dialogue, the participants suggested the following steps for
the future implementation of LGAF recommendations:

    1. Follow-up meetings with ARAZI to internalize the Policy Matrix document
    2. Presentation of the document to the High Council on Land and Water chaired by the President
       by ARAZI
    3. Review of the measuring indicators and the capacities of the institutions to perform the
       monitoring. If needed, new measuring system should be devised (lead by ARAZI with the
       participation of all related land administration institutions).
    4. Review conference of the progress of the Policy Matrix implementation conducted by ARAZI
       every 6 months




                                                  209
13. Annexes:

13.1 Annex I – Glossary

Aabi                           Irrigated agricultural land
Alafchar                       Pastureland
Arbab                          Head of a village (Malik)
Asnad-e urfi                   Customary deed documents
Bogi                           Land used for gardening purposes
Burqa                          A type of Hijab worn by women in Afghanistan covering all the body
                               and face
Chamani                        A type of a green land used for animal grazing, playground or as a
                               protected area
Khermanjay                     a special field for separating wheat from hay by using cows or tractors
Daftar-i-amlak-i-dawalati      Principal books of state land
Dewan                          Registry book or book of accounts
Farmaan                        Presidential decree
Gozar                          Administrative units smaller than districts in urban areas
Haqaba                 Water rights documents
Heba                           Donation
Huqooq                 Law
Izharnama                      Land declaration
Jabazar                Rangeland
Jalsa                          Meeting or gathering
jerib                          Measurement of land equal to 2000 square meters
Jirga                          Traditional assembly of leaders making decisions by consensus and
                               according to the teachings of Islam.
Jirgamaran                     Mediator, a person who solves disputes brought to Jirga/Shura
Jungalzar                      Forestry
Konda                          Court records (archive documents) or Land Title Registration Book
Lalmi                          Rain feed agriculture land, mostly located in rural areas
Loya Jirga                     “Grand assembly" - is a special type of jirga mainly organized for
                               making a strategic decisions such as choosing a new head of state in
                               case of sudden death, adopting a new constitution, or to settling
                               national or regional issues.
Madrasa                        A college for Islamic instruction
Mahram                         Based on Islamic sharia legal terminology, a mahram (Arabic also
                               transliterated mahrim or maharem) is an unmarriageable kin with
                               whom sexual intercourse would be considered incestuous and
                               punishable
Makhzan                        Court archives
Malik                          Head of a village
Malkiat-i-auma         Public ownership
Mara’a                         Not clearly defined in Afghan law; it roughly equates to pastureland.
Maraka                         Interview
Maylati                        Tax documents
Mawat                  Vacant lands
Mena                           Specific parcels of land
Mesherano Jirga                Is the upper house of the bicameral National Assembly of Afghanistan,
                               alongside with the House of the People (Wolesi Jirga)
Mowzeyee                       Based on need or necessity
Mujahidin                      Guerrilla fighter in Islamic countries, especially those who are fighting
                               against non-Muslim forces
Mullahs                Muslim man or woman educated in Islamic theology
Mustofiat                     A branch of MoF in districts and provinces
Nahyia                        Area or district
Naizar                        Land located near to a river growing plants (straw or cane, which was
                              used for writing with ink before the invention of a pen)
Naaqilin                      People who during Zahir Shah regime’s were displaced from some part
                              of the country and moved to other part for agriculture purposes.
Qabala-e Qatae                Official deed proving a land ownership issued after a legal settlement
                              of the land
Qabele Sharayee               Legal title deed documents
Safayi                        Land/property “sanitation” taxes collected by Municipality from houses
                              located in urban areas
Sanad Rasmee Mulkyet          Legal ownership documents
Sharak                        Small town near an urban center
Shari’a                       Shari'a is an Arabic word meaning “path” or “way.” Today the term is
                              used most commonly to mean “Islamic law,” the detailed system of
                              religious law developed by Muslim scholars in the first three centuries
                              of Islam and still in force among fundamentalists today.
Shuras                        A consultative council
Tanazul              Practice of renunciation
Tapaha               Hills
Taraka                        Division of ownership
Taraka Khatt                  Document of division
Tasfiya              Land clearance process
Tashkil                       Organizational structure
Taqnin                        Department of Legistlative Drafting (MoJ)
Tazkera              Identification Card (ID)
Tokhm jirga                   An inter-tribal regional Jirga
Urfi                          Customary documents
Qawm                          Solidarity group which can signify the entities of different sizes, from
                              the small group such as individual’s family to big entities such as
                              tribes, clans and sub-clans.
Wakil-e- Gozar                Person who attends to some of the needs of the residents of the area
                              under his responsibility, such as certifying identities and residence
                              locations, mediating land and construction disputes, informing people
                              about their responsibilities to the Municipality and to public utilities,
                              and assembling needs of the community for communication to the
                              Mayor’s office.
Waqf                          Is an inalienable religious endowment in Islamic law, typically donating
                              a building or plot of land or cash for Muslim religious or charitable
                              purposes with no intention of reclaiming the assets
Waseqa Shari’a       Title Deed
Wolesi Jirga                  The House of the People - is the lower house of the bicameral National
                              Assembly of Afghanistan, alongside the House of Elders.
Zamin-e khususi               Private land
Zamin-e lalmi        Non-irrigated agricultural land




                                                 211
13.2 Annex II - Revised LGAF Definitions Regarding Concepts and Terminology
Dimension/Indicator                            Modifications/Definitions
LGI: 2.1 Rights to forest and common           The Afghan legal framework does not provide the definition of communal lands, even
lands                                          though in the past, the concept of communal lands existed and at times the communal
                                               lands were allocated to different tribes or clans. Currently, despite the absence of the
2.1.9. Boundary         demarcation       of
                                               communal land as such in Afghan land terminology, the Pasture Law 2000 mentions the
communal land
                                               communal pastures473. Art. 2(2) provides the definition of communal pastures: “Arid land
                                               which, in accordance with section (9) of the land management law does not fall within
                                               bounds of villages or towns.” According to Art. 3 of the same law, “the communal pasture
                                               can be used for grazing cattle belonging to the communities” and it cannot be brought,
                                               sold or leased (Art.6). For the purposes of this report, the communal land equals to
                                               communal pastures. Common land, however, equals to public land, to prevent limiting
                                               ourselves to communal pastures only.
LGI: 4.1 Identification of public land and     All the indicators falling under this dimension suffer from the absence of clear definition of
clear     management:       public    land     public lands in Afghan body of land laws. Public lands are not adequately defined in current
ownership is clearly defined, effectively      Afghan statutory law. Given that the Art. 3(8) of LML 2008 stipulates that any land, which
serves     the    public    purpose,     is    is deemed public and is not registered in the book of government lands, is considered state
inventoried, under clear management            land and the fact, that registration of land occurs rarely in rural areas, public land can be
responsibilities,       and       relevant     easily interchanged for the state land. Therefore the management, surveying and public
information is publicly accessible.            assess to information on public lands cannot be objectively assessed. Most of the analysis
                                               on public land is derived from the analysis of the all Afghan land (private, public and
                                               state).
4.1.1. Criteria for public land ownership      This indicator in particular suffers from an unclear definition of “public interest”, “public
are clearly defined and assigned to the        good”, “public welfare” etc. So as no clear definition of public land is provided in Afghan
right level of government.                     legal framework, nor the definitions of how the public lands should be used for the
                                               provision of “public goods”.
4.1.6. All essential information on public     Albeit no clear definition of public land is provided in Afghan legal framework, a general
land allocations to private interests is       understanding of public lands is that the public land is the land that has been allocated for




473Certain experts advocate that the communal land equals to mara’a land. However,in Art. 82 of LML (Dari version), the translation used for all types of
pasturelands is mara’a, being it grazing land, graveyard, hills etc. Since the term mara’a encompasses all types of pasturelands, communal lands can be
certainly considered as part of mara’a land; however, not equal to mara’a land. Liz Alden Wily considers mara’a land as equal to public land (“Land, People,
and the State in Afghanistan: 2002 – 2012,” Kabul: AREU/USIP, 2013), however, due to the absence of a clear definition of public lands in Afghanistan, this
does not have a legal back-up.
publicly accessible.                           public use and is neither the property of the state nor the property of the individual, hence
                                               it cannot be sold nor leased to private interests.474 However, since the public land can be
                                               easily interchanged for the state land, which can indeed be allocated to private interests in
                                               Afghanistan, the analysis of this indicator will be based on the analysis of the state land
                                               allocations to private interest (particularly arid and virgin land).
LGI: 4.2 Justification and time-               In Afghanistan the state can acquire land from individuals only for public purposes.
efficiency of acquisition processes: the       Therefore from the legal point of view the acquired land cannot be transferred to private
state acquires land for public interest        interests. This indicator will be analyzed based on the realities on the ground, where the
only and this is done efficiently              transfer of acquired land to private interest might occur.
4.2.1. There is minimal transfer of
acquired land to private interests
LGI: 5.1 Transfer of public land to            All of the indicators under this dimension had to be modified to the realities of Afghanistan
private use follows a clear, transparent,      due to the fact that the public land, although not clearly defined, cannot be sold nor
and competitive process and payments           leased because it is a property of the public. Therefore, the analysis of the state land in
are collected and audited (with the            relation to these indicators was used in cases where Afghan legal provisions clearly provide
exception of transfers to improve equity       certain limitations on the public land transactions.
such as land distribution and land for
social housing
LGI: 5.4 Contracts involving public land
are public, easily accessible, with
agreements monitored and enforced.




This understanding is also currently being proposed in the new draft of LML, Art. 6.3. The article stipulates that public land is not the property of the 474
                                                                                                                                  government or individuals.


                                                                            213
13.3 Annex III - List of Experts and Qualifications
                                      Panel 1 : Land Tenure Recognition
Expert Investigator    Khalid Bahrami
                       Mr. Bahrami has earned his Bachelor Degree (L.L.B) in Law and Political Science
Qualifications         Faculty of Kabul University and his L.L.M from Kateb University. Recently, he has
                       worked with ARAZI as Legal Specialist in the development of land polices. His areas of
                       work include land dispute resolution and land reform.
                 Panel 2 : Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations
Expert Investigator    Ghulam Dastageer Sarwaree
                       Ghulam Dastageer Sarwaree is head of the Rangeland Department of the Ministry of
Qualifications         Agriculture Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL). He has graduated from Horticulture and
                       Natural Resources Department of the Faculty of Agriculture in Kabul. Mr. Sarwaree
                       was previously a General Manager of Analysis and Planning for Environment, as well as
                       a manager of Artificial Forest Program with MAIL.
                            Panel 3 : Urban Land Use, Planning and Development
Expert Investigator    Jamshid Habib
                       Mr. Habib studied architecture at Kabul University and subsequently in Kansas State
Qualifications         University from where he received his Masters Degree in Environment Behavior
                       Studies. Currently he divides his time between teaching at Kabul University and
                       serving as a CEO for a design and consultancy firm.
                                       Panel 4 : Public Land Management
Expert Investigator     Ghulam Hussain Rahmani
                       Ghulam Hussain Rahmani is the Director of Planning and Policy at ARAZI, Kabul. He has
Qualifications         graduated from the Social Science Institute of Kabul. Mr. Rahmani has been working
                       with ARAZI for over 30 years in various positions.

   Panel 5 : Transparent Process and Economic benefit: transfer of public land to private use follows
                               clear, transparent and competitive process
Expert Investigator Arifullah Arif
                       Mr. Arif gained his L.L.B (Jurisprudence & Law) and L.L.M (Sharia & Law) from the Law
Qualifications         Faculty of Kabul University. His areas of work include the following; Legal Advisory,
                       Rule of Law, Legal Reform/Legislation Drafting/Amending, Land Reform, Anti-
                       corruption, Informal Justice System, Community Based Dispute Resolution (CBDR),
                       Capacity Building and Project Management.
                    Panel 6: Public Provision of Land Information: Registry and Cadastre
Expert Investigator    Yasin Safar
                       Mohammad Yasin Safar is an Afghan Topographical/Cadastral Surveyor and Land
Qualifications         Tenure Specialist and member of Terra Institute. He has more than 40 years
                       professional experience in land surveying, land classification, land clarification, land
                       registration and land administration. He is the former deputy of Afghan Geodesy and
                       Cartography Head Office (AGCHO) and Director of Cadastral Department.
                                    Panel 7 : Land Valuation and Taxation
Expert                 Abdul Salam Kohistani
Investigator
                      Mr. Kohistani is a graduate from Animal Science Section of Agriculture Faculty, Kabul
Qualifications        University. He is currently working as a Manager of Land transfer and exchange with
                      ARAZI, Kabul. His areas of work are Land management, Land distribution and
                      Management of land Documents Records.
                                        Panel 8: Dispute Resolution
Expert Investigator   Gul Rahman Totakhail
                      Mr. Totakhail has 10 years of work experience with national and international
Qualifications        organization mainly in the areas of legal advisory, Planning and Policy, Drafting Rules
                      and Regulations, Legislative Capacity Building, Legal Research, Technical and Legal
                      Consultancy, Parliamentary Culture and Practice as well as Administration and
                      Managements. Currently he is working as Consultant, Senior Legal Advisor and Rule of
                      Law Officer with United State Institute for Peace (USIP).
                       Panel 9 : Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies
Expert Investigator   Fahim Hakim
                      Mr. Hakim is a graduate of Engineering Faculty of Kabul University and he earned his
Qualifications        M.A in Post-war Recovery Studies from the University of York, England. Currently he is
                      working as a freelance consultant with various national and international
                      Organizations. His past professional experiences includes: Commissioner and Deputy
                      Chair to AIHRC and Program Coordinator of UNCHS (Habitat).




                                                  215
      13.4 Annex IV - Lists of Participants – panel workshops
                                    Panel 1 : Land Tenure Recognition
Name                    Title
Eng. Yousuf Pashtoon Technical Advisor, Presidential Office
Attaullah               Head of ARAZI Department of Mosahee District, Kabul
Ghulam Ehsan Sultani Director of Cadastral Survey at ARAZI, Kabul
 Ahmad Zia Langari      Commissioner at Afghanistan Independent Human Right commission (AIHRC)
Qudrat                  Project Manager, Women and Children Legal Research Foundation (WCLRF)
Eng. Noor Agha          Representative from Nangarhar Municipality
Khalid Bahrami          Formerly with Legal team of ARAZI and the expert investigator of Panel 1
Eng. Abdul Latif        Head of Construction Department, Kandahar Municipality
                Panel 2: Rights to Forest and common lands & rural land use regulations
Arif Rahimi             Representative from Wild Life Conservation Society (WCS)
Zohurullah Yaqeen       Advisor of Cadastral Survey, Cadastral Department, ARAZI, Kabul
Ghulam Dastageer        Head of Rangeland Management Department, MAIL
Sarwaree
Mohammad Arif           Director of Rangeland Management Department, MAIL
Ahmad Shah              Head of Forestation and Natural Resources Management Section, MAIL
                          Panel 3 : Urban land use, planning and development
Eng. Seyar              Civil Engineer, Herat Municipality
Abdul Satar             Architecture, Nangarhar Municipality
Eng. Ramat              Representative of Mr. Khaliq Nemat from MUDA
                                    Panel 4: Public Land management
Ghulam Hussain          Director of Planning and Policy, ARAZI, Kabul
Rahmani
Abdurrab Samadi         Head of Land Clarification, ARAZI, Kabul
Mohammad Yousuf         Chief of Policy and Planning, Cadastral Department, ARAZI, Kabul
 Panel 5 : Transparent process and economic benefit: transfer of public land to private use follows a
                                 clear, transfer, and competitive process
Habibullah Rahmani      Former Administration and Finance Director, Afghanistan Independent Land
                        Authority (ARAZI)
Wahid Rahman            Land Leased Director, Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI)
Rahmani
Saida Faqirzada         Pro-active Land Lease Manager, ARAZI
                  Panel 6: Public provision of land information: registry and cadastre
Yasin Safar             Former Head of Cadastre, Afghan Topographical/Cadastral Surveyor and Land
                        Tenure Specialist and member of Terra Institute.
Ghulam Ehsan Sultani Director of Cadastral Survey at ARAZI, Kabul
Noor Agha               Instructor at Cadastral Institute, Kabul
Motiullah Nazari        Representative of Provincial of Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI),
                        Herat Province
Ghulam Hussian          Director of Planning and Policy, ARAZI, Kabul
Rahmani
                                  Panel 7 : Land valuation and taxation
Hamidullah              Head of Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI), Parwan Province
Rohullah Haqdost        Director of Registration and Land Clarification, Ministry of Finance (MoF)
Abdul Salam             Head of Land Distribution, Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI)
Kohistani
Ahmad Khalid Ekrami Representative from Directorate of Revenue Recognition Department (MoF)
Ghulam Hussain          Representative of the Municipal District
Bayat
Abdullah Murad          Representative of the Revenue Recognition Department, MoF
                                        Panel 8: Dispute resolution
Ghulam Rahman          Legal Advisor at Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (Arazi), Kabul
Totakhail
Ahmad Sayed Ahmadi     Head of Dispute Resolution Department, Afghanistan Independent Land Authority
                       (Arazi)
Sayed Yahya Sultani    Dispute Resolution Manager, Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (Arazi)
Stanikzai              The Liaison Office (TLO), Justice Section
Noor Afzal Muslih      Leader of Nomad Tribe council, Nangarhar Province
                      Panel 9 : Review of institutional arrangements and policies
Kabir Ranjbar          Senior Legal Advisor, Afghanistan Investment Support Agency (AISA)
Gul Rahman             Legal Advisor, Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI)
Totakhail
Yasin Safar            Former Head of Cadastre, Afghan Topographical/Cadastral Surveyor and Land
                       Tenure Specialist and member of Terra Institute.
Ghulam Hussain         Director of planning and policy, ARAZI
Rahmani
Abdul Salam            Head of Land Distribution, Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI)
Kohistani
Mohammad Asif Seyar    Technical Deputy, Cadastral Survey
Nafisa Kabuli          Member of Appeal Court, Kabul
Khalid Bahrami         Formerly with the Legal Team at ARAZI




                                                217
           13.5 Annex V - List of Participants- Technical Validation Workshop
No.           Name                                       Position/Organization
      1.      Yousuf Pashtoon                            Technical Advisor, President's Office

      2.      Ms. Najia Zareef                           Law Department, Ministry of Justice (MoJ)

      3.      Ghayor Ahmad Ahmadyar                      Director of Protected Areas Management, Ministry of
                                                         Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL)
      4.      Habibullah Habib                           Head of Kabul office, Afghanistan Independent Land
                                                         Authority (ARAZI)

      5.      Motte-ullah Nazari                         Representative of Provincial of Afghanistan Independent
                                                         Land Authority (ARAZI), Herat Province
      6.      Haji Sher Ahmad                            Representative of Provincial of Afghanistan Independent
                                                         Land Authority (ARAZI), Heart Province.
      7.      Abdurrab Samadi                            Head of Land Clearance Department, Afghanistan
                                                         Independent Land Authority (ARAZI)
      8.      Arifullah Arif                             Legal Specialist, ARAZI

      9.      M. Asif Sayar                              Technical Chief, Cadastral Survey, ARAZI

      10.     Eng. Ghulam Rasoul Nawabi                  Program Director, Kabul Municipal Development Program
                                                         (KMDP), Kabul Municipality
      11.     Ghulam Hussain Bayat                       Representative of Municipal District, Kabul Municipality

      12.     Zia-ur Rahman                              Representative of Afghanistan Investment Support Agency
                                                         (AISA)
      13.     Bilal Waqad                                Legal Advisor, United Nations Assistance Mission to
                                                         Afghanistan (UNAMA)
      14.     Abdul Kabir Salehi                         ICLA Project Coordinator, Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC)

      15.     Suraya Subhrang                            Women Department Commissioner, Afghanistan’s
                                                         Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC)
      16.     Eng. Jaweed                                Representative of Humanitarian Assistance and Facilitating
                                                         Organization (HAFO)
      17.     Payton Cook                                Rule of Law Officer, United States Institute of Peace (USIP)

      18.     Haji Ghulam Hussain Rahmani                Land Conflict Resolution Director, ARAZI

      19.     Najibullah Atiqi                           Representative of International Rescue Committee (IRC),
                                                         Aynak site
      20.     Shobha Rao                                 Liaison Officer, UNHCR

      21.     Mr. Abdul Latif                            Property Manager, Kandahar Municipality

      22.     Ms. Claire Van Loveren                     Judicial Officer, UNAMA

      23.     Ms. Tamana Sharifi                         Representative of Women & Children Legal Research
                                                         Foundation (WCLRF)
      24.     Ms. Suraya Ebrahimi                        Representative of Women & Children Legal Research
                                                         Foundation (WCLRF)
      25.     Mr. Reza Amiri                             head of Knowledge Management Unit, UNEP
26.   Alec Knuerr                   Project Coordinator, UNEP

27.   Ms. Farah Diba Karimi         Urban Planning Advisor, GDMA (general directorate of
                                    municipal affairs), IDLG
28.   Mohammad Aqa                  Assistant FAO Representative, MAIL

29.   Depika Sherchan               HLP Task Force Coordinator, UN-HABITAT

30.   Bernardo Almeida              Representative of UN-HABITAT

31.   Mr. Abdul Qadir Shakiri       Training Officer, UN-HABITAT

32.   Mr. Zabiullah Habib Afroz     Director of policy and legislation, NEPA

33.   Dr. Jalaludin Naseri          Acting Director, NEPA

34.   Maiwand Rahimi                Researcher, PTRO

35.   Mirwais Asr                   Social Development Specialist, Ministry of Mines and
                                    Petroleum (MoMP)
36.   Noor Katawazi                 Director of Human Resources, MoBTA

37.   Maseehullah Farahmand         Senior Program Officer, EPD

38.   Ruhullahm Haqdost             Director of registration and land clarification, MoF

39.   Abdul Salam Kohi              Legal Policy Advisor, ACCI

40.   Sayed Mahmood                 Social and Environmental Specialist, Kabul Municipality
                                    Development Program
41.   Saleh Mohammad                Manager, AKF

42.   Kabir Zazai                   Law Department, Ministry of Justice (MoJ)




                                  219
      13.6 Annex VI - List of Participants – Policy Dialogue




No.   Name                         Organization/Position
1     Rahim-Ulla Hedayat           Senior Legal Advisor, Office of 2nd Vice-President
2     Zabihullah Habib Afrooz      Director of Policy and Legislation, NEPA
3     Jawad Peikar                 CEO, Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (ARAZI)
4     Alim Erada                   Deputy CEO, ARAZI
5     Mr. Arya                     Chief of Staff, ARAZI
6     Ghulam Hussain Rahmani       Director of Policy and Planning, ARAZI
7     Abdurab Samandi              Director, Land Clearance, ARAZI
8     Ghulam Eshan Sultan          Director of Cadastral Department, ARAZI
9     Gul Rahman Totakhil          Legal Advisor, ARAZI
10    Hashmat Ghafoori             Senior Advisor and Executive Director of Regional Programme, MRRD
11    Najib Fahim                  Head of International Agreements Directorate, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
12    Yosuf Pashtun                Technical Advisor, President’s Office
13    Mir. M. Anwar Sadat          Head of Department of Legal Cases, MoJ
15    Shobha Rao                   Representative of UNHCR
16    Ghafoor Laiwal               Deputy Minister, Ministry of Border and Tribal Affairs (MoBTA)
18    Zia Ul-haq Zahid             Afghanistan Independent Bar Association - AIBA
19    Mohammad Akbar               Representative, UNDP
       13.7 Annex VII – Institutional Map

Institutions     Type of           Land policy       Responsibility Mandate                                         Overlapping         Mandates/        Other
                 Land475                                                                                            Issues476
National Government
President        State             Formulation       •   Formulation of overall land policy, strategies and         •     Parliament      should     approve
                 and                                     short and long term goals                                        promulgated      laws    by    the
                 Private                             •   Formulation of decrees and promulgation of laws                  President, however in practice
                                                     •   Decisions on distribution and donations of state                 this    requirement    is    often
                                                         land to disadvantaged people                                     overlooked. Thus the President
                                                     •   Decisions on transfer of arid & virgin lands                     and Parliament have a large
                                                     •   Decision on conducting land surveys and making                   overlap in their mandates. This is
                                                         the information public (national or on demand)                   particularly notable as the 2008
                                                     •   Exceptional cases of acquisition of public lands                 LML      has     never    received
                                                     •   Decisions on establishing protection areas                       parliamentary approval.

Council           of    State      Formulation       •   Approval of strategic decisions based on policies          N/A
Ministers      (incl.   and                              developed by respective ministries and other
CEO)                    private                          governmental agencies
                                                     •   Decisions on leasing state land over 1500 jeribs
                                                     •   Decisions on compensation for land acquisition
                                                     •   Aproving of welfare projects through the
                                                         acquisition of large tracts of land
Parliament              State      Formulation       •   Enactment of land laws                                     •     Overlap with the executive in
                        and                          •   Supervision of law implementation                                supervision of law implementation
                        private                                                                                     •     Lack of capacity in law drafting
                                                                                                                    •     Allegations that a large number of
                                                                                                                          parliamentarians are involved in
                                                                                                                          land grabbing
High Council on         State      Formulation       •   Coordination among various land administration             N/A
Water and Land          and                              authorities
                        private                      •   Approval of strategic policies on land and water
                                                         reform;
                                                     •   Monitoring and support of proper implementation

475Please note that due to the unclear definition and contested nature of public lands in Afghanistan, in this institutional map we will consider public land to
be included in the state land.
476
    Please note that the issues such as lack of human resources and financial capacity is not mentioned here because it is similarly applicable to
all institutions dealing with land issues in Afghanistan.
                                                   of these policies;
                                               •   Addressing urgent land grabbing cases;
                                               •   Providing technical support to land and water
                                                   affairs in the country;
                                               • Issuingrequired orders on land and water affairs;
                                               • MonitoringARAZI activities;
                                               • Rural development from land and water
                                                   perspective;
                                               • Creating coordination on land water projects;
ARAZI              State     Formulation,      Land management and administration of land tenure         •   Needs greater clarity over its role
                   and       Implementati      in Afghanistan :                                              over dispute resolution – possible
                   Private   on       (incl.   • Enforcement of land law, policies and procedures            overlap exists betweem the
                             Monitoring),      • Implementation of presidential decrees                      Department of Addressing Land
                             Arbitration       • Transfer of the state land for distribution                 Disputes and the jurisdiction of
                                                   purposes to public (after the transfer,                   courts (from legal perspective
                                                   corresponsing ministries are responsible for actual       unclear; in reality when a case
                                                   distribution depending on who are the                     comes in front of a court, ARAZI
                                                   beneficiaries)                                            provides necessary documentation
                                               • Leasing of state land and the collection and                about the land; informally the
                                                   monitoring of revenues from land leases                   department can resolve the
                                               • Transfer and exchange of government and private             dispute, which is then recorded at
                                                   land                                                      ARAZI, if one of the disputants
                                               • Refinement of government or private land                    doesn’t agree with the decision,
                                               • Returning illegally occupied land                           the case is forwarded to the court
                                               • Contributing to land survey activities                  •   ARAZI makes decisions about both
                                               • Organizing and deployment of refinement teams               the leasing of the state land, as
                                                   to clear disputed lands (Tasfiya)                         well as it is responsible for its
                                                                                                             monitoring
                                               • Provide information to the courts about land
                                                   ownership                                             •   Relatively new organization with
                                                                                                             limited    professional capacity,
                                               • Protection of state land and prevention of illegal
                                                                                                             especially at provincial level.
                                                   occupation of land
                                                                                                         •   Poor coordination among main and
                                               • Participating in land dispute resolution
                                                                                                             regional offices.
                                               • Allocation of compensatory land in a methodical
                                                                                                         •   There     are     concerns     about
                                                   and transparent manner
                                                                                                             centralization      of     authority,
                                                                                                             especially at the Office of ARAZI
                                                                                                             CEO.
Cadastral          State     Implementati      •   Conducts geodetic, cartographic and cadastral         •   Lack of up to date cadastral
Department (part   and       on                    survey and mapping activities throughout the              information (only 34% of the



                                                                     222
of ARAZI    since   Private                        country.                                                country has been surveyed) with
2013)                                                                                                      many records since destroyed.
                                                                                                       •   Lack of clarity and gaps in
                                                                                                           Cadastral Survey Law.
                                                                                                       •   The effective functioning of
                                                                                                           Cadastral Regional Directorates
                                                                                                           have been questioned, especially
                                                                                                           after establishment of new ARAZI
                                                                                                           office.
Ministry      of    Private     Formulation,   •   Land and property taxation                          •   Limited capacity to collect taxes
Finance (MoF)                   Implementati   •   Taking part in land valuation for acquisition           in rural areas
                                on                 purposes
                                               •   Recordkeeping in mustofiat
Ministry       of   State       Formulation,   •   Sustainable management of forests, pastures         •   The ownership of pastures unclear
Agriculture,                    Implementati       (incl. deserts, hills, mountains and slopes,        •   Poor relations with community
Irrigation    and               on                 marshlands, river banks) and natural resources          councils in rural areas.
Livestock (MAIL)                               •   Taking part in land valuation for acquisition       •   Water Right Law and policies are
                                                   purposes                                                not implemented in practice.
                                                                                                       •   Limited capacity to resolve water
                                                                                                           conflicts.
                                                                                                       •   Inequity in water distribution.
                                                                                                       •   Inadequate       monitoring     and
                                                                                                           evaluation system
                                                                                                       •   Weak legal framework
                                                                                                       •   Gap between community and
                                                                                                           provincial authorities.
                                                                                                       •   Conflicts between community
                                                                                                           based approaches and formal state
                                                                                                           mechanisms.
National            State       Formulation,   •   Improve livelihood and protect the health of        •   Poor    law     enforcement     and
Environment                     Implementati       humans, fauna and flora.                                implementation capacity.
Protection                      on                                                                     •   Inadequate funding.
Agency (NEPA)
Ministry of Rural   Private –   Formulation,   •   Development and implementation of programs          •   Poor  law    enforcement       and
Rehabilitation      rural       Implementati       promoting responsible social and financial growth       implementation capacity.
and Development     areas       on                 in rural areas, primarily in the non-farm sector.
(MRRD)                                         •   Implementing a made-in-Afghanistan “Pro-Poor”
                                                   growth strategy.
Ministry of Urban   Private     Formulation,   •   Making, approving and implementing National         •   Lack    of     clear    legislative


                                                                    223
Development             and           Implementati          Urban Policy.                                                  framework for urban planning, and
Affairs (MUDA)          State     –   on                •   Preparing development strategies for all the                   its implementation.
                        urban                               zones.                                                     •   Yet to produce a national urban
                        areas                           •   Preparing urban and regional plans for all major               policy.
                                                            urban areas.                                               •   Overlap with the responsibilities
                                                        •   Strengthen the capacity of municipalities.                     of the Municipalities over control
                                                        •   Developing revenue building programs for all                   and supervision of implementation
                                                            municipalities.                                                of Master Plans
                                                        •   Taking part in land valuation for acquisition
                                                            purposes
Municipalities          Private       Formulation,      •   Responsible for urban planning in large cities             •   Overlap with MUDA in relation to
                        and           Implementati      •   Adopt measures for allotment of land-plots for the             formulation,       implementation
                        state   –     on                    construction of residential houses and commercial              control and supervision of the
                        urban         (Conflict of          sites in accordance with the relevant law                      Master Plan (this is particularly
                        areas         interest :            provision.                                                     true in case of Kabul Municipality)
                                      responsible       •   Expropriate land in accordance with the provisions
                                      for                   of the land expropriation law
                                      formulation,      •   Adoption of measures for road, playground,
                                      implementati          hammams and market construction; creation of
                                      on         and        urban green spaces; public health and upgrading
                                      supervision)          works in cities477
                                                        •   Taking part in land valuation for acquisition
                                                            purposes
                                                        •   Management of public lands within city Master
                                                            Plans
Ministry of Mines       State         Formulation,      •   Development of Afghanistan’s natural resources             •   Sensitivity of the issue in terms of
and Petroleum                         Implementati                                                                         contracting of investors to develop
                                      on                                                                                   Afghan natural resources
Independent             Private       Formulation,      •   To develop sub-national governance policy                  •   Responsibilities between MUDA
Directorate   of        and           of                •   To increase people’s participation in sub-national             and IDLG for developing national
Local Governance        State         Implementati          governance                                                     urban policy is unclear.
(IDLG)                                on                •   To empower provincial councils                             •   Interference     from      provincial
                                                        •   To introduce laws on district councils, municipal              authorities in the decision making
                                                            councils, mayors, and village councils                         of municipalities.
                                                        •   To reform public administration and build
                                                            capacity of the public work force at the sub-
                                                            national level

477Abdul   Baqi Popal, “Municipalities in Afghanistan,” (Kabul: General Directorate of Municipal Affairs, 2014), 18.


                                                                                 224
                                              •   To institutionalize provincial     planning   and
                                                  budgeting
Afghanistan          State     Implementati   Sale of the state land to investors                      •     Ambiguity about legality of state
Investment                     on             Support of private investment                                  land sales (AISA selling the state
Support Agency                                                                                               land tranferred to it by ARAZI with
(AISA)                                                                                                       high prices, ambiguity of legal
                                                                                                             framework in this regard)
                                                                                                       •     Ambiguity in terms of AISA’ s
                                                                                                             status as independent entity
                                                                                                             (established as a part of the
                                                                                                             Ministry    of     Commerce      and
                                                                                                             Industries, currently its status
                                                                                                             unclear)
Courts               State     Arbitration    •   Maintaining land related records                     •     Lack     of     transparency     and
                     and                      •   Issuing title deeds                                        accessibility of land records
                     Private                  •   Dispute resolution                                   •     Corruption
                                                                                                       •     Time     consuming      and    costly
                                                                                                             process.
                                                                                                       •     Perceived conflict of interest
                                                                                                             between      their    administrative
                                                                                                             function and judicial function of
                                                                                                             resolving land related disputes.
Ministry       of    Private   Formulation,   •   Development of legal texts                           •     Overlap with the Parliament for
Justice              and       Arbitration    •   Conflict resolution (Huqooq)                               law drafting (such as Taqnin, but
                     state                                                                                   not parliament, is playing a large
                                                                                                             role in LML revision process).
Afghanistan          Private   Implementati   •   To monitor, foster and protect respect for human     N/A
Independent          and       on         -       rights
Human       Rights   state     monitoring     •   Acceptance of individual complains about the
Commission                                        violation of personal human rights.
(AIHRC)                                       •   Referral of human rights violations of individuals
                                                  to legal authorities
                                              •   Assistance in defense of Afghan citizens’ rights.

Independent          State     Formulation,   •   Protection and advocacy for right of Kuchi tribes    •     Ambiguity between state          and
Directorate    of              Implementati       and other minorities                                       publicly owned pastures
Kuchi Affairs                  on
High Office of       State     Monitoring     •   Monitoring and prevention of corruption              •     Possible overlaps with MEC
Oversight     and    and


                                                                   225
Anti-corruption    private
Provincial Government
Huqooq       (Law State       Arbitration     •   Resolving conflicts civil disputes between          •   Time consuming
Department      of and                            government- individuals or between individuals.     •   Lots    of   paper   work   and
MoJ)               private                    •   Play mediation role on conflict resolution.             bureaucracy
                                                                                                      •   Increases community awareness.
Private Sector Service Providers
Property Dealers   Private    Implementati    •   Dealing with property transactions.                 •    Their     credibility   has been
                              on              •   Inputs of land valuation process                         questioned.
                                              •   Own land record-keeping                             •    Informal charges are more than
                                                                                                           what is their mandate according
                                                                                                           to their formal obligation.
                                                                                                      •    At times acts as illegal bridge
                                                                                                           between government authorities
                                                                                                           and customers.
Cooperation for               Implementati    Facilitates mobilization and empowerment of local       •   Links community with municipal
Rehabilitation of             on              communities to ensure sustainable peace, human              authorities.
Afghanistan                                   rights, development and the overall improvement of      •   Increases community awareness
(CRA)                                         quality of life.                                            socially and economically.
Afghanistan Land    Private   Implementati    The Afghan Land Consulting Organization (ALCO) is a     •   Increases community awareness.
Consulting                    on              not-for-profit, non-political and non-governmental
Organization                                  organization (NGO). ALCO is to “enable a secure and
(ALCO)                                        equitable access to land for all citizens and improve
                                              the efficiency of land markets”
Non-governmental entities
Independent       Private     Implementati    •   Developing anti-corruption recommendations;         •   Possible overlaps with HOO
Joint Monitoring and          on         -    •   Monitoring and evaluating the anti-corruption
and    Evaluation state       monitoring          efforts of the Afghan government and the
Commission                                        international community;
(MEC)                                         •   Reporting on a regular basis to the President,
                                                  Parliament, and people of Afghanistan, as well as
                                                  to the international community, about the state
                                                  of the fight against corruption.
Provincial          Private   Mediation       •   Conflict mediation                                  •   Various informal justice system
Commissions on                                                                                            mechanisms in Afghanistan create
Conflict                                                                                                  myriad of venues for conflict
Mediation                                                                                                 resolution/mediation
Shuras & jirgas     Private   Arbitration/M   •   Addressing of land disputes often with aim to       •   Linkages between formal and
                              ediation            bring peace to the community as opposed to              informal justice system unclear


                                                                    226
justice         •   Informal justice system often not
                    recognized by the formal justice
                    system
                •   Currently draft law on shuras and
                    jirgas in being developed (two
                    drafts with MoJ – one also
                    including criminal aspects)




          227
      13.8 Annex VIII. - Technical concepts’ definitions
Acquisition:         Assumption or attainment of rights in property.
Adjudication:        Process of final and authoritative determination of the existing rights and
                     claims of people to land.
Long term            Possession of land through long term peaceful occupation as a trespasser or
unchallenged         squatter. The right to possession after a statutorily prescribed period of
possession:          limitation can be gained if there is no legally defendable claim.
                     NB: In the Afghan context, should not be confused with occupation without
                     explicit state warrant, because the latter is not exceptional, rather the norm
                     in most places (hence not in any strong sense “trespassers” or “squatters”)
Assessed tax:        Taxation based on an assessment of the value of the property.
Assessed value:      A value recorded by a public body on the market price of the property.
Building permit:     An approval by the local governing body on land use and planning for
                     construction or renovation to a property.
Building             Regulations or bylaws that set out standards one must conform to when
standards:           constructing or renovating buildings or immovable objects. Examples include
                     building heights, setbacks from roads or neighbors etc. Where standards are
                     not met the local authority can impose fines or instruct on construction
                     changes.
Cadastral map:       A map showing land parcel boundaries. Cadastral maps may also show
                     buildings.
Cadastral            The surveying and mapping of land parcel boundaries in support of a country's
surveying:           land administration, conveying or land registration system.
Cadastre:            A type of land information system that records land parcel. The term includes:
                     Judicial Cadastre: a register of ownership of parcels of land; Fiscal cadastre: a
                     register of properties according to their value; Land-use cadastre: a register of
                     land use
Certified copy:      A document copy certified by the official records authority who has affixed
                     his/her certification and seal to the copy.
Chain of title:      A succession of conveyances at some accepted starting point, whereby the
                     present holder of real property derives his or her title.
Classification:      Classification is a land use and management mechanism to assist decision
                     making. Classification is based on the use of the land, not on the type of
                     ownership or necessarily the rights associated with the land/property.
Cloud on the         Any document, claim, unreleased lien, or encumbrance that may impair the
title:               title to real property or make the title doubtful.
Collective           Collective ownership of a natural resource is where the holders of rights to a
ownership:           given natural resource are clearly defined as a collective group, and where
                     they have the right to exclude third parties from the enjoyment of those
                     rights.
Collectively-held     Based on the Pasture Law 2000, it can be considered as specific pasture (Art. 3
land                  (2)) located in the proximity of the village. However, in the past, various
                      tribes were not only given the land in the proximity of the village, therefore
                      for the purposes of this report, collectively-held land does not equal only to
                      specific pasture land, but includes all the lands irrespective of their proximity
                      to the village that is collectively held. Collective ownership of land constitutes
                      a major pattern of land holding across the country (in all likelihood
                      encompassing the majority of land in Afghanistan). However, this type of land
                      ownership is not recognized under Afghan law.
Concession:           A concession is a restricted use right granted to a private party for a large
                      parcel of public land that is granted for a specific purpose (for example
                      forestry, bio-fuel, cultural/tourism, etc.)

Common or             Land over which a community has rights or access to. The community may or
public land:          may not have legally recognized ownership over the land. In some cases for
                      instance the State may be considered the owner. Please note the ambiguities
                      in the legal definition of public lands in Afghanistan.
Communal land         The definition of communal land is not provided for in Afghan body of law.
                      Communal lands in Afghanistan can be considered as a public land, taking the
                      issues with their definition and communities’ rights recognition mentioned in
                      the previous parts. Nevertheless, the Pasture Law 2000 mentions the
                      communal pastures478. Art. 2(2) provides the definition of communal
                      pastures: “Communal pasture: Arid land which, in accordance with section (9)
                      of the land management law does not fall within bounds of villages or towns.”
                      According to Art. 3 of the same law, “the communal pasture can be used for
                      grazing cattle belonging to the communities” and it cannot be brought, sold or
                      leased (Art.6).
Community             Community forests and community forest land care systems are identifiable
forest:               community groups that use and manage designated areas. In many cases
                      governmental recognition is obtained through the approval of their
                      management plan.
                      NB: Not generally applicable in Afghan context, in that most forests seem to
                      be state land over which the state has no effective control, hence community
                      use is technically unauthorized, but uncontested in fact.
Condominiums:         A condominium is a collection of individual home units along with the land
                      upon which they sit, also known as strata. Individuals have private rights
                      within the complex/building, but they also have use and access to common
                      facilities, including hallways, stairwells, and exterior areas etc. There are
                      typically common property areas included in the property that require
                      management by the commons.
Customary tenure: The holding of land in accordance with customary law. Customs are a set of
                  agreed, stipulated or generally accepted standards, social norms and
                  practices. Customary land law regulates rights to enjoy some use of land that
                  arises through customary, unwritten practice, rather than through written or
                  codified law.
Decentralization:     Decentralization is the principle of delegating policy-making and authority
                      responsibility to local levels of public authority.



478Art. 82 of LML, Dari version: pasturelands are translated as mara’a land, meaning it can be grazing land,
graveyard, hills, etc. Therefore, the common pasture can be certainly considered as mara’a land.


                                                    229
Deed:               Written or printed instrument that effects a legal action such as a contract for
                    sale
Dispute             Typically a range of dispute resolution mechanisms is available which could be
resolution:         grouped into formal and informal dispute resolution mechanisms. The formal
                    dispute resolution mechanisms include the formal court system, administrative
                    dispute resolution and state administered or sanctioned alternative dispute
                    resolution (ADR) mechanisms. The informal systems for dispute resolution
                    typically involve community leaders, village elders, village assemblies or
                    committees in resolving disputes. They may or may not have formal
                    recognition by the state or under the law. ADR and informal systems may
                    overlap.
Encumbrance:        A right that adversely affects the land. Many are registerable in formal real
                    estate registration systems; such as restrictive covenants, easements,
                    mortgages and registered leases.
Eviction:           Eviction is the removal of someone from their occupation of land or property.
                    The term is very commonly used in connection with the eviction of squatters,
                    but may also be used in the context of unlawful eviction.
Exemption (tax):    Release from the obligation to pay tax. Property tax exemption is typically
                    based on criteria such as the particular use of the property (such as use as a
                    place of primary residence, public use, agricultural production, etc),
                    ownership (with exemptions for particular types of owners such as investors,
                    government etc.), or other factors (such as the status of improvements on the
                    land, location or size of the holding etc.).
Expropriation:      Expropriation is the act of taking away individuals' land by the state due to
                    public interest but prior to respect of procedures provided for by law and prior
                    to payment of fair compensation.
First instance      This is the first judicial instance (court) which serves as the place of a first
(Basic tribunal):   hearing of a dispute in the judicial system. Decisions served in such courts can
                    be appealed and raised to a higher level of the judicial court system.
Forests:            The different forest classifications vary with respect to designate uses,
                    management authority levels and with various effective bi-laws. Management
                    regulations typically outline user rights, production rights, extraction rights,
                    hunting and gathering rights etc. In a more general sense, forest
                    classifications can extend to a wide range of natural resource management
                    areas including wetlands, grasslands, desserts, and cleared areas.



Group:              A group is a collection of households residing in a locality and operating under
                    some common organization or set of rules and norms, with or without formal
                    recognition of the state. In rural areas these groups include indigenous,
                    nomadic and pastoral communities. In the urban context these groups include
                    organized informal settlements, collectively organized migrants who cluster in
                    a particular locality and clusters of traditional communities.
Hoqooq:             Law office, Ministry of Justice, charged with the out of court resolution of
                    disputes.




                                                 230
Informal                 Occupation of an area by a group of individuals (households) that is not legally
settlements:             registered in the name of the occupiers. There is great variety in the form of
                         informal settlements ranging from well established, well-built communities
                         that simply lack formal recognition to very heterogeneous groupings of houses
                         that are poorly planned and lack access to infrastructure such as roads,
                         utilities etc.
Improvement:             According to the world Bank definition, « indigenous people are understood as
                         follows (operational directive 4.20, 1991):
                         « Indigenous Peoples can be identified in particular geographical areas by the
                         presence in varying degrees of the following characteristics:
                         a) close attachment to ancestral territories and to the natural resources in
                         these areas;
                         b) self-identification and identification by others as members of a distinct
                         cultural group;
                         c) an indigenous language, often different from the national language;
                         d) presence of customary social and political institutions;
                         e) primarily subsistence-oriented production. »
                         In the Afghan context, this definition may apply to much of the rural
                         population, particularly in some tribal areas (mainly Pashtun, but not only)
                         where customary principles and tribal mechanisms remain strong, tribes retain
                         a strong sense of identity, and the relationship to land and the resources
                         available on it are governed by ancestral customary principles.
                         In order not to create an overlap with the previous indicator concerning
                         customary rights, “indigenous rights to land” will here apply to nomadic and
                         semi-nomadic tribes, whose practice of land use remains distinct from that of
                         the majority of the sedentary rural population.
Jerib:                   Unit of land measurement; one-fifth of a hectare (2000) square meters in most
                         of Afghanistan.
Judgment:                The decision of a court or other decision-making body upon the respective
                         rights and claims of the parties to an action or suit.
Land                     The processes of determining, recording and disseminating information about
administration:          tenure, value and use of land when implementing land management policies
                         (UNECE 1996479).
Land dispute /           A land dispute is a disagreement over land and occurs where specific
conflict:                individual or collective interests relating to land are in conflict. Land disputes
                         can operate at any scale from the international, between groups and to those
                         between individual neighbors.
Land                     The activities associated with the management of land.
management:


Land tenure              Land tenure refers to the legal regime in which rights in land are exclusively
system:                  assigned to an individual or entity, who is said to "hold" the land. A land
                         tenure system refers to the regulation for the allocation and security of rights
                         in land, transactions of property, the management and adjudication of
                         disputes regarding rights and property boundaries.


479
      UNECE, 1996. Land Administration Guidelines, United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, Geneva.


                                                       231
Land use plan:     A plan that identifies areas for a designated use for the purpose of land
                   management. Used for classification, resource management planning,
                   identification of areas for future development uses, including road widening.
Land contract:     A contract for the sale of real estate, where the purchase price is paid in
                   periodic instalments by the purchaser, who is in possession of the property
                   even though title is retained by the seller until final payment
Lease:             A lease is a contractual agreement between a landlord and a tenant for the
                   tenancy of land.
Legal framework:   Judicial, statutory and administrative systems such as court decisions, laws,
                   regulations, bylaws, directions and instructions that regulate society and set
                   enforcement processes.
Legal              A description of a specific parcel of real estate that is complete enough for an
description:       independent surveyor to locate and identify.
Mortgage:          A transfer in the interest of land for the security of a debt.
Parcel:            A parcel is a defined area of land with a unique record of ownership, use, or
                   other characteristics.
Public good:       An asset, facility, resource or infrastructure provided for the benefit of the
                   public.
Public             Public access to information is a feature of public policy by which each society
information:       defines what information, particularly about private citizens and corporate
                   entities should be available to the public.
Public land:       Public land is the land in the custodianship of the State, municipality, or local
                   authority, as opposed to private land. Please consult the report explaining the
                   ambiguities of the public land definition in Afghan context
Publicly           Referring to information that can be obtained by the public without any
accessible:        special requirements or certifications placed on the person/body making the
                   enquiry.
Registry:          The term ‘registry’ or ‘register’ is used to denote the organization where the
                   information on registered land rights is held. Information on registered land is
                   typically textual and spatial, with the former typically maintained in a registry
                   and the later in a cadastre office. In some countries there is a combined
                   organization that has both sets of data and in some countries this office is
                   called the cadastral office (in the Balkans, for example). In others there are
                   separate registry and cadastre offices. For the purpose of the LGAF, unless
                   clearly specified otherwise, we use the term ‘registry’ to cover both the
                   registry and the cadastre (if one exists).
Recognition        For LGAF purposes recognition of rights talks about how the rights are
                   recognized legally based on various land related laws and decree




                                                 232
Registration        In applying the LGAF, the term ‘registered’ means that the rights are recorded
                    unambiguously in the land administration system and there are generally few
                    disputes over the recorded information. The term ‘registered’ does not
                    necessarily mean that the final certificate or title has been issued. It is an act
                    of writing down the information about ones land in the Principal Books of
                    ARAZI or courts’ Register of Title Deeds (Kondas).
Recording:          The rights in Afghanistan can be recorded in Land Statistics Registration book
                    of the Cadastral Department, which serves as a “probable” ownership record
                    in Afghanistan.



Regularization /    Regularization of tenure is where informal or illegal occupation of land is
formalization:      legalized by statute, giving occupiers the legal right to ownership, occupation
                    or use of the land.


Resolution          Resolving a dispute through an administrative or judicial process where the
formal:             outcome is legally binding.


Resolution          Resolving a dispute through a process where the outcome is not legally
informal:           binding.
Restrictions:       A limitation on the use of real property, generally originated by the owner or
                    sub divider in a deed. Also termed a deed restriction

Secondary rights:   Rights that are beyond the primary rights to transfer property through sale,
                    gift, exchange or inheritance or encumber property through mortgage, lien or
                    other charge. Secondary rights are typically associated with use rights that
                    may or may not be eligible for registration.
State land:         Property in the custodianship of the Central/National Government.
Title:              (1) the right to or ownership of land. (2) The evidence of ownership of land.

Transaction cost:   Costs associated with an agreement over property rights and the costs of
                    enforcing those rights. For example, purchase of land may require not only
                    payment of the negotiation asking price but also legal land transfer fees to
                    establish who is the rightful owner, survey and valuation costs, arrangement
                    of credit and drafting the legal transfer document. Taxes and duties are not
                    considered part of a transaction cost.
                    NB: Given the length of formal and informal processes, opportunity costs also
                    might be relevant here.
Transfer tax:       Taxes associated with the transfer of properties payable to the State. The
                    most common is in the form of a stamp duty or capital gains tax.


Typology of         A country-specific typology of land tenure is established during the
tenure              implementation of the LGAF. It distinguishes Public ownership/use – incl.
situations:         State land Private ownership/use and Indigenous and non-indigenous
                    community tenure.




                                                 233
Tenure            A mechanism for increasing tenure security by formalizing interests in
Upgrading:        property in an incremental process. All or some rights may be registered with
                  varying degrees of restrictions placed on the property.
Urban group       Refers to identifiable groups in an urban setting. Those which people can be
rights:           easily classified as members or non-members for the purpose of benefitting
                  from specific rights to an area.
Valuation roll:   A list of taxable properties and associated property values used in assessing
                  property tax within a jurisdiction (typically a local government authority).




                                               234
14. Bibliography
     “2015 UNHCR Country Operations Profile – Afghanistan.” Geneva: United Nations High
     Commissioner for Refugees, 2015.
     AECOM. “Afghanistan Social Outreach Program (ASOP) Annual Report: July 2010-July 2011.”
     Washington, DC: United States Agency for International Development, 2011.
     “Afghanistan Economic Update, October 2014.” Kabul: The World Bank, 2014).
     “Afghanistan Initial National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on
     Climate Change.” Kabul: National Environmental Protection Agency, 2012.
     “Afghanistan Post-Conflict Environmental Assessment.” Geneva: UNEP, 2003.
     “Afghanistan Statistical Yearbook 2014-2014.” Kabul: Central Statistics Office, 2015.
     “Afghanistan’s Environmental Recovery: A Post-Conflict Plan for People and their Natural
     Resources.” Kabul: UNEP Post-Conflict Branch, 2006.
     “Afghanistan’s Urban Future.” Kabul: UN-Habitat, discussion paper #1, State of Afghan Cities,
     2013.
     ARAZI Land Lease Procedure, 2012.
     ARAZI, Operational Strategy to Become a Modern Public Land Services Institution, 2014.
     “Assessment of Out of School Children and Jogi communities.” Kabul: Samuel Hall, UNICEF, 2011.
     Barfield, Thomas, Neamat Nojumi, and J. Alexander Thier. “The Clash of Two Goods, State and
     Non-State Dispute Resolution in Afghanistan.” Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace,
     2006.
     Bertaud, Alain. “Kabul Urban Development: Current              City   Structure,     Spatial   Issues,
     Recommendation on Urban Planning.” 17 April 2005.
     Cadastral Survey Statistics Report, 1978.
     Calogero, Pietro A., “Planning Kabul: The Politics of Urbanization in Afghanistan.” doctoral
     dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 2011.
     “Cooperation: Herat, a Database Designing a Future City.” Farnesia, Ministero degli Affari Esteri
     e della Cooperazion Internazionale, 2011.
     “The Customary Laws of Afghanistan.” New York: International Legal Foundation, 2004.
     Doing      Business.   “Registering    Property.”    World      Bank      Group,     2015,
     http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/afghanistan/#registering-property
     (accessed 4 September 2015).
     “Draft Policy Paper on Addressing Land Grabbing through the Criminal Justice System.” Kabul:
     Policy Advisory Group on Land, 2014.
      “Fact-sheet      on       GDP        per      Capita.”           World            Bank,        2013.
     (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD.
     Foley, Conor. “A Guide to Property Law in Afghanistan.” Kabul: United Nations High
     Commissioner for Refugees, Norwegian Refugee Council, 2005,
     http://www.globalprotectioncluster.org/_assets/files/field_protection_clusters/Afghanistan/file
     s/HLP%20AoR/Guide_Property_Law_Afghanistan_2005_EN.pdf.
     “Formal and Informal Justice in Southern Afghanistan: Evidence from Helmand, Uruzgan, and
     Nimruz.” Kabul: The Liaison Office, 2011.
Foschini, Fabrizio. “The Social Wandering of the Afghan Kuchis.” Kabul: Afghan Analysts Network,
Thematic Report, 2013.
Gang, Rebecca. “Community-Based Dispute Resolution Processes in Balkh Province.” Kabul:
Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2010, http://areu.org.af/Uploads/EditionPdfs/1036E-
Community-Based%20Dispute%20Resolution%20in%20Balkh%20CS%202010.pdf.
Gebremedhin, Yohannes. “Land Tenure and Administration in Rural Afghanistan: Legal Aspects.”
Kabul: Asian Development Bank, Department for International Development, 2007.
Gebremedhin, Yohannes. “Preliminary Assessment of Informal Settlements in Kabul City.” Kabul:
USAID, Emerging Markets Group, 2005.
Ghani Ahmadzai, Ashraf. “Manifesto and Change and Continuity Team.” 2014.
Ghobar, Gholam Mohammad, afghanestan dar masir-e tarikh (Afghanistan in the Course of
History), Jomhuri Publications, 1st edition, SY1384 (2005).
Giovacchini, Tommaso. “Governance and Representation in the Afghan Urban Transition.” Kabul:
Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2011.
Giovacchini, Tommaso. “Jalalabad City Profile.” Kabul: Land Reform in Afghanistan (LARA),
United States Agency for International Development (USAID), 2013.
Giustozzi, Antonio, Claudio Franco and Adam Baczko. “Shadow Justice: How the Taliban run their
judiciary?” Kabul: Integrity Watch Afghanistan, 2012.
Government of Afghanistan. “Safayi Mahsool Regulations: Independent Directorial for Local
Governance.” (Guidelines for Safayi Taxation), 201 2.
Howard, Caroline and Jelena Madzarevic. “Security of Tenure and the Forced Eviction of IDPs and
Refugee Returnees in Afghanistan.” Kabul: Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre and
Norwegian Refugee Council, 2014.
“Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Capacity Building in Land Policy and Administrative Reform”
Scanagi Denmark A-S, Asian Development Bank, 2007.
“Justice and Security: Practices, Perceptions, and Problems in Kabul and Nangarhar.” Kabul: The
Liaison Office and Cordaid, forthcoming 2014.
“Kabul Urban Land Crisis: A Summary of Issues and Recommendations .” Kabul: Kabul Urban Policy
Notes Series n.1, The World Bank, 2005.
“Kabul Urbanization and Development Challenges: A Synthesis Report.” Kabul: Aga Khan Trust for
Culture, 2011.
“Kabul’s   Hidden    Crisis.” London:      Overseas     Development    Institute,          2014,
http://www.odi.org/comment/6688-kabul-refugee-idp-displacement-urban-afghanistan.
“Knowing Kabul: A potential powerhouse of social and economic development.” Kabul: UN -
Habitat, discussion paper #10, 2015.
Komino, Takeshi. “Disaster Risk Reduction National Platform and Strategic National Action Plan in
Afghanistan, in Civil Society Organization and Disaster Risk Reduction: The Asian Dilemma.”
Tokyo: Springer, 2014.
 “Living in the 'burbs, Kabul style: The human wave of homes for one million people sweeping up
the    steep      hills  around     Afghan   capital.”    Daily  Mail,    10   October    2012,
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2215793/Poverty-Kabul-style-One-million-residents-
populate-steep-hills-Afghan-capital--long-way-high-life.html.
Luccaro, Tim and Erica Gaston. “Women’s Access to Justice in Afghanistan: Individual versus
Community Barriers to Justice.” Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace, 2014,
http://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/PW98_Women's-Access-to-Justice-in-Afghanistan.pdf.



                                           236
“Major Land Disputes and Land Titling Systems of Khost Province Implications for Collaboration
between Traditional Dispute Resolution Mechanisms and ARAZI.” Kabul: The Liaison Office, 2014.
“Major New Disaster Risk Management Program for Afghanistan.” International Organization for
Migration, 10 March 2015, http://afghanistan.iom.int/press-releases/major-new-disaster-risk-
management-programme-afghanistan.
“Managing Land, Mobilizing Revenue: Strengthening Municipal Finance and Land Administration
through Property Registration and Taxation.” Kabul: UN -Habitiat, discussion paper 3, 2015.
“Mapping a Future for Jalalabad.” Kabul: USAID, 2012.
McEwen, Alec and Brendan Whitty. “Water Management, Livestock and the Opium Economy: Land
Tenure.” Kabul: Welt Hunger Hilfe, DACAAR, Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit and
European Commission, 2006.
McEwan, Alec and Sharna Nolan. “Water Management, Livestock and the Opium Economy:
Options for Land Registration.” Kabul: Welt Hunger Hilfe, DACAAR, Afghanistan Research and
Evaluation Unit and European Commission, 2007.
Ministry of Agriculture, report on achievements in the last 12 years, SY1393 (2014).
Moschtaghi, Ramin. “Max Planck Manual on the Organization and Jurisdiction of the Afghan
Courts: Afghan Court Organization and Its Compliance with the Constitution and International
Law.” Max Planck Institute for Public International Law; 3rd ed., 2009.
“National Plan for Sustainable Rangeland Management.” Kabul: Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation
and Livestock, fourth draft, 2012.
“National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment 2011-12. Afghanistan Living Condition Survey.”
Kabul: Central Statistics Office, 2014.
Peikar, Jawad. “Historic and Current institutional developments in Afghanistan’s land sector.”
Presentation by CEO of ARAZI, Housing Land Property Task Force, Kabul, 22 April 2014.
Peikar Jawad, Asta Olsen, Sanjay Upadhyay. “The proposed Law on Land Acquisition and Just and
Fair Compensation in Afghanistan.” Annual World Bank Conference of Land and Poverty,
Washington DC, March 23-27, 2015.
Popal, Abdul Baqi. “Municipalities in Afghanistan.” Kabul: General Directorate of Municipal
Affairs, 2014.
“Public Inquiry into Land Usurpation.” Kabul: Independent Joint Anti -Corruption Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee, 2014.
Rao, Shobha and Jan Trustka. “Enhancing Security of Land Tenure for IDPs.” Kabul: UN -Habitat,
2014.
Rationale for a Land Policy , Draft Land Policy, 2007 (SY 1386), Government of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan, 1.1.
Safar, Mohammad Yasin and David Stanfield. “Cadastral Survey in Afghanistan, Capacity Building
for Land Policy and Administration Reform .” Kabul: Asian Development Bank/Department for
International Development, 2007.
Schutte, Stefan. “Poor, Poorer, Poorest: Urban Livelihoods and Vulnerability in Mazar -i-Sharif.”
Kabul: Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit and European Commission, 2006.
Smith, Deborah. “Community-Based Dispute Resolution Processes in Nangarhar Province.” Kabul:
Afghanistan         Research          and           Evaluation          Unit,          2010,
http://www.areu.org.af/Uploads/EditionPdfs/941E-Community-
Based%20Dispute%20Resolution%20in%20Nangarhar%20CS%202009.pdf.




                                            237
“The Stolen Lands of Afghanistan and its People: The Legal Framework Part 1 of a 3 Part Series.”
Kabul: UNAMA Rule of Law Unit, 2014.
Thomas, Vincent. “‘Good’ Water Governance Models in Afghanistan: Gaps and Opportunities.”
Kabul: Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2013.
Thomas, Vincent. “Unpacking the Complexities of Water Conflicts Resolution Processes in
Afghanistan.” Kabul: Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2014.
Thomas, Vincent. “Water Rights and Conflict Resolution Processes in A fghanistan: The Case of
the Sar-i-Pul Sub-Basin.” Kabul: Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2013.
“Understanding Urbanization: Monitoring Urban Dynamics in a Fragile and Resource -Constrained
Context.” Kabul: UN-Habitat, discussion Paper #9, 2015.
“USAID Country Profile: Property Rights and Resource Governance: Afghanistan.” Washington,
DC: United States Agency for International Development, undated (post-2010).
Wardak, Ali. “Civil Dispute Resolution in Afghanistan.” Kabul: UNDP, JHRA Project, 2015.
Wardak, Ali. “Jirga - a Traditional Method of Conflict Resolution in Afghanistan.” Unpublished
working paper, University of Glamorgan, UK, 2003.
Warren, Zach. “Afghanistan in 2014: A Survey of Afghan People.” Kabul: Asia Foundation, 2014.
Warren, Zachary and Hopkins, Nancy. “Afghanistan in 2015: A Survey of Afghan People.” Kabul:
Asia Foundation, 2015.
“White Paper on Tenure Security and Community Based Upgrading in Kabul.” Kabul: Ministry of
Urban Development, 2006.
Wily, Liz Alden. “Land and the Constitution: Current Land Issues in Afghanistan.” Kabul:
Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2003.
Wily, Liz Alden. “Land Governance at the Crossroads: A Review of Afghanistan’s Proposed New
Land Management Law.” Kabul: Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Un it, 2012.
Wily, Liz Alden. “Land, People and the State in Afghanistan 2002 -2012.” Kabul: Afghanistan
Research and Evaluation Unit, 2013.
Wily, Liz Alden. “Looking for Peace on the Pastures.” Kabul: Afghanistan Research and Evaluation
Unit, 2004.
“Winter Assistance to the Kabul Informal Settlements 2014/2015 - Report on the Post-Distribution
Monitoring Survey” (Kabul: Task Force on the Kabul Informal Settlements, 2015).




                                           238
