LAND GOVERNANCE
ASSESSMENT
FRAMEWORK (LGAF)
KARNATAKA
                        State Report - 2014



 School of Policy and
         Governance

                             Supported by

    Bangalore - India
                                                                KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
               2014




Acknowledgement
An exercise as elaborate and wide-ranging as the LGAF is made possible only by dedicated efforts
of several people across various teams who have contributed their time and expertise towards
developing this detailed and analytical account of Karnataka’s land governance. The project owes
a great deal to the Karnataka state government departments, their heads and other staff for their
persistent support in furnishing documents and data. We are thankful to the technical advisory
group members and experts who have contributed their insights and professional experience in
steering the panel research in appropriate direction.

We thank respective panel research teams for producing the extensively researched panel
reports that are pivotal to the entire assessment exercise. The project team also owes it to Azim
Premji University, Bangalore for hosting the project, institutional support and facilitating the
project with its infrastructure.

The origin of this study is the request made in 2012 by the State Governments of Jharkhand,
Odisha, West Bengal, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh by way of the Department of Land
Resources, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, for the World Bank to support
the undertaking of an independent land governance assessment using the LGAF approach. The
State of Bihar joined this work in 2013. The six State LGAF teams are supported by the Technical
Advisory Group (TAG), a highly qualified and capable team of nationally recognized experts each
covering one of the LGAF thematic areas. The LGAF process and TAG are coordinated by the TAG
secretariat, hosted by the Center for Sustainable Development in Delhi. CSD coordinated also the
work with DoLR. We thank the World Bank for the support extended at every stage of the
assessment exercise.




                                                                                               i
                                                                 KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014




Glossary
              Akrama sakrama       Regularization of encroachment on public land and violation
                                   of building bye-laws.
              Amrith       Mahal The land assigned for the pasturage of Amruth Mahal breed
              Kaval              of Cattle.
              Anewari              Crop Yield Assessment
              Ashraya              A housing scheme for the economically weaker sections.
              Bagar Hukum          Government land which has been cultivated by farmers
                                   without permission and whose application for title is pending
                                   for disposal before the competent authority.
              Bane land             A special type of tenure prevailing in the district of Coorg
                                   (Kodagu) Bane is part of the protected forest land granted for
                                   service of holding of wet land, held free of revenue by
                                   cultivator for grazing and to supply leaf manure and fire
                                   wood and small timber required for agricultural and domestic
                                   purposes of the cultivator.
              Benami               Made, held, done, or transacted in the name of another
                                   person—used in Hindu law to designate a transaction,
                                   contract, or property that is made or held under a name that
                                   is fictitious or is that of a third party who holds as ostensible
                                   owner for the principal or beneficial owner. Benami
                                   Transactions are prohibited under the Benami Transactions
                                   Prohibition Act of 1988
              Betta land           Betta lands are defined in the Karnataka Forest Manual as
                                   Forest privileges. Betta lands are protected forests assigned

                                                                                                  ii
                                                                KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014




                                   to gardeners in the North Canara (Uttara Kannada) District of
                                   Karnataka with certain conditions that they can graze their
                                   own cattle. Betta lands in other districts are district forests.
              Bhoomi               The name given computerization of land records project in
                                   Karnataka. Bhoomi means land in the local language of
                                   Kannada
              Booswadhana          Computerized records of land acquisition.
              records
              Chavadi              Village community centre
              E-swathu             Computerization programme covering a range of activities
                                   such as maintaining and updating records with respect to
                                   ownership, extent dimension etc of the rural settlement
                                   lands.
              Gomal land           Pasture lands set apart in a village for grazing purposes
              Gramathana           Site inside village limits which are used for residential
                                   purposes
              Gundu Thopu          Land used for planting trees for common use
              Hobli                A cluster of villages
              Inam land            A grant of a village or land with total or partial exemption
                                   from the payment of land revenue made to a person or an
                                   institution, and entered in the land records as an inam,
              Jamabandi            village land audit system
              Jamma        Malai    Jamma Malai is also a protected forest. Jamma Malai are
              land                 basically given for the cultivation of Cardamom. These are
                                   treated as enclosure within the reserve forest, according to
                                   Rule 141 of Karnataka Forest Manual
              Jan Andolan          People’s movement
              Kana land            Kanas are protected forests which is given for the privilege
                                   of the public for Coffee, Pepper, Gum and Honey and also
                                   Green Manure as per the Section 134(3) and 138(3) of
                                   Karnataka Forest Manual.
              KAVERI               Abbreviated form of Karnataka Valuation and E-registration,
              Kharab land          Kharab land is a waste, non-arable land that is in possession
                                   of the Government.



                                                                                                 iii
                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014




              Khata           The khata is primarily an assessment of property with a view
                              to levy property tax. The document will contain details
                              related to your location, the size of property, and the built up
                              area and will also have the survey numbers of the properties
                              that border on all sides
              Kisaan          Farmer
              Kumki land      Kumki is Government waste land which can be used by a
                              specified group of land holders.
              Lok Adalats     Alternative dispute resolution system, legally recognized (Lok
                              Adalat literally translates into ‘people’s court’)
              Lokayukta       Anti-corruption ombudsman or a grievance redressing body
                              which investigates cases of administrative abuse
              Maidan          Open ground
              Mandi           Market
              Mantra          A commonly repeated word or phrase
              Mojani          Means Survey in the local Kannada language. It is also the
                              name given to a software used to issue issues pre-mutation
                              sketches which are a pre-requisite for any sale transaction to
                              happen
              Motasthal       Wetlands
              Namma Bhoomi-   A housing scheme to distribute homestead plots to the poor.
              Namma Thota
              Pahani          Pahani is one of the local words used to describe Record of
                              Rights or the Record of Tenancy Rights and Cultivation (RTC)
              Paisari land    As per para 53 (97) of Karnataka Revenue Survey Manual,
                              Paisari lands are all waste and forest lands which are
                              declared to be the property of the Government and which
                              have not be notified as protected forests or as reserve
                              forests.
              Panchayat       A local council of elected representatives which has
                              autonomy; a decentralized unit of administration
              Panchatantra    A software used to maintain accounts in local government
                              offices
              Patta           Legal document issued by the government in the name of the
                              actual owner of a particular plot of land

                                                                                            iv
                                                              KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014




              Peramboke land    As per para 53 (93) of Karnataka Revenue Survey Manual,
                                Perampoke means rocky portions of land void of earth, which
                                cannot be ploughed of, and on which even grass does not
                                grow, and also land which in consequence of being with thick
                                jungle cannot be cultivated.
              Phodi             Re-drawing the borders of a parcel of land with consequent
                                changes in the cadastral map.
              Ryotwari          One of the principal methods of revenue collection during
                                British India, widely prevalent in Southern India. Taxes under
                                this system were directly collected from each individual
                                cultivator by government agents.
              Saguvali Chit     A grant certification which demarcates the extent of land
                                granted to an individual; without this certification the
                                individual is not allowed to cultivate the land
              Sakala            The name given to the time-bound delivery of services under
                                the Karnataka Guarantee of Services Act.
              Shiristedas       A revenue official in the office of tahsidlar.
              Smashaana         Graveyard
              Soppina Betta     Usufruct forest legally provided to farmers for purpose of
                                compost production (comes from the words – soppu which
                                means foliage and betta which means hills)
              Suvarna           Computerized building plan sanction system
              Paravnige-Gruha
              nakshe
              Taluk/Tahsil      An administrative unit below the sub-divisional level.
              Udyog Mitra       A government of Karnataka organization, it is an initiative to
                                promote and facilitate investments and assist investors
              Zamindari         A method of revenue collection in British India. The Zamindar
                                or the landlord was tasked with the duty of collecting taxes
                                from the peasants and hand it over to the colonial
                                authorities.




                                                                                            v
                                                                  KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014




List of Abbreviations
             BBMP               Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagar Palike

             BDA                Bangalore Development Authority

             BSUP               Basic Services for Urban Poor

             CAG                Comptroller and Auditor General

             CPR                Common Property Resource

             FMB                Field Measurement Book

             GoK                Government of Karnataka

             JFPM               Joint Forest Planning and Management

             JNNURM             Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission

             KIADB              Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board

             KIP                Karnataka Industrial Policy

             KLRA               Karnataka Land Revenue Act

             KPCB               Karnataka Pollution Control Board

             KPLC               Karnataka Public Lands Corporation

             KSCB               Karnataka Slum Clearance Board

             KT&CP              Karnataka Town & Country Planning

             KUM                Karnataka Udyog Mitra

             LAA                Land Acquisition Act

             LGI                Land Governance Indicator

             NUHHP              National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy

             RAY                Rajiv Awaas Yojna

             Record of Rights   Record of Rights

             RTC                Records of Rights, Tenancy and Crop Inspection

             SC                 Scheduled Caste

             SRO                Sub Registrar Office

                                                                                        vi
                                                 KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014




             ST     Scheduled Tribe
             UPOR   Urban Property Ownership Record
             VFC    Village Forest Committees




                                                                       vii
Contents
Acknowledgement ................................................................................................................................... i
Glossary .................................................................................................................................................... i
List of Abbreviations.............................................................................................................................. vi
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 1
1. Introduction ...................................................................................................................................... 21
2. Methodology ..................................................................................................................................... 24
3. Karnataka Context............................................................................................................................. 26
4. Assessments per panel...................................................................................................................... 31
   4.1 Panel 1: Land Rights Recognition ................................................................................................ 31
   4.2 Panel 2: Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use ............................................... 52
   4.3. Panel 3: Urban Land Use, Planning and Development .............................................................. 78
   4.4 Panel 4:Public Land Management .............................................................................................. 98
   4.5 Panel 5: Transfer of Land to Private Use................................................................................... 118
   4.6. Panel 6: Public provision of land information: registry and cadastre ...................................... 134
   4.7. Panel 7: Land Valuation and Taxation...................................................................................... 166
   4.8. Panel 8: Dispute Resolution ..................................................................................................... 177
   4.9. Panel 9: Institutional Arrangements and Policies .................................................................... 190
5.1 Policy Matrix ................................................................................................................................. 208
5.2. Best Practices ............................................................................................................................... 216
6. Conclusions ..................................................................................................................................... 222
References .......................................................................................................................................... 224
Annexure ............................................................................................................................................. 231
                                                                 KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014




Executive Summary




INTRODUCTION
                     Land Governance in the southern Indian state of Karnataka is characterized
                     by both bright spots and serious areas of concern. The state has been in the
                     forefront of modernizing land governance by using information technology
                     for the past two decades, and it has launched a few highly successful projects
                     to improve the delivery of land-related services. It also has a record of having
                     implemented one of the most progressive land reforms laws in India. At the
                     same time, however, the state has been witnessing public outcries against
                     increasing instances of land grabbing and an increasing demand for more
                     equitable distribution of land. Its urban land records, land use and planning
                     are in a state of disarray and in need of urgent corrective actions. The land
                     bureaucracy has been facing serious capacity constraints. Private investors
                     are complaining of delay in getting land for industrial projects. While the
                     successive governments have been attempting to address these issues, the
                     results have been far from satisfactory so far. It was in this context that a
                     comprehensive assessment of the status of land governance has been taken
                     up in the state, by using the World Bank’s Land Governance Assessment
                     Framework (LGAF) during 2013-1014. This report presents its findings.

                     The assessment was taken up in nine distinct thematic areas of land
                     governance as envisaged in the LGAF. These nine thematic areas are: (i) Land
                     Rights Recognition (ii) Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use
                     Regulations (iii) Urban Land Use Planning and Development (iv) Public Land
                     Management (v) Transfer of Public Land to Private Use (vi) Public Provision
                     of Land Information: Registry and Cadastre (vii) Land Valuation and Taxation
                     (viii) Dispute Resolution and (ix) Review of Institutional Arrangements and
                     Policies. In line with a participatory process that the LGAF has specified these
                     nine thematic areas were investigated by six locally drawn expert
                     investigators and was reviewed by a panel of stakeholder representatives.

     Each of the nine thematic areas has been assessed using a set of land governance indicators
     which have been further divided into various dimensions. The dimensions have been scored
                                                                                                  1
                                                                  KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014



     on a scale of A to D based on a thorough assessment of the state’s performance in the given
     indicator area. The reports prepared by the expert investigators with their recommended
     score for various dimensions were discussed with the stakeholder panels. These panels
     consisted of representatives from the state government departments concerned, retired
     officials of the government, members of civil society, private sector and in some cases lawyers
     specializing in land laws. The panels discussed the reports and arrived at a consensus on scores
     for various dimensions besides suggesting policy recommendations. The scores and policy
     recommendations were validated at a state-level meeting of the senior state government
     officials and various other stakeholders.

     The main findings of the report are summarized below with policy recommendations under
     each of the nine thematic areas.




LAND RIGHTS RECOGNITION

 1. Karnataka has a strong legal and institutional framework which recognizes and protects
    private land rights. The abolition of tenancy in agricultural land and conferment of land rights
    on tillers of land under the Karnataka Land Reforms Act-1974 reduced insecurity of land rights
    to a large extent in rural areas. At present, while overall the system provides for security of
    land rights, there are certain categories of land holders who continue to face various kind of
    insecurity of tenure. These include poor people who occupy government land without proper
    titles, those who occupy land of which the legal status has not been clearly identified (for
    example those who have been granted land which actually belong to forest department) and
    those who live in urban slums. While the government has been coming out with periodic
    measures to strengthen the tenure security of the first and the third categories of land
    holders, those who occupy the forest land which was mistakenly granted to them as non-
    forest rural agricultural land in some parts of the state face the threat of eviction under the
    current regime of strict forest laws. Exact number of those who face such insecurity of tenure
    is not available. Similarly, although the customary and indigenous land rights are recognized
    and protected in general there are some issues of confusions and overlap.
    The problem of informal or undocumented tenancy is also a matter of concern. While the
    tenancy in agricultural land was abolished under the Karnataka Land Reforms Act-1974, over
    the years a large number of people resorted to tenancy cultivation informally. Since this
    tenancy is undocumented as they are legally not recognized, the status of such informal
    tenants remains a grey area. They have no security of tenure nor can they access agricultural
    credit or various schemes of the government.

 2. Individual land in rural areas is recorded but their mapping remains incomplete. Overall,
    according to the data available with the Karnataka Survey, Settlement and Land Records

                                                                                                  2
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014



     Department over 12 million of the total 16 million records have been mapped, leaving a gap
     of around 25 per cent. In urban areas no such recording or mapping is available except in four
     cities where individual property records have been created under a new program called Urban
     Property Ownership Records (UPOR). In other urban areas, tax paid receipts (khata registers)
     are used as property records. Another category of land for which proper recording or mapping
     is not available is the rural settlement land or gramthana lands. For these lands also, the tax
     receipts constitute the sole documentary evidence of ownership.

 3. According to the current records of rights of rural land ownership, women constitute over 18
    per cent of total recorded land owners in the state. Data to determine what proportion of
    women owners is not recorded is not available. However, qualitative studies show that
    historically there has been a low incidence of land in the name of women in Karnataka.

 4. In Karnataka, over 55% of all land use is for agricultural purposes. The rights over private
    agricultural land are subject to following restrictions under various provisions of Section 79 of
    the Karnataka Land Reforms Act - 1974.
          Any person not cultivating land personally is not entitled to hold agricultural land.
          In order to be eligible to purchase agriculture land, the individual must have had an
            agricultural land in his/her name before the year 1974. That is the person should be
            an agriculturist or an agricultural worker by profession in order to be eligible to
            purchase agricultural land.
          The non-agricultural income of a purchaser who must be an agriculturist should not
            exceed Rs 200,000 (roughly $ 3200) a year.

     However, amendments brought in 1995 to the Karnataka Land Reforms Act relaxed these
     conditions to some extent which some commentators have termed as reverse tenancy.

     Further Section 63 of the Act imposes ceilings on the extent of agricultural land that can be
     owned by various categories of individuals.

     Although these restrictions were imposed in the overall public interest, over the years the
     agricultural situation and the land relations in rural Karnataka have undergone a change and
     some of these provisions may have to be reviewed. Widespread concealed tenancy is
     practiced which go unrecorded because of the blanket ban of tenancy affecting the rights of
     the actual cultivators of land. Similarly, the restrictions on purchase of agriculture land by non-
     agriculturists have often been violated and have created opportunities for corruption. Studies
     have shown that agricultural productivity is higher in neighbouring state of Tamil Nadu where
     there are no such restrictions on owning agricultural land by non-agriculturists suggesting that
     there is a case for a comprehensive review of the agricultural land right laws in Karnataka.




                                                                                                     3
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
               2014



   5. Through a series of amendments beginning 1970 the Karnataka government through its Land
      Revenue Act 1964 has attempted to provide a process for the regularization of unauthorized
      occupation of land. Purportedly acknowledging the “hardships” faced by the poor and
      underprivileged as a result of eviction from occupied land, a series of amendments in 1970,
      1997 and 1999, led to the insertion of three sections in the Act that dealt with regularization
      of such land for bona fide landless persons. An amendment made in 1999 introduced a
      provision for regularisation of unauthorised dwelling houses constructed on Government
      land, constructed prior to 14, April, 1998. Similar amendments are being contemplated once
      again now to help the poorer sections who have occupied the government land.

       While the equity objective of these measures which aim at providing security of tenure to the
       poor is laudable, the current policy allowing unauthorized occupation in the first instance,
       leaving such occupants in a state of limbo for a long time and then conferring on them the
       ownership rights may lead to several problems. First, the provisions could be abused easily for
       land grabbing and second, such post facto regularization can come in the way of systematic
       land use planning. The government should therefore take a relook at this policy of periodic
       regularization of unauthorized occupation of land.

   6. There are a number of restrictions on the sale of granted land. The restrictions are particularly
       stringent for land granted to SC/STs. While non-SC/ST grantees are allowed to alienate the
       granted land after five years with the permission of the jurisdictional Deputy Commissioner,
       in the case of land granted to SC/ST, permission needs to be obtained from the State
       Government, under Section 4 of the Karnataka Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe
       (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) Act, 1978. This procedure of getting permission from
       the government, although well-intentioned, is tedious, time consuming and is said to be
       breeding corruption and various kinds of malpractices.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

      Existing sources of insecurity of tenure need to be identified and addressed appropriately.
       This would mean conferring rights or providing rehabilitation to those who occupy land in the
       possession of the forest department; regularizing or providing alternatives to those who have
       settled in government land for a long period of time along with measures to prevent such
       unauthorized occupation in the future. In urban areas the informal tenure needs to recognized
       and protected with appropriate titling or rehabilitation. Finally, the informally leased out
       agricultural land has created a new area of tenure insecurity. Since this is a direct outcome of
       the ban on leasing out agricultural land, the government needs to review the ban in the
       changed agrarian relations in rural Karnataka.

      Restrictions on purchasing and owning agricultural land under the Sections 79 of the
       Karnataka Land Reforms Act-1974 need to be comprehensively reviewed as the objective of

                                                                                                    4
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014



     these restrictions seems to have not been fulfilled and these restrictions have put barriers on
     agricultural land market.

    There is an urgent need to create a digital repository of spatial data with geo referential co-
     ordinates for all agricultural lands so that land parcels can be identified and located easily both
     on satellite imagery and physically.

    Steps should be taken for stricter monitoring of compliance with conditions of land grant and
     confiscation of granted land which has not been utilized for the purpose specified at the time
     of grant.

    Steps should be taken to strengthen the security of land rights in urban areas by extending
     the urban property ownership record (UPOR) project throughout Karnataka.

    The government should bring about a policy for more systematic distribution of land among
     the landless and houseless people with a view to preventing unauthorized occupation of the
     government land.

    Restrictions on the right to alienate the land granted to SC/STs need to be reviewed as these
     restrictions have come in the way of their taking advantage of the land market. The
     government may buy back the land from SC/STs and create a bank of such land for future
     distribution among similar disadvantaged groups.


RIGHT TO FOREST, COMMON LANDS AND
RURAL LAND USE

 1. Karnataka has a forest cover of 43,356 sq. km, according to data available with the State Forest
    Department. This forms 22.6% of the geographic region of the state which is slightly higher
    than the national average of 21.3%. Of this, the area under notified forests is 33,331.56 sq km
    which includes reserved forests, protected forests, village forests and private forests. The rest
    is called deemed forests which are not yet notified and they include proposed forests under
    Section 4 of the Karnataka Forest Act, Betta Lands, Bane, Jammamalai forest parampoke,
    kans, kumki, Paisari, Amrit Mahal Kaval, assessed waste lands, kharab lands, Inam lands,
    thickly wooded areas, plantations etc.

 2. There is a general lack of clarity on legal recognition of forests and there is a mismatch
    between land records and the reality on the ground. As regards the rights to forest land, the
    status report for the implementation of the Forest Rights Act-2006 published by the Union
    Tribal Affairs Ministry in September 2013 reveals community rights are hardly ever realized in

                                                                                                     5
                                                                   KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014



     Karnataka. In fact, they constitute only 2% of the total applications received (i.e. 3,080
     community claims as opposed to 1,65,638 individual claims) and only 90 such titles have been
     granted under the Act.

 3. The National Forest Policy, 1988 highlighted the urgent need to protect and preserve forests
    with the necessary involvement of village communities in the regeneration of degraded forest
    lands. Karnataka was one of the earliest states to issue a Government Order in 1993 for the
    implementation of a Joint Forest Planning & Management (JFPM) programme for the
    protection and management of degraded forests with a canopy density less than 0.25, and to
    provide a 50% share in forest produce to Village Forest Committees (VFCs) set up in JFPM
    areas. Over the last two decades, nearly 5,200 VFCs have been constituted, bringing around
    340000 hectares of degraded forests under the JFPM. However, there are several issues with
    the JFPM programme as it exists. By restricting the lands that the JFPM would apply to,
    problems of open access continue to remain in forests with a greater canopy cover and in
    lands such as gomaalas, assessed wastelands and other lands which are similar in nature to
    forest lands, but under the control of the Revenue Department. Furthermore, the JFPM
    programme also does not cover a significant portion of forested lands in the Western Ghats
    which are under “individual access” systems (soppinabettas, kumkis, baanes etc.), whereby
    only certain households have exclusive rights over use.

 4. As regards the common land, it is neither properly identified nor is the responsibility for its
    protection clearly assigned. The rights of community over non-forest common resources such
    as fishing ponds etc are not clearly defined, nor are codified. There seems a great deal of
    confusion with regard to the definition and status of such land despite government orders
    issued from time to time clarifying their status and the measures to be followed while
    disposing them of. In the absence of a clear policy relating to their diversion to commercial
    and housing purposes, the extent of common land is continuously dwindling. Although the
    official data shows the total extent as 4110425 acres, this figure does not necessarily reflect
    the reality on the ground as the diversion of common land has not been properly documented.
    There has also been large scale encroachment of such land. A comprehensive survey of all
    types of common land and clear policy for their management and use are the need of the
    hour.

 5. Regulations regarding restrictions on rural land use have been imposed with the objective of
    serving public purpose but their enforcement seems to be weak. Similarly, while public
    opinion is sought while preparing and amending land use plans, these comments are not
    always incorporated in the finalization of land use plans as the process of notifying the public
    and soliciting participation is half-heartedly followed. The major regulation of rural land use is
    specified under Section 95 of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act which mandates that the use
    of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes should have the consent of the government
    through a process of land conversion. Agricultural land, which does not come under the Green
    Belt, can be converted for non-agricultural purposes like residential, commercial, industrial
                                                                                                   6
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
               2014



       etc., subject to the approval of the Special Deputy Commissioner on payment of the
       prescribed fees and subject to certain conditions. However, this policy of conversion has come
       in for criticism for the undue delay in getting conversions even in genuine cases and for the
       absence of a proper mechanism to monitor the compliance of conditions imposed at the time
       of land conversion.

   6. Rural Land Use planning is virtually absent and there is no institutional capacity in the rural
      local bodies to implement the provisions of the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act in
      rural areas.


POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

      There is an urgent need for reclassifying, identifying and surveying all non-forest and forest
       common pool and property resources - including survey of different community uses of each
       type of commons.

      There is a need to legislate for conservation of dwindling permanent pastures. Diversion of
       permanent pastures for other purposes needs to be restricted.

      Joint Forest Planning Management programme needs to be extended to cover more common
       lands such as gomaalas, soppinabettas, kumkis etc.

      Awareness about the means of formalizing group rights over common land under the Forest
       Rights Act, 2006 needs to be created as official reports suggest that a large number of tribes
       eligible to seek land rights under the Act have not submitted their claim.

      Community rights/ privileges in non-forest Common Property Resources (tanks, soppinabettas
       etc.) need to be legally recognized and protected. Such rights in existence need to be codified.

      Thickly wooded public land can be declared as reserve forest with a view to preventing
       encroachment of such land.

      Transparent scientifically informed public processes need to be evolved for planning rural land
       use. Institutional arrangements necessary for this need to be established.

      There is a need to make explicit the contributions of CPR to private property resources – e.g.
       soppinabettas to arecanut / paddy lands; jamma & bane to plantations; keres to surrounding
       ground water levels


URBAN LAND USE AND PLANNING
                                                                                                    7
                                                                   KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
               2014



   1. Karnataka has an urban population of about 23.6 million ( 38.67% ), according to the Census
      2011. The governance of urban land in Karnataka is carried out by 213 urban local bodies
      which include eight City Corporations, 43 City Municipal Councils, 68 Town Municipal Councils
      and 94 Town Panchayats.

   2. Urban land use planning is the responsibility of the elected urban local self-governments and
      the non-elected urban development authorities in Karnataka. The Karnataka Town & Country
      Planning Act (KT&CP) outlines the master plan, planning process and lists the key outcomes
      of the master plan –zoning regulations and plans. Despite the KT & CP Act itself being
      subjected to numerous amendments to facilitate ‘urban development’, questions have
      frequently been raised on the effectiveness of these master plans. For example, despite the
      restrictions on construction in tank beds, green spaces and such notified areas, there has been
      widespread encroachment, thus suggesting that the mandate of the laws is not being
      protected in practice.

   3. Another important issue pertaining to the master plan and its amendments has been with
      respect to the ‘regularisation of unauthorised construction and development’ pursued by an
      amendment (under Section 76-FF of KTCP Act) and the notification of its rules subsequently.
      Though the master plan assigns land uses for localities, the exact alignments or extents of land
      being acquired are not known by the public until process is actually started. This is seen in
      land use changes by the Bangalore Development Authority and in the development of
      Electronic City in Bangalore by Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board.

   4. The state government does provide services like access to power, community sanitation,
      street lighting, etc. Though a variety of policies and schemes exist to provide the urban poor
      with housing, their implementation has not been ineffective. Urban local bodies along with
      the state’s slum development board notify slums or informal settlements based on duration
      of occupancy and size of such settlements. However, the process is not clearly defined and ad
      hoc, giving rise to political manipulations. While national schemes like the Rajiv Awas Yojna
      (RAY) lays down guidelines for providing security of tenure to slum dwellers, its
      implementation by urban local bodies in Karnataka has been found to be ineffective.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

      There is an urgent need to streamline urban planning and its implementation in Karnataka.
       The existing practice in which para-state planning authorities undertake planning and oversee
       the implementations need to be reviewed and appropriately democratic bodies (Metropolitan
       Planning Committee in big cities, for example) as provided for under the 74th Constitutional
       Amendments need to take over the planning function in letter and spirit or at least oversee
       them even if the local planning authority undertakes it.




                                                                                                   8
                                                                  KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014



    A common jurisdiction and geographical coverage for all agencies dealing with the urban on
     provisioning of various services needs to be ensured. In the present scenario, the existence of
     many parastatal organisations, each of them acting in its own jurisdiction area, leads to
     challenges in coordinating different activities.

    Apart from the absence of a common jurisdiction and the lack of coordinated effort, even
     basic information related to different sectors is extremely difficult to collect, collate and to
     correlate. For effective planning it is imperative that all the basic information is gathered
     across a common jurisdiction with the effect of creating a robust city information system.

    There is a need for a systematic assessment of housing stock in the urban with tenure types
     and evolving a workable plan for provisioning housing.

    The policy of regularization of unauthorized construction and development in urban
     peripheries should stop and greater compliance with plan regulations and building by-laws
     should be ensured.


PUBLIC LAND MANAGEMENT

 1. Around 23 per cent (over 115 lakh acres) of the total geographical area in Karnataka is publicly
    owned, according to the data available with the Land Records, Survey and Settlement
    Department. Public Land management in Karnataka is in a state of disarray prompting the
    state to initiate a number of corrective measures such as setting up of the Karnataka Public
    Land Corporation and the passing of the Karnataka Land Grabbing (Prohibition) Bill 2011. The
    Bill is awaiting Presidential assent. These measures were initiated in response to the
    recommendations made by a high-level committee headed by former Additional Chief
    Secretary V. Balasubramanian, which investigated the cases of public land encroachment in
    the state. The committee detected rampant public land encroachments especially in the
    periphery of cities across the state and estimated that 10 per cent of the total available public
    land was under encroachment.

 2. Public land under this definition, i.e., the land which the government owns and manages
    directly can fall under two broad categories. The first category of public land – referred to as
    common land - is one which is owned and managed by the government but the people may
    have some user rights on such land. The second category of public land – referred to as
    government land - is the land owned and managed by the government on which the people
    have no such user rights. Under the former category some kind of land are available for the
    use of the individuals and some other kind are available to the community as a whole. Public
    land on which user rights are available to individuals are generally adjacent to the private land
    and the owners of the private land either cultivate that land or only collect its produce for

                                                                                                  9
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
              2014



     cultivating their private land. The public land on which people have rights collectively include
     lands such as grazing land, burial lands, tank-beds and so on. Some of these lands were used
     for grazing and other common purposes and became common property resources over time.
     These include: Gomal lands (those used for grazing the cattle); Gundu thopu (those used for
     planting trees for common use); Poramboke (or the cultivable waste); uncultivable waste
     lands; lands used for public utilities including lakes and roads etc. The land on which the
     people have no such rights is commonly known as government land.

 3. The extent of public land under these two categories in Karnataka were determined at the
    time of initial survey settlement and since then their size has been shrinking for two main
    reasons: first the government has been transferring these land (barring some kind of public
    land in the first category above) to various other public and private uses. Second, there has
    been rampant encroachment of public land across the state. The extent of public land shown
    in the government records may not reflect the ground reality as the records are not regularly
    and properly updated following the transfer of public land to private purposes and because of
    encroachments.

 4. Reforms in public land management have been hampered greatly by the absence of proper
    records to properly identify such land. Currently a drive is on to recover encroached land but
    in the absence of a clear policy and appropriate records the government has been facing
    gigantic legal hurdles in completing this exercise. The data submitted by the Karnataka Public
    Land Corporation to the State Legislature in early 2014 shows that of the 1302241 acres of
    public land encroachment detected till the end of 2013, a total of 100555 acres have been
    recovered. Of the remaining 1201686 acres which are yet to be recovered more than 50 per
    cent (745603 acres) are held up in various court cases.

 5. Under the provisions of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act- 1964 Subject to such rules as may
    be made in this behalf, the State Government, the Regional Commissioner, the Deputy
    Commissioner, the Assistant Commissioner and the Tahsildar, may dispose of land or other
    property belonging to the State Government. The process involves submission of an
    application by the applicant containing the details of the proposal, purpose etc. The DC after
    appraising the proposal, if satisfied can transfer the land invariably by lease. Although Section
    69 A of the Act, states that, the state can auction any such land to fetch higher price, it is rarely
    used these days. Moreover though the DC is empowered, of late every such case is placed
    before the state cabinet for approval. The Deputy Commissioner also has powers to grant
    public land in his jurisdiction to certain marginalized sections of society.

    Public Lands described above are typically disposed for three kinds of uses:

        Use of Public Land by the poor – the revenue department is authorized to grant cultivation
         rights to the poor and destitute for a limited period of time, in order to make public land
         useful to the needy.

                                                                                                     10
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
               2014



          For Industrial Use –Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board is the statutory
           authority which mediates between the State and the industry for use of Public land for
           industrial purposes. Long term lease of Public land for industrial use is a typical
           arrangement.
          For other public purposes – Public land may be diverted to various public purposes such
           as building roads, schools, hospitals and so on.

   The disposal of public land has become a very controversial issue as often such land is allocated in
   violation of rules. The recent controversy over the allocation of over 10000 acres of Amrit Mahal
   Kaval Land (grazing) in Challakere Taluk of Chitradurga district exemplifies this issue. Although
   there are restrictions on diverting grazing land for any other purpose, public or private, this land
   was handed over to various agencies of the union government by the state government,
   prompting some non-governmental organizations to move the Green Tribunal against this
   decision. The case has since been pending before the National Green Tribunal.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

      An immediate survey of all public land in Karnataka should be taken up and a clear policy for
       their management and disposal should be evolved keeping in view the future requirement of
       government land for various public purposes and the ecological and economic importance of
       common land resources. The recommendations made by V. Balasubramanian Committee in
       this regard should be implemented forthwith.

      The State should expedite the presidential clearance for the Karnataka Land Grabbing
       (Prohibition Bill) 2011, which provides for setting up of special courts to try land grabbing
       cases.

      While transferring public land to private purposes, people who are dependent on such land
       for their livelihood should be consulted and when the transfer takes place, the dependent
       people should be appropriately compensated.

      A mechanism should be evolved to monitor whether the land acquired and transferred to
       various purposes is actually used for the destined use.

      The departments charged with the responsibility of managing the public land should
       systematically identify public land and maintain a data-base which should be publicly
       accessible and updated from time to time. A portal can be created to make this information
       available to the public.

      All public land should be surveyed, fenced and protected not only to identify them but also to
       ensure that any encroachment on them is publicly visible.


                                                                                                   11
                                                                  KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014



    The practice of periodic regularization of unauthorized occupation of public land by the poor
     should be reviewed and a policy should be evolved keeping in mind the need to protect public
     land and the livelihood and residential needs of the poor.

    Measures should be taken to maintain a minimum stock of public land under each gram
     panchayat for unforeseen public uses in the future.




ALLOCATION OF LAND TO PRIVATE USE

 1. Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board (KIADB) is the government agency in charge of
    acquiring and transferring land to private industrial use. In addition to KIADB, the revenue
    department may directly acquire land for some private or public purposes such as setting up
    educational institutions etc. The Bangalore Urban Development Authority and the Karnataka
    Housing Boards acquire land and transfer them to private individuals as housing sites. All these
    agencies may acquire private land or use the existing public land for such transfers.

 2. The KIADB followed the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act – 1894 along with the Karnataka
    Industrial Area Development Board Act while acquiring the land till December 31, 2013. A new
    land acquisition law titled The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
    Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act-2013 came into force from January 1, 2014.
    In June 2014 Karnataka published draft rules for the implementation of the new legislation
    and sought public comments. These rules are expected to make the land acquisition process
    faster, fairer and more transparent, thus addressing some of the issues which dogged land
    acquisition under the previous law.

 3. Some of the major issues in this area in Karnataka relate to the way the acquired land is
    transferred to the private sector. First, as of now there is no clear methodology for deciding
    the actual requirements of an industry for the investment that it envisages and as a result
    there are complaints of private industries accumulating excess land through the KIADB.

 4. Another major issue is that while all such transfer of industrial land to private sector had been
    previously on lease, now the land is sold to private industries. Although there are certain
    conditions imposed for the use and alienation of such land in cases of both lease and sale,
    there are no proper mechanisms to monitor compliance.

 5. While high power committees receive, scrutinize and approve proposals for industrial
    enterprise and based on the demand of each proposal the KIADB acquires land as per the
    mandated provisions, in practice, the KIADB, in several instances, as noted by the Comptroller
                                                                                                 12
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
               2014



       and Auditor General, the courts and other studies, acted in violation of the norms. Notable
       areas of violation captured in these documents are:

           a) Acquisition of land: here the Board has either acquired land in excess of demand or
              acquired in an erratic fashion.
           b) The payment of compensation: here it is either excess payment or payment without
              the scrutiny of the mandated documents.
           c) Transfer of land: there have also been instances of violation of rules that hindered
              transparency in transfer of lands. Restriction of publicity, unauthorized transfer and
              reduction of allotment price are some of the violations.
           d) The KIADB often acquired and transferred to private industries land in violation of
              land use planning regulations notified by the local planning authorities.

   6. The price for the land acquired is determined by a district level price-fixing committee headed
      by the Deputy Commissioner of the district in a public hearing. The average registration price
      of the land being acquired over 5-10 years is used as a benchmark. Generally these prices are
      marked up by 20-50% to account for market prices being higher than registered prices. Inputs
      from the public and various other stakeholders are taken and the final prices are determined
      by the Committee headed by the Deputy Commissioner. Land owners can choose from two
      forms of compensation- they can opt for developed land as large as ~25% of acquired land in
      the same area or accept the price determined KIADB (except in the case of single unit
      complexes). Employment for one adult in each land owner's family is also provided along with
      the compensation. Under the new legislation, these measures are expected to be improved
      further.

   7. Based on suggestions received from the investors attending the Global Investors Meet in
      2010, the government launched a massive initiative in June 2010 to have a land bank and
      acquired over 1,00,000 acres of land ready for industrial development in time for the next GIM
      in June 2012. The KIADB, in collaboration with the Industries and Commerce department and
      the Revenue Department, has identified 119000 acres of land suitable for industrial use
      throughout the state.

   8. Finally, there have been a number of cases wherein the land acquired for specific purposes
      has been de-notified subsequently in violation of the law.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

      The practice of resorting to KIADB Act as an overbearing law to acquire lands which are not to
       be used for industrial purpose under the provisions of other laws (Grazing land, Green Belt
       etc). KIADB should consult with the jurisdictional planning authorities while acquiring land for
       industrial purposes and strictly avoid transfer of land meant for civic amenities etc in the
       industrial areas to the private investors.
                                                                                                   13
                                                                   KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
              2014




     Clear guidelines for compensation should be made to prevent discretion of the administration
      and the seller. There should be uniformity in the check-list of documents to be submitted by
      the land owners when they apply for compensation. Currently different kinds of documents
      are demanded by different land acquisition officers, resulting in corruption and payment of
      compensation in ineligible cases.

     There should be strict checks on de-notification of the land identified for acquisition.

     The Board should re-introduce the system of giving the land on lease and the lease conditions
      should be monitored strictly.



PROVISION OF LAND INFORMATION:
REGISTRY AND CADASTRE
 1. The central government’s Computerization of Land Records project has been enthusiastically
    pursued in Karnataka under the name Bhoomi since the early 2000s. As a result, rural land
    records have been made available in a digitized format allowing for relatively easy access by
    farmers. Fees for accessing records from the Bhoomi database are also reasonable and anyone
    can collect copies of the record of rights on payment of the official fee. The copies of the
    record of rights (Record of Rights) have also made available online.

 2. The government has also established processes to link Bhoomi with the land registration
    database (KAVERI) which allows for synchronizing the updating of the record of rights with the
    registration process. Further, integration of Bhoomi with banks and cooperative institutions
    for efficient verification of records and determining liabilities on the land have also been put
    in place. Measures are afoot to link Bhoomi data base with courts so that the encumbrances
    would also reflect any pending court cases with regard to the land parcel in question.

 3.    One weakness of the Bhoomi project is that the manual records were digitized without first
      determining whether these records reflected the actual details of the land parcel or not. As a
      result, the data in Bhoomi may not reflect the true situation on the ground. As far as the
      cadastre is concerned, in rural areas, nearly 75% of land parcels have corresponding cadastral
      maps. However, an upgraded version of the Bhoomi Project which is likely to be launched
      within a year’s time aims to update all the existing records in the data base besides developing
      a robust land information system covering all aspects of land governance.

 4. For urban property records, Karnataka is in the process of implementing an Urban Property
    Ownership Records project using latest available technology. The project which began in 2011,
    aims to create an accurate record of both spatial and textual ownership data of urban
                                                                                                  14
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
               2014



       properties. Further, this database is planned to be used to provide speedy land related
       services to urban residents. At present, since tax accounts maintained by local bodies are
       being used as property records in the absence of proper ownership documents, no cadastre
       is maintained for urban properties.

   5. Karnataka is one of the few states in India where the land records registry is financially
      sustainable through the fees charged for copies of the Record of Rights. About Rs 2250 million
      has been collected in the form of user charges since 2000. This money is used for purchase of
      equipment and to meet certain other operational costs. Even technical manpower at state
      and district level which is outsourced from private firms is funded using fees collected under
      this project.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

      A resurvey with latest technologies which will ensure that all land parcels will become spatially
       identifiable and accurate maps can be created which will help in better land management.

      The Urban Property Ownership Record project currently being implemented in four cities
       needs to be scaled up for other cities and towns in the state.

      There is an urgent need to create ownership records for gramthana (village habitation) land
       on the lines of urban property ownership documents and amending the Karnataka Land
       Revenue Act to enable panchayats to manage these lands.

      The notice period to file objections and to conduct physical verification of land parcels as part
       of mutation process should be reduced to 8 to 10 days from the current 30 days period.

      There is a need of enabling appointment based registration system. Public should be given
       opportunity to apply for registration and uploading of documents through web based
       application.

      The land registry and the registration should be integrated to end duplication of records and
       to evolve a robust land information system.

      The current drive launched for correcting errors in the Record of Rights digitized under the
       Bhoomi program should be completed within a definite time-frame.



LAND VALUATION AND TAXATION
   1. There is a well-established process for property valuation in Karnataka which is supposed to
      get revised every year. The Department of stamps and registration uses various sources to get

                                                                                                    15
                                                                   KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
               2014



       the market value of the property for fixing guidance value. The important sources are report
       from sub-registrars, District registrars, Banks, real estate agencies; Advertisements issued by
       developers etc.

   2. Karnataka as part of its urban reforms process has attempted to introduce Capital Value Based
      property taxation system along with schematic GIS and MIS of all properties of urban areas.
      This has involved the computerization of the revenue sections of the urban local bodies for
      efficient tax management. Further, a GIS Based Property Tax Information System is being put
      in place to improve property tax collection. These processes bring transparency in property
      tax levy and collection, which was hitherto criticized for inefficient tax management and low
      revenue collection.

   3. As regards tax exemption, it is difficult to say that norms are applied in a transparent and
      consistent manner especially in urban local bodies while providing exemptions as it is
      subjective decision of the officer in charge based on his discretion. Further, tax exemptions
      details are not publicly displayed for scrutiny. Also, the government has not conducted any
      study for determining the costs of collection of taxes making it difficult to determine the
      efficiency of the system.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

      The current practice of area-specific valuation of properties may be replaced with property-
       specific valuation for efficiency and better compliance.


DISPUTE RESOLUTION
   1. In Karnataka, as in other states in India, land disputes form a high proportion of cases before
      the courts and are also seen to clog the formal legal system as they generally are not disposed
      of quickly. These disputes may be classified under three broad heads- (i) acquisition disputes
      under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894; (ii) revenue disputes under the Karnataka Land
      Revenue Act, 1964 and the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961; and (iii) transactional disputes
      such as succession and transfer of property.

   2. Land acquisition cases filed in the last decade have increased substantially. However, the
      same is not true for land revenue disputes. The former also have a higher disposal rate than
      the latter.

   3. The revenue department is also vested with dispute resolution powers in Karnataka. The
      Tahsildar, who heads the revenue department at the Taluk/block level is identified as the first
      level dispute resolution officer. A large number of cases remain pending at this level. Also,
      this system has been criticized on the grounds that this combines both the functions – dispute
      resolution as well as the executive functions, which may create a conflict of interest.

                                                                                                  16
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
               2014



   4. In addition to regular courts, the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008 establishes formal rural courts
      (Gram Nyayalayas) at the panchayat level. In the context of land disputes, Gram Nyayalayas
      are empowered to adjudicate on disputes related to rights to purchase a property, use of
      common pasturage, use of irrigation facilities, wells and water channels and disputes
      regarding possession of village and farm houses.

   5. Finally, in addition to the regular civil litigation system, the state is mandated to make efforts
      towards clearing the backlog in courts through Lok Adalats. Under the Legal Services
      Authorities Act, 1987 states organise Lok Adalats or courts that are specifically set up for
      speedy disposal of cases. The jurisdiction of these courts is limited to cases in which the
      parties agree or file a complaint before this forum or when a Court deems it fit to refer the
      case to a Lok Adalat. The award of this court is in the form of an agreement and appeals
      against such awards are not allowed. However, the efficacy of the Lok Adalat system requires
      careful examination

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

      Special tribunals for land disputes may be established on the lines of land tribunals in Bihar to
       relieve the formal legal system of the land cases clogging the system.

      A separate category for land-related cases needs to be created in the data base of pending
       court cases.

      Special courts may be established for trying land grabbing cases.

      Legal Cells (in Law Department) dealing with land cases needs to be strengthened as suggested
       by Balasubramanian Committee.

      There is a need to separate out dispute resolution powers from the executive authorities such
       as Tahsildars to facilitate faster resolution of land disputes and to avoid conflict of interests.


INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS & POLICIES
   1. The policy and institutional arrangement for land governance in Karnataka has evolved over a
      period of time. Although these mechanisms are in place with proper separation of policy
      making from implementation and arbitration in most institutions, there are significant issues
      of horizontal institutional overlap and multiplicity of laws. This is because there is an absence
      of a single land code which covers all aspects of land administration.

   2. Although the Revenue Department is in general responsible for land administration, the actual
      management of land is shared by at least four departments and a number of agencies under
      these departments. The forest land is managed by the forest department and of what
      constitutes the non-forest land, the rural agricultural land, both public and private, and
                                                                                               17
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
               2014



       common lands are under the revenue department, the urban land is under the urban local
       bodies, rural housing site land (gramthana) is under the rural local bodies. Besides these, land
       use planning is under the Town and Country Planning Department which itself is under the
       larger Urban Development Department. This multiplicity of institutions has resulted in
       horizontal institutional overlaps affecting overall efficiency of land governance.

   3. The revenue department which is responsible for the larger part off land administration is also
      the general administration department. Since the revenue department is burdened with a
      wide range of general administration functions, the time and energy that it could devote to
      land administration has been traditionally low and this has also affected the efficiency of land
      administration in the state.

   4. Karnataka has one of the most progressive land reforms acts in India. The state has also come
      out with several policies to promote equity in land holdings and distribution, such as free grant
      of land to marginalized community, provision for joint registration of land in the names of
      both husband and wife etc. However, the implementation of most of these policy measures
      have been found lacking and some of the policies require a re-look at in order to effectively
      balance the demands of equity, ecology and growth.

   5. There is a serious lack of capacity at various levels of land administration, starting from the
      village level. The time-tested system of village jamabandis (land audit) has been discontinued
      with for want of sufficient manpower at the lower levels of land administration. The State has
      taken measures to fill the vacancies of the village accountants who deal with land matters at
      the village level, and surveyors whose shortage had resulted in spatial data remaining not
      updated over a long period of time. However, generally, the vacancies are not filled on a
      regular basis. Besides this, the land bureaucracy at various levels lacks proper training and
      motivation.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

      Land administration should be taken away from the general administration department and
       be vested with a separate land administration department following the West Bengal Model.
       The land administration department should be responsible for managing all kinds of non-
       forest lands – both rural an urban.

      Land administration needs to be strengthened from the village level by re-introducing annual
       jamabandi (village land audit) system.

      There is a need to create a single land code which covers all aspects of land administration to
       avoid overlaps and conflict of land laws.



                                                                                                   18
                                                                 KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014



    Procedures for correction of Record of Tenancy Rights and Cultivation (RTC) should be
     simplified and all land records related services should be made available at the village level.

    On the question of capacity building and training, the recommendation made by the Second
     Administrative Reforms Commission (SARC) pertaining to the need for State Administrative
     Training Institutes (ATI) to overhaul their training content and to ensure availability of high
     quality trainers, with adequate focus on land governance, needs to be implemented forthwith.




                                                                                                19
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014




CONCLUSIONS
To conclude, this report presents in detail the status of land governance in Karnataka. The report is
prepared by applying the World Bank’s Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF).The study
has examined the state’s land governance in nine focus areas. Overall conclusions emerging from this
study show that Karnataka has a strong policy and institutional framework for land governance which
seeks to recognize and protect land rights and to use land resources for the larger socio-economic
development. The State has also made good progress in using information and communication
technology for strengthening the administration of land records. However, there are some significant
areas of concern which need policy attention.

This study shows that multiplicity of laws with a lack of legal clarity on several crucial issues; an
overburdened land administration infrastructure; mismatch between textual and spatial records and
a poor land information system have affected the effectiveness of land governance in the State. As a
result, despite the state’s pioneering efforts of digitizing land records management and land
registration system, fraudulent duplicate and overlapping land titles continue to dog the system,
especially in urban areas, leading to conflicts and litigation in private land and unabated grabbing of
public land. Land use planning is a matter of serious concern both in rural and urban areas. In urban
areas, while there is planning machinery in place although the plan stipulations are routinely flouted,
in smaller towns and rural areas, there is virtually no land use planning in practice. There is no clear
policy to guide the use of land for the state’s overall development by striking a balance between the
competing claims of economic development, equity and environmental concerns. Indiscriminate
diversion of common land for housing and commercial purposes and a highly discretionary system of
allocation of land for private investment are too glaring to miss. The absence of a centralized land
information system to assist in decision making and in monitoring compliance of regulations is another
deficiency in the land governance system.

The State has taken up several progressive reforms in the land sector, especially in land distribution
and land records management. While these existing programs need scaling up, this study strongly
recommends for an integrated approach to solving the problems of land governance starting with a
comprehensive survey of land using modern technological tools and eventually moving towards an
absolute titling system in place of the current practice of presumptive titling.




                                                                                                    20
                                                            KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014




               1. Introduction


                    T
                            he southern Indian State of Karnataka presents a paradox in land
                            governance. The State has been in the forefront of using
                            information technology to improve land records administration
                    for the past two decades. Yet, the state has of late been routinely
                    witnessing cases of large scale grabbing of public land, a principal reason
                    for this being lack of proper land records to establish the government’s
                    ownership of such land. The State’s has a progressive land reforms policy
                    and is known for its effective implementation during the 1970s. But of
                    late there has been a wave of discontent regarding the indiscriminate
                    diversion of agricultural and common land for non-agricultural purpose.
                    There is also an increasing concern that some of the provisions of the land
                    reforms legislation have become obsolete and are adversely affecting the
                    interest of the poorer sections in whose interest the reforms had been
                    introduced. Post land reforms the state has seen a number of schemes to
                    distribute smaller plots of land to the landless through various grants and
                    housing programs. At the same time, the National Sample Survey (2003)
                    has recorded proportion of landless households in the state at 14.09 per
                    cent as against the national average of 10.04 per cent. The situation
                    compares favourably with the neighbouring states of Tamil Nadu which
                    has 16 per cent of households as landless and Andhra Pradesh (14.33 per
                    cent) but poorly with the southern neighbour, Kerala, which has only 4.8
                    per cent landless households.

                                                                                           21
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



Karnataka has a range of institutions including Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board and a
single window clearance agency to facilitate smooth availability of land for the industrial sector. The
State’s overzealousness in acquiring land for industrial purpose has often come under criticism,
especially the creation of a huge land bank to ensure speedy availability of land to the prospective
investors. Despite all of this, the Karnataka Manufacturing Task Force appointed by the State
Government makes the following observation in its report (2013):

Land is the biggest constraint for the growth of the manufacturing sector. At present, the availability,
cost and the process of obtaining land causes significant financial and time overruns for business
looking to grow or set up industries in the State. This contributes to lack of competitiveness for the
manufacturing sector (pp 7)

As the above instances suggest, Land governance in Karnataka, as it is the case in any other Indian
State, is one of the most complex areas to comprehend. Being one of the most preferred investment
destinations, especially in information industries sector of late, Karnataka has under tremendous
pressure to meet an ever increasing demand for land for industrial investment. The fact that the state
has second largest dry land and has some of the world’s most sensitive ecological hotspots only
intensified the challenge of having to balance between the needs of economic growth, ecological
conservation and equity concerns while managing the land resources. Therefore, it is critical that the
state (i) possesses an accurate estimate of its available land (ii) develops a balanced approach for its
management through an effective, efficient and equitable legal and institutional framework, and (iii)
maintains a highly detailed and easily accessible land records system to govern the available land
resources efficiently and equitably.

In this context, Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) - Karnataka is an attempt to take a
comprehensive look at the current challenges of land governance, identify the gaps and suggest
corrective measures. Developed by the World Bank, it covers the entire gamut of land governance
issues in the state under nine focus areas (panels) – namely (i) Land Rights Recognition, (ii) Rights to
Forests, Common Land and Rural Land Use, (iii) Urban Land Planning and Development, (iv) Public
Land Management (vi) Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Private Investment, (vii) Land Information,
Registry and Cadastre, (viii) land dispute resolution and (ix) institutions and policy framework.

The results of the LGAF exercise carried out through an inclusive and participatory methodology,
developed by the World Bank and detailed out in the next section are presented in this document. It

                                                                                                    22
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



is hoped that the findings along with scores given to various indicators would help the government
identify and prioritize reforms to be initiated to strengthen land governance.

The LGAF exercise was carried out in Karnataka at a critical juncture. A new government voted to
power in early 2013 has been initiating a number of reforms in land governance ever since it assumed
office. Among the other things the new government is upgrading the computerized land records
management system, launched a fresh survey of land parcels on a pilot basis and is planning to review
the existing land statutes comprehensively to identify overlaps, conflicts and redundancy. The LGAF
recommendations made in this background are expected to help the government identify policy and
institutional constraints and problems associated with the implementation of the existing policies and
programs.

The rest of this report will proceed as follows: The next section will elaborate the methodology of
LGAF – Karnataka, which will be followed by a detailed presentation of the context of Karnataka State.
The subsequent section presents the main findings of the study along with scores and analysis of
various indicators of land governance in Karnataka. The final section comprises policy
recommendations, some of the best practices and conclusions.




                                                                                                  23
                                                            KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014




               2. Methodology


                    T
                            he Land Governance Assessment Framework was developed by
                            the World Bank and its partner organizations. It has been
                            customized to the Indian context through a series of
                    deliberations involving the representatives of the participating States in
                    India and the members of the Technical Advisory Group consisting of
                    serving and retired All India Service officials and a retired High Court
                    Judge. The objective of the LGAF is to provide a tool for the diagnosis of
                    land governance problems in the specific context of its implementation
                    to establish bench marks and to monitor progress over time.

                    The LGAF framework consists of 27 land governance indicators (LGI) that
                    cover a set of nine panels listed in the previous section. Each indicator is
                    further broken down into a number of “dimensions” with pre-coded
                    statements (on a scale from A to D). In total, there are 116 dimensions in
                    the LGAF. The implementation followed the protocol described in the
                    LGAF Manual. This involved an expert investigation into each of the nine
                    thematic areas (panels) to prepare a background report and suggest
                    scores for each indicator. Each of the expert investigator’s reports and
                    scores were reviewed at workshops attended by representatives of
                    government, civil society, academia and lawyers and other experts in the
                    respective thematic area. The results and scores were validated at a
                    meeting of stakeholders, expert investigators and TAG member assigned
                    to the state concerned.




                                                                                            24
                                                                   KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



                           The indicators were scored mainly on the basis of the official documents
                           (administrative data), secondary literature, consultation with informed
                           individuals and the expertise of the investigator concerned. The
                           administrative data were obtained from the participating departments
                           directly, or by filing applications under the Karnataka Right to Information
                           Act. The documents tabled in the State Legislature were also used in
                           some cases.

In all over 60 individuals representing various stakeholder groups were part of the LGAF process in
Karnataka, besides the coordinator and the World Bank officials. The findings, scores and policy
recommendations presented in this document emerged from this elaborate process which began in
October 2013 and concluded with the Validation Workshop held in June 2014.




                                                                                                   25
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
    LGAF-INDIA
                  2014




                   3.         Karnataka Context


                              K
                                       arnataka, with a total geographical area of 191,791 sq km is
                                       India’s eighth largest state. Its population according to Census
                                       2011 is 61.1 million which accounts for 5.05 per cent of India’s
                              population and makes it the ninth most populated state in the country.
                              The state is divided into four divisions, 30 districts, 49 sub-divisions and
                              176 talukas. It has 27028 inhabited and 2362 uninhabited villages1, 281
                              towns and seven municipal corporations.2

                              Karnataka was known as princely state of Mysore during the colonial
                              period and it became an independent state of the Indian Union post-
                              Independence.




1
    Revenue Department, Government of Karnataka
2
    Urban Development Department, Government of Karnataka.
                                                                                                      26
                                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
    LGAF-INDIA
                     2014



The state assumed its present form on November 1, 1956 with the integration of Kannada speaking
areas from the erstwhile states of Madras, Bombay and Hyderabad with Mysore State. The integrated
Mysore State was renamed as Karnataka on November 1, 1973. Karnataka borders the Arabian Sea in
the West and has three natural regions – the costal belt, the Deccan Plateu and the Western Ghat
region. The state shares its borders with Maharashtra and Goa in the North, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil
Nadu in the East and Kerala in the South.

Agriculture remains the main source of livelihood for a majority of population in the state although
the contribution of agriculture to the State Domestic Product has been on a decline. Around 56 per
cent of working population in Karnataka is engaged in agriculture while secondary and tertiary sectors
account for 18 per cent and 26 per cent of workers in 2009-10. Agriculture is characterized by a wide
crop diversification and is still remains largely dependent on the southwest monsoon. Out of the net
sown area only 30 per cent is irrigated. The broad land use change over the years is indicated in the
table 3.1 below:

3.1 Area under various land use categories over the years

    Land use category         1966-68         1976-78           1986-88    1996-98       2001-03
    Non-agri.Purp             876.33          1036.47           1172.37    1288.60       1330.95
    Perm.Pastures             1675.57         1449.53           1131.57    1003.18       951.75
    Current Fallows           1065.53         1305.73           1090.33    1358.64       1084.73
    Net Sown Area             10067.23        9939.87           10621.50   10401.23      9907.43
    Gross Irrigated Area      1297.32         -                 2383.33    2970.22       9907.74
    Area in ‘000 hectares, Source:Purushottaman and Kashyap (2010)3



Land Tenure System
The tenure system that historically prevailed in most part of southern India including Karnataka was
the ryotwari system under which individual cultivators were recognized as proprietors of their land
with rights to sub-let, mortgage and transfer land through sale or as a gift. Tenure of land was secure
as long as revenue payment was made directly to the collectors of the colonial administration. In
1850s, the British Government passed laws which enabled farmers to borrow from money lenders on
the security of their land holdings. As revenue assessments were high, indebtedness grew and this in
turn led to the dispossession of land, resulting in rising tenancy. Consequently, the distribution of land




3
 Purushottaman, S. and Kashyap S., (2010) Trends in Land Use and Crop Acreage in Karnataka and their
Repurcussions, Karnataka Journal of Agricultural Science 23 (20) 330-333
                                                                                                      27
                                                                         KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



became very unequal, with rural society polarized into landlords and rich peasants against tenants
and agricultural labourers.

Against this broad backdrop, however, there were widespread local variations in the tenancy system.
As Pani (1997) notes the coastal Karnataka region had an agrarian structure that would have met the
major requirements of the zamindari system. In contrast, the agrarian system in old Mysore region of
Karnataka had historically a very limited role for tenancy. In the 1971 agricultural census, the area
under tenancy in most districts of old Mysore was well below 10 per cent, with this figure dropping to
less than 2 per cent in some districts, for example Chitradurga. In Northern Karnataka, which includes
the present Bombay Karnataka and Hyderabad Karnataka areas, agrarian system was dominated by a
very large proportion of tenant-cultivators but the system was quite different from that which existed
in coastal districts. Especially, in the three districts of Hyderabad Karnataka region (now six), the
proportion of tenanted holding to the total holdings were less than 50 per cent. One of the reasons
for this could be that the region when it was part of the Hyderabad State between 1948 and 1956
witnessed some progressive tenancy reforms legislation under which ownership rights were conferred
on a large number of tenant farmers.

Post-independence, Karnataka is one of the states known for having effectively implemented land
reforms. Aziz and Krishna (1997), in their review of the land reform program in Karnataka identified
four distinct phases of land reform and administration. In the first phase, intermediaries and new
tenancy arrangements were abolished. Then, ceilings on agricultural land holdings were imposed. In
the next phase, land of disadvantaged groups like Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes were
provided protection. And finally, there has been a relaxation on ceilings and previous restrictions on
the acquisition of agricultural land for non-agricultural use.

Although, land reforms resulted in a large number of tenants becoming land owners, analysts later
argued that its actual impact was limited. First, as the land reforms had been planned for a long time
many land lords in anticipation of the radical changes had terminated tenancy much before the Act
was passed (Damle 1989). Second, even those who benefited from the new legislation were largely
the members of the dominant castes (ibid). So, the agrarian relations changed only to a limited extent
even under Urs. Damle argues:

        In conclusion, it can be said that the land reforms in Karnataka had failed to achieve the
        avowed ideal of creating an egalitarian society. The legal measures could hardly sabotage


                                                                                                     28
                                                                            KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



        the vested interests in land. On the contrary, the loopholes in the laws were aides in disguise
        to the landlords to maintain status quo in the agrarian social structure (1989: pp 1905)

Apart of an impressive record of land reforms, Karnataka has also been known for introducing several
progressive measures in administration over the years. The state introduced a decentralized system
of governance in 1986, almost a decade before the country-wide administrative decentralization took
effect under the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments. The State also established an anti-
corruption ombudsman (the Lokayukta) also in 1986. Among other things, the administrative reform
measures introduced since then the Right to Information Act – 2000 and the Karnataka Guarantee of
Services to Citizen’s Act, which guarantees time-bound delivery of 478 administrative services across
47 state departments are noteworthy.

Land Administration
In Karnataka the Department of Revenue headed by the Minister for Revenue is primarily responsible
for land administration. The revenue department in Karnataka as is the case in several other states
has a range of general administration responsibilities along with land governance. These include
magisterial, executive and residency functions. Specific land governance related functions such as land
registration and valuation, and the Survey Settlement are handled by separate units within the
Department. While a Principal Secretary is the principal executive under the minister for the overall
revenue administration, the registration and valuation unit known as Department of Registration and
Stamps is headed by an Inspector General and the Survey Settlement unit known as the Department
of Survey Settlement and Land Records is headed by a Commissioner. While all the three wings of the
Revenue Department are individually involved in specific aspects of land governance; they jointly
handle the land registry in a complicated arrangement. In addition to the Revenue Department, the
rural and urban local bodies also enter into the land administration. The village level rural local bodies
called gram panchayats manage the village settlement land (gramthana) while the urban local bodies
are responsible for the maintenance of the urban land under their jurisdiction. The town planning
authorities and the urban development authorities are responsible for planning and land use
management in urban areas. There are also Special Purpose Vehicles such as Karnataka Industrial Area
Development Board which have been formed for facilitating transfer of land for industrial purposes.
The responsibility of managing the forest land is vested with the Karnataka Forest Department, which
is headed by the Forest Minister and has secretariat of its own.




                                                                                                          29
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



Karnataka is one of the few states to have made remarkable progress in the computerization of land
records, as part of the computerisation of land records (CoLR) project (Bhoomi) started by the Ministry
of Rural Development in 1991. Karnataka’s CoLR programme has attracted widespread recognition in
the country as well as internationally. Due to massive efforts of the revenue department of the state,
Karnataka’s 67 lakh farmers can access their land records (RTCs) at all talukas of the state through the
Bhoomi e-governance project. An amendment made to the Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964 by the
state government recognises only the computer-generated RTCs duly signed by the authorised
signatory will be valid for all legal purposes and manually written RTCs will have no legal validity. Some
of the benefits claimed by the government as a result of this project include, having a centralized
repository of rural land records in the state, simple and efficient way to update land records,
computerized records make farmers free from harassment by government officials, touts, middlemen
and village level leaders as farmers have direct access to all information about their property.

Under the National Land Records Modernization Project (NLRMP) of the Ministry of Rural
Development, Karnataka has completed the digitisation of Record of Rights (mentioned above),
computerization of land registration system (known as Kaveri Project) and the integration of digitized
Record of Rights Data base with Land Acquisition Process and Agricultural Credit system (Banks).
Digitization of the old land records and the digitization of survey records are currently underway. The
State has also decided to take up a comprehensive resurvey of land and it has been taken up on a pilot
basis in two villages in all districts.

Overall, Karnataka has a number of initiatives to improve land administration. This is significant as it
points to the fact that the need to invest in improved systems is recognized. However, these initiatives
seem to be working in isolation and what seems to be absent is an overall strategy and integrated
approach to improve land governance, as brought out in the next section.




                                                                                                      30
                                                                                         KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
    LGAF-INDIA
                       2014




                               4. Assessments per panel
4.1. Panel 1: Land Rights Recognition
             4.1.1. Context


                Introduction




K
              arnataka, the eight largest state in India, covers a land area of 191791 sq km4 of which about
              75% is privately owned while remaining 25% is under state ownership5. Land rights by and
              large are formally recognized and most of the land is held with full rights (freeholds). Under
the land reforms legislation of 1974, a large number of rural farmers cultivating land on lease were
conferred the rights on land they had been cultivating. This has substantially strengthened security of
tenure in rural areas. Land rights are formally recognized in urban areas also except in the case of
slums. Land held under customary tenure seems to be very small and no proper estimate of such land
is officially available. Customary rights over use of land and produce from some kind of land are
generally recognized. Indigenous people’s right to land has been a contentious issue over the years
but the Forest Rights Act-2006 has recognized the right of such people to the land they occupy, albeit
in a limited sense. A number of measures have been taken to strengthen the women’s rights to land.
There is a system in place to record land rights and this system, evolved over a period of time, needs
some major reforms especially in urban areas. Information technology is being deployed in a big way
to address the existing deficiencies in the system with varying degrees of success.


Some of these issues pertaining to land rights recognition are discussed below, followed by a detailed
analysis of a set of indictors which address the strengths and weaknesses of the existing legal and
institutional and policy related aspects of the security of land rights in Karnataka.




4
    Census 2011
5
    BHOOMI data base of land records available with the Revenue Department Government of Karnataka

                                                                                                               31
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



          Land Rights and Land Reforms


The tenure system that historically prevailed in most part of southern India including Karnataka was
the ryotwari system under which individual cultivators were recognized as proprietors of their land
with rights to sub -let, mortgage and transfer land through sale or as a gift. Tenure of land was secure
as long as revenue payment was made directly to the collectors of the colonial administration. In
1850s, the British Government passed laws which enabled farmers to borrow from money lenders on
the security of their land holdings. As revenue assessments were high indebtedness grew and this in
turn led to the dispossession of land, resulting in rising tenancy. By and large, these tenants had little
security against evictions or takeovers by land lords, and thus the pre-independence period was
marked with high incidence of tenure insecurity. After independence, this system continued to a large
extent although there were some attempts to protect the rights of tenants from time to time. The
reorganization of the state in 1956 by integrating Kannada speaking areas from the neighbouring
provinces only complicated this problem as a majority of the rural population came under a system of
tenancy governed independently in the different Kannada speaking areas of Madras, Bombay,
Hyderabad and Coorg states which were integrated with the State of Mysore to form the present state
of Karnataka.


In 1961 a Land Reform Act was passed with the intention to provide security to tenants against eviction
and to prevent land owners from taking away plots which their tenants had cultivated. The Act was
also designed to abolish tenancy, ban on further leases, fix fair rents with respect to the then existing
leases and to impose ceiling on land holdings so that surplus land could be redistributed among poor
cultivators and needy landless agricultural labourers. However, it was only after the Land Reforms
Amendment Act of 1974 that tenancy was done away with. These reforms were carried out uniformly
on different tenancy systems in Karnataka and rights of ownership were attempted to be accorded to
the tiller of the land and a land ceiling on ownership was also established.


After the commencement of the 1974 Act, the tenure system in Karnataka was strengthened as rights
of ownership were conferred to a large number of tenant cultivators. Data from the reports of the




                                                                                                      32
                                                                                                 KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
    LGAF-INDIA
                        2014



Revenue department show that close to 60% of the applications6 received from the erstwhile tenants
for ownership rights were granted by the land tribunals set up under the Act.



                Tenure Types and Sources of Insecurity of Land Rights


With the abolition of tenancy in the state, land came to be owned either privately or by the
government. The table 4.1.1 captures various rights associated with these two principal tenure types
(Dale & McLaughlin, 2000)

Table 4.1.1 – Tenure Types and Land Rights in Karnataka
                                                        Nature of Rights

     Tenure                           Types             To Alienate*     To Inherit    To Bequeath       To Use     Extent of land (Acres)***
                                      Purchased         Yes              Yes           Yes               Yes
     Private -
     where individuals have rights    Granted**         Conditional      Yes           Yes               Yes
     of ownership, subject to                                                                                       2,5,336,489
     statutory or contractual         Inherited         Yes              Yes           Yes               Yes
     limitations.
                                      Regularized**     Conditional      Yes           Yes               Yes
     State - All lands wherever
     situated and which are not
     the property of individuals or
     of aggregate of persons            All rights on such properties are vested in the State Government             8,610,267
     legally capable of holding
     property are declared to be
     of the state government.
     * For agricultural land alienation involves only sale and not lease, while for non-agricultural land both sale and lease are allowed.
     ** Certain restrictions are imposed on alienation and use of Granted and Regularized lands.
     *** figures from the Bhoomi data base of land records available with the Department of Revenue, Karnataka.


As a result of legal recognition of the tenure types indicated in the table above (and detailed in the
next section), there is a general sense of security in land tenure in Karnataka. However, certain
individuals and groups continue to face various kinds of insecurity of tenure. There are three main
reasons for insecure land rights at prsent. First, where the type and status of land is not clearly
identified, land rights become tenuous. For instance, in one district of Karnataka7, land on which the
Forest Department has claimed ownership as a Reserve forest, the Revenue Department has allowed
for various tenures to be established. Forest Laws require all settlers on this land to be evicted, and




6   Quoted in Damle (1993)
7
    Chikkamagalur
                                                                                                                                             33
                                                                                              KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
    LGAF-INDIA
                        2014



this has created immense insecurity for land owners8. Secondly, insecurity of rights arises when
ownership is not clearly captured in land records. Thirdly, insecurity also arises from the absence of
legal recognition of encroached land. The government from time to time regularizes encroachments
subject to certain conditions but pending such regularization the occupants of encroached land face
insecurity of tenure. In urban areas slum dwellers face similar problems.


Another grey area as regards the land rights is the problem of concealed tenancy. Although tenancy
in agricultural land has been abolished under the Land Reforms Act – 1974, tenancy continues to exist
informally. For example, 81 per cent of respondents of a survey in Gulbarga District in 2006 confirmed
that tenancy still existed (Ahuja & Singh 2006). The study noted that even with the computerization
of land records, there was no detection of concealed tenancy in the state. Overall, the concealed
tenancy has been estimated to be 2 per cent to 8 per cent of holdings9 against the national average of
15 to 25 percent (Deshpande, 2003).



                Equity and Land Rights


The Land Reforms Act of 1961 stipulated a land ceiling on the amount of land that could be held by
landlords. Several studies have shown that these provisions were not adequate to prevent landlords
from holding huge tracts of land. According to the 1961 law, a maximum of 27 standard acres of first
class wet land was fixed as the ceiling which varied up to 432 acres of dry land that was permissible
for a big family (Deshpande & Torgal, 2003). It has been noted that even under the 1974 Amendment
to the Land Reforms Act, big landlords could retain vast lands under their ownership by dividing their
family into a number of ‘units’ and also by fraudulent transactions of landed property. Thus, while it
is true that tenancy as a form of cultivation has been replaced by peasant proprietorship, the land-
ownership pattern continues to remain skewed, especially in the northern regions of Karnataka,
indicating need for further ceiling implementation. If the land ceiling is applied more stringently, more
surplus land will become free for redistribution among poorer people and land rights can be conferred
to a larger section of society.



8
    Personal Communication with State Department Officials and media reports. At the time of writing this report, unrest was growing in this
part of the state.
9
    Development in Karnataka (2007), Planning Commission Government of India, Academic Foundation New Delhi
                                                                                                                                       34
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014




Karnataka has initiated several programs to reduce inequity in land distribution as well as well as to
improve security of tenure of vulnerable groups. These include land grants to the landless (including
persons belonging to the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, ex-servicemen, political sufferers and
so on, under the Land Grant Rules – 1969) and regularization of unauthorized occupation of land by
the poorer sections. The maximum extent of unauthorized holding allowed to be regularized is 2
hectares of ‘D’ class land or equivalent (excluding plantation lands, garden lands and forest lands).


The Government has also initiated a number of steps to strengthen women’s rights to land. One
important move by the government of Karnataka is an amendment of the Karnataka Land Grant rules,
wherein for government granted land / housing sites the grant orders would be issued in the names
of both husband and wife. While joint ownership of lands purchased during marriage is not recognized
under Indian law, Karnataka state policy provides a safeguard to ensure that household land is not
sold without the knowledge of the female members. Central and State level housing schemes
implemented in Karnataka have also sought to correct the imbalance between male and female access
to land. However, under the Indira Awaas Yojana run by the Central government, women constitute
less than 40% of the beneficiaries, despite the program statement reading that “houses are invariably
allotted in the name of women” (Ministry of Rural Development, 2012). The Ashraya Yojana and Dr.
Ambedkar Rural Housing Scheme grant lands jointly in the name of the husband and wife, though this
policy is not always followed in practice. Other initiatives include, the Namma Bhoomi - Namma Thota
(Our Land – Our Garden) Homestead Program, initiated by the Rural Development and Panchayat Raj
Department in 2005 which has the objective of “enhancing respect and security of women” by issuing
joint titles in the name of husband and wife. The scheme has provided nearly 25,000 landless women
and their families with title to small plots of land.



           Recording of Land Rights


The security of tenure is dependent on the quality of records maintained to determine ownership of
land. Historically, with land surveys conducted in Karnataka in 1836 and 1840 the name of the
caretaker of the land began to be associated with land parcels. All lands surveyed had a person
associated with it. If there was no such person that land was recognized as Government Land.
However, these surveys did not bestow rights on the caretakers. It was in 1926, with the establishment
                                                                                                    35
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



of the Record of Rights regulation Act, that the concept of rights got introduced in Karnataka. Here
onwards Individual possession was recognized and documentary evidence for the same was created.
This was streamlined further under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act – 1964 which provides for issuing
the Record of Rights, Tenancy and Cultivation (RTC) as a presumptive ownership document. Karnataka
has approximately 6700000 agricultural land owners spread across 176 talukas in nearly 30,000
villages. Together they account for 20 million RTCs. Since the early 2000s these records of rights have
been digitized under the Computerization of Land Records (CLR) project, brand named Bhoomi.
Digitization of spatial records is under progress.


There are no comparable records for urban land and the rural settlement land (gramthana). For these
lands, the tax paid receipts are the only available documentary evidence of ownership. Recently, the
Survey, Settlement and Land Records Department in Karnataka has taken up the task of creating Urban
property Ownership Records (UPOR) in four cities namely Mysore, Hubli-Dharwar, Bellary and
Shimoga. UPOR aims to capture all the rights associated with properties in urban areas through the
use of modern spatial technology such as Global Positioning Systems (GPS).




                                                                                                   36
                                                                                 KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                       2014



               4.1.2. Assessment and Score


This section analyses in detail the specific elements related to land tenure recognition in Karnataka,
with a focus on legal recognition of rights, their protection in practice and the practice of recording of
rights. These elements are divided into Indicators which in turn are broken down into several
Dimensions. Indicators provide a relatively exhaustive assessment of relevant land governance issues
through specific dimensions which define areas for investigation, quantitative measurement or
qualitative assessment.10

INDICATOR 1: RECOGNITION OF A CONTINUUM OF RIGHTS: THE LAW RECOGNIZES A RANGE OF
RIGHTS HELD BY INDIVIDUAL (INCLUDING SECONDARY RIGHTS, RIGHTS BY MINORITIES and WOMEN
ETC.)



      LGI                Dimension Description             Score   Score Description

                                                           A
                Individual Rural Land Tenure Rights are            Existing legal framework recognizes and protects
 1     1(i)     Legally recognized                                 rights held by more than 90% of the rural population.


                Individual Rural Land Tenure Rights                Existing legal framework protects rights held by 70%
 1     1(ii)    Protected in Practice                      B       - 90% of the rural population


                Customary Land Tenure Rights are Legally           Customary Land Tenure Rights are partly recognized
 1     2        Recognized and protected in practice       B       and partly protected in practice


                Indigenous Rights to Land and Natural              Indigenous Rights to land and Natural resources are
 1     3(i)     Resources are Legally Recognized           B       partly recognized


                Indigenous Rights to Land and Natural              Indigenous Rights to land and Natural resources are
 1     3(ii)    Resources are Protected in Practice        C       hardly ever protected in practice


                Urban Land Tenures are Legally                     Existing legal framework recognizes rights held by
 1     4        Recognized and Protected in Practice       B       70% - 90% of the urban population




10
     Land Governance Assessment Framework: Implementation Manual
                                                                                                                        37
                                                                                                  KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                      2014



Analysis

              Legal Recognition of Individual Rural Land Tenure Rights:


With the advent of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act 1961 (Reforms Act), and the Karnataka Land
Revenue Act - 1964 (Revenue Act), the State abolished pre-existing land tenure models (in most cases)
by simply classifying all lands as either private or public lands. Private lands, or patta land – named
after the legal document issued by the Government in the name of the actual owner (or owners) of a
particular plot of land, are of multiple types. Public land is an umbrella term for all lands held by the
State. Examples of these lands include forestlands, common lands, lands reclaimed from encroachers,
government plots.


 Table 4.1.2. – Private land tenure types and corresponding laws
 Private Land Tenure Types                                                Legal Recognition
 Purchased Land                                                           Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 as amended
 Granted Land                                                                 Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 as amended
 Categories of Grantees                                                       Karnataka Land Grant Rules, 1969
      Scheduled Castes and Tribes
      Political Sufferers
      Others – landless persons residing in village where the grant
        land is situated, persons with “insufficient” extent of land in
        the same village, landless persons residing in other villages,
        others
 Inherited Land                                                           Personal Laws - Hindu Succession Act, 1956, Indian Succession
                                                                          Act, 1925, Muslim Personal Laws
 Regularized land                                                         Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 as amended
 originally encroached by poor but later regularized
 Partial Recognition – Saguvili Chit Grant                                Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 as amended
 -government allows for cultivation to the poor but the cultivators
 are not owners of the land

 Bagar Hukum – Unauthorized occupancy for cultivation pending             Not recognized in law unless occupancy is regularized.
 regularization
 Concealed Tenancy - Even after the abolition of tenancy, a large         Not recognized in law
 number of farmers continue as tenants but without declaring so.*
 Tenancy Land                                                             The Karnataka Conferment of Ownership on Mulageni or
 - tenancy has been abolished but in Dakshina Kannada, Uttara             Volamulageni Tenants Act 2011
 Kannada and Udupi districts some tenancy land tenures continue
 as they have been under litigation
 Land given in lieu of acquisition and/or as part of rehabilitation       Karnataka Land Revenue Act.
 package

The Revenue Act provides the general controlling guidelines on property ownership including
guidelines governing the leases and rentals of urban and rural lands. As per Section 99 of the Revenue
Act, an occupant has the right to use and occupy his land for either a fixed period, determined by


                                                                                                                                   38
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



tenure, or for an unlimited period of time, subject to timely payment of land revenue and compliance
with provisions. If the occupant complies with the provisions of the Revenue Act, the rights that he
retains over the land are inheritable in nature, and transferable to another party at the will of the
occupant. Further, as per Section 95 of the Revenue Act, an occupier of agricultural land has the right
to construct, either by himself or through his legal representatives or subordinates, any structures for
the improvement of cultivation of the land.

Section 127 of the Revenue Act also mandates maintenance of a record of Rights with the name of
persons who are holders, occupants, owners, mortgagees, landlords or tenants of the land. Further,
section 128 makes compulsory the reporting of rights on land acquired by an individual succession,
survivorship, inheritance, partition, purchase, mortgage, gift, and lease or otherwise. Section 129A of
the Act makes it incumbent upon the state to provide every individual a patta book containing a copy
of the record of rights pertaining to such land. Information on rights in agricultural land set out in the
Record of rights, tenancy cultivation and crop inspection (RTC) is maintained at the village level with
the copy of the RTC maintained in the office of the Tahsildar at the Taluk level.

The private land tenure typology (table 4.1.2) indicates that the current legal infrastructure provides
for a comprehensive recognition of rights of rural population.

           Protection of Individual Land Rights in Practice


Individual tenures, recognized in law are sometimes not protected in practice. This occurs when the
status of the land is not clearly identified in government records even while various types of tenures
are held on that land. For instance, as discussed above, in one district of Karnataka, land on which the
Forest Department has claimed ownership as a Reserve forest, the Revenue Department has allowed
for various tenures to be established on the same land. The protection of rights that individuals hold
on such lands is not guaranteed in practice as there is a possibility of eviction.

Similarly, while legal recognition of private tenures does not distinguish between male and female
individual owners, thus suggesting that individual rights of both men and women are recognized in
law, women’s right in land is sometime not protected in practice owing to cultural reasons which
prioritize ownership rights of men over those of women.




                                                                                                      39
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



             Legal Recognition and Protection of Customary Land Rights:


There seems to be no significant land ownership based on customary laws in Karnataka and hence the
question of recognition of such rights does not arise. Customary rights in general exist with regard to
the right to use certain category of land. There are some rare exceptions. For example: in the districts
of Dakshina Kannada certain Tulu speaking castes have the concept of “deity land” which under the
local customs can be jointly inherited only by the senior most female members of all the families who
worship the particular deity. Generally, male members of the family do not make a claim on such land
but the question remains whether law would recognize such rights enjoyed exclusively by women if
the male members make a claim. However, more important issue with regard to customary rights in
the context of Karnataka is a set of privileges which are customarily enjoyed by people on certain kinds
of land. These privileges confer only user rights on land. In the district of Kodagu (Coorg) certain
privileges are guaranteed under various customary tenure types of which Jamma-Bane tenure is well
known. Kumki land in Dakshina Kannada and Udupi districts and Soppinabetta in Uttara Kannada are
the principal tenure types which confer some kind of privileges on the farmers owning adjoining
agricultural land to use the produce of such land. These lands cannot be alienated as there is no
provision for transferring the title of the property. The ownership is jointly held by the family or the
clan.

The Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 recognizes these customary rights by stating under section 79
(2) that in the case of regulation of use of forest produce, privileges enjoyed “either by custom or
under any order such as privileges in respect of Kumki lands, Bane lands and Kane lands in South
Kanara District*, Betta lands and Hadi lands in North Kanara District**, Kane and Soppina Betta lands
in Mysore Area, Jamma and Bane in Coorg District and [Motasthal wet lands] in [Gulbarga Area] shall
continue.” Thus usufructory rights on customarily held land are recognized by section 79 of the
Revenue Act. Further, Section 192-A of the Act states that the provision for categorizing unlawful entry
or occupation of government lands as offence shall not apply to Jamma, Bane lands.

The Indian Easements Act, 1882 recognizes customary easements by stating that “An easement may
be acquired by virtue of a local custom. Such easements are called customary easements.”11 Although




11
     Section 18 of Indian Easements Act, 1882
                                                                                                    40
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



provisions of these laws show that customary rights to use certain kinds of land are recognized in law,
when such land is acquired for other purposes these rights are not protected in the sense of providing
adequate compensation in most cases. Similarly, there is no systematic codification of all such
customary rights and privileges.

In the last few years there have been instances reported where customary inalienable rights on land
are attempted to be converted into individual ownership rights in order to sell and transfer the land12.
The Karnataka Land Revenue (third amendment) 2011 which received Presidential assent in early
2014, seeks to allow disposal and the sale of Jamma land in Kodagu. The new legislation will confer
the title of ‘occupant owner’ in place of the earlier ‘deemed owner’ and allows the sale of land.
Similarly, in early 2013 the government decided to confer absolute ownership of Kumki lands in
Dakshina Kannada to farmers, ostensibly to benefit them. The government had intended to introduce
an amendment to the Karnataka Land Grant Rules by inserting Rule 17B. However, the government
is yet to implement this decision.

Hence, along with certain gaps in the legal recognition of customary rights, those rights guaranteed in
law are also sometimes not fully protected in practice. Hence this dimension gets a score of B.

             Legal Recognition and Protection of Indigenous Rights to Land and Natural
             Resources


The inalienable rights for certain classes of users to collect forest products and rights to nature are
recognized under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Act, 2006 (also known as the Forest Rights Act) which is a central legislation applicable to all
states in India. Section III of the Act establishes the provision for the recognition of, and vesting of,
right to hold and live in the forest land under the individual or common occupation for habitation or
for self-cultivation for livelihood by a member or members of a forest dwelling Scheduled Tribe or
other traditional forest dwellers. This section also recognizes rights including community tenures of
habitat and habitation for primitive tribal groups and pre-agriculture communities. The section
recognizes the right of ownership, access to collect, use, and dispose of minor forest produce (includes




* Previous name for Dakshin Kannada district; ** Previous name for Uttara Kannada district
12
     http://www.deccanherald.com/content/346652/permission-sell-kodagu039s-jamma-lands.html
                                                                                                     41
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



all non-timber forest produce of plant origin) which has been traditionally collected. Finally, it seeks
to recognize any other traditional right customarily enjoyed by the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes
or other traditional forest dwellers. Specifically, the Karnataka Forest Manual lays down the provision
for the Recording of Rights of forest tribes by the Forest Settlement officer.

Where land is specifically granted by the government under the Forest Rights Act to all categories of
tribal groups, Section 4 of the Karnataka Schedule Caste and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer
of Certain Lands Act), 1978, upholds the rights of these indigenous groups by prohibiting transfer of
any land granted by the Government in favour of a person belonging to the Schedule Caste or
Scheduled Tribe. Any such transfer is considered to be null and void and no right title or interest in
such land is conveyed by such transfer.

As recently as December 2013, leaders representing tribal groups in Karnataka have alleged that
Forest Rights Act has not been properly implemented in Karnataka as applications filed by many
claimants seeking lands were rejected on frivolous grounds. Further, it has been alleged that lands
allotted to 65 tribal families in one block of the state had been encroached upon. Also, while Section
3 of the Forest Rights Act recognizes the rights of indigenous communities to uses or entitlements of
water bodies such as fish and other products, activist group claim that indigenous populations were
treated as encroachers and trespassers and reportedly attacked for fishing in the backwaters of the
Kabini dam part of the Kabini Reserve Forest.

The cases of loss of forest commons and forest produce in the cases of Amrit Kaval Grasslands, Bellary
mining and Nagarhole Tiger reserve suggest that Indigenous rights are not adequately protected in
practice although they are mostly legally recognized.

          Legal Recognition and Protection of Urban Land Rights


By and large two tenure forms emerge in urban areas:

       Tenure forms emerging from community-based claims i.e. Community – Based Land Tenure
        forms
       Tenure forms emerging from claims by individual i.e. Individual-based Land Tenure forms

Within these, specific spatially defined tenure types emerge, such as pavements, slums, residential
layouts, Municipal corporations, parks, etc.

                                                                                                    42
                                                                                                  KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                       2014



In urban areas in Karnataka, the Karnataka City Corporations Act, Bangalore Development Authority
Act (In Bangalore), Urban Development Authority Act (in other cities) and Town and Country Planning
Act are the laws which recognize land rights in addition to Karnataka Land Revenue Act and Karnataka
Land Grants Rules.

The indicative urban tenure typology (table 4.3), points to the fact that the current legal infrastructure
provides for a comprehensive recognition of rights of urban population.

 Table 4.1.3 – Urban land tenure types and corresponding laws
 Urban Land Tenure Type                                                       Legal Recognition

 Freehold (Individual) -Ownership in Perpetuity                               Karnataka Land Revenue Act as amended


 Registered Leasehold (individual or community based) - The right to             Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976
 hold or use property for a fixed period at a given price, without transfer      The Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976
 of ownership, on the basis of a lease contract.                                 The Karnataka Urban Development Authorities Act, 1987


 Co-operative ownership - Ownership is vested in the co-operative or             The Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976
 group of which residents are co-owner                                           The Karnataka Urban Development Authorities Act, 1987


 Public Rental - Rental Occupation of publicly owned land or house            Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976

 Private Rental- Rental of privately owned land or property                   Karnataka Land Revenue Act as amended

 Religious Tenure Systems                                                        The Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976
                                                                                 The Karnataka Urban Development Authorities Act, 1987

 Slum Tenure                                                                  Property Rights to Slum Dwellers Act, 2011



For Slum areas under the Karnataka Slum Clearance Board (KSCB) owners or occupiers of every
building situated in any slum area can send to the prescribed authority a statement bearing details of
the building and the authority on being satisfied about the correctness of the statement, should
register the building issue in a registration certificate to the owner or occupier of the building.
However, this does not provide security of tenure. More recent attempts to provide security of tenure
for slum dwellers in Karnataka have been introduced as part of the Basic Services for the Urban Poor
programme under the Jawaharlal NehruNational Urban Renewal Mission (JNNRUM).

While guidelines for housing programmes such as JNURM’s Basic Services for the Urban Poor (BSUP)
and Rajiv Awaas Yojana (RAY) described in detail above, claim to provide security of tenure to slum
dwellers, studies carried out in certain slums of Bangalore by independent researchers (Kamath,
2012), point to the fact that BSUP continues to provide only possession certificates to slum owners as
                                                                                                  43
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



opposed to the documents that give them rights of use over land. This suggests that slum tenure is
not always protected in practice.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

       Given the current status of recognition and protection of customary rights, there is a need to
        clearly document all customary land rights and to review their legal status.
       More awareness needs to generate about the provisions of the Forests Rights Act-2006.
       The rights of the indigenous people over non-forest commons such as fishing etc need to be
        properly recorded and recognized.
       Reclassifying, identifying and surveying all non-forest and forest common pool and property
        resources
       Ensuring community rights/ privileges in non-forest Common Property Resources (tanks,
        Soppinabetta etc.).




                                                                                                  44
                                                                                               KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                        2014



INDICATOR 2: RESPECT FOR AND ENFORCEMENT OF RIGHTS


 LGI           Dimension Description              Score   Score Description

                                                          The law provides opportunities for those holding land under customary, group,
               Accessible Opportunities for               or collective tenures to fully or partially individualize land rights if they so
 2     1                                          B
               Tenure Individualization exist             desire. Procedures to do so are affordable and include basic safeguards
                                                          against abuse.

               Individual agricultural land in
                                                          Between 70% and 90% of individual land in rural areas is formally recorded &
 2     2(i)    rural areas is recorded &          B
                                                          mapped.
               mapped

               Individual non-agricultural land
 2     2(ii)   in rural areas is recorded &       D       Less than 50% of individual land in rural areas is formally recorded & mapped.
               mapped

               Individual land in urban areas
 2     3                                          D       Less than 50% of individual land in urban areas is recorded and mapped.
               is recorded & mapped



               The Number of Illegal Land                 The number of illegal land transactions is low and some are unambiguously
 2     4                                          B
               Sales is Low                               identified on a routine basis.



               The Number of Illegal Land                 Existing Legal Restrictions on land leases are clearly identified but not fully
 2     5                                          C
               leases is Low                              justified or accepted by land users, so that compliance is partial


               Recording of Women’s Right                 Between 15% and 35% of land registered to physical persons is registered in
 2     6                                          C
               to Land                                    the name of women either individually or jointly




Analysis

               Accessible Opportunities for Tenure Individualization:


In Karnataka there is no legal provision for those holding land under customary or group tenure to
fully or partially individualize land rights. However, collectively owned land (by Joint Families or Co-
operatives) can be partitioned and land rights over the land can be individualized.

Section 128 of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964, clearly states the procedure for individualizing
rights through partition. According to the Act, any person acquiring by partition any right in the land
is required to report the acquisition of such right to the prescribed officer. Further the Act states that
acquisition by “any person of a right in partition in respect of the land shall annex with the report a
                                                                                                                                            45
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



sketch showing the metes and bounds and other prescribed particulars of such land and such person
shall get the sketch prepared by a licensed surveyor.”

On receiving such information, the same is entered in the Register of Mutations. Objections are
thereafter invited from all interested persons, and if no objections are received the entries
pertaining to the acquisition of rights are transferred from the register of Mutations to the Record of
Rights. In the event of any objections being received, an enquiry is conducted into the objections,
before transferring the entry into the record of rights.

Section 111 of the Revenue Act states that when any estate paying land revenue to the State
Government is to be partitioned under the decree or order of a court or otherwise, expenses properly
incurred in making such partition, shall be recovered as a land revenue demand in such proportions
as the Deputy Commissioner may think fit, from the sharers at whose request the partition is made,
or from the persons interested in the partition.

The Department of Stamps and Registration clearly mentions on its website the procedure for
registering a partition-deed as well as the stamp and registration fees applicable for registering various
types of partition deeds.

Co-operative farms comprising the land held and possessed by ten or more persons of a village or two
or more contiguous villages can be formed through an application to the Registrar of Co-operative
societies in Karnataka. On the creation of such a cooperative farm, the possession of all lands in the
village or contiguous villages held by a member is transferred to the Co-operative Farm. However,
Section 92(4) of the Revenue Act states that “On the withdrawal of membership of a Co-operative
Farm by any person, the possession of the lands in respect of which he had become a member shall,
subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, be transferred by the Co-operative
Farm to such person”. This suggests that tenure individualization for cooperative farms exists in
Karnataka.

It has been noted that with respect to land held jointly by family members sometimes members do
not come forward to individualize their tenures owing to conflicts within the family relating to division
of land as well a general fear and awareness of bureaucratic procedures. Thus while the law provides
opportunities to fully or partially individualize group rights its implementation in practice is
incomplete.


                                                                                                      46
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014




          Recording and Mapping of Individual Land Rights on Rural Land


For individual agricultural land in rural areas, overall, as per current (December 2013) data available
with Bhoomi data base, the number of Record of Rights (Record of Rights) across Karnataka is about
16 million while about 12 million land parcels have been mapped. This means there is a lag of about
25 per cent. Hence score B

Individual non-agricultural land, primarily residential properties within the village (known as
gramathana) is neither recorded (except for tax assessment registers) nor mapped.

          Recording and Mapping Individual Land Rights in Urban Areas


In Karnataka, there are no ownership records in urban areas except in the case of areas where city
survey is in practice. In other places tax assessment registers may be considered to determine
ownership records.

Since the Department of Survey, Settlement and Land Records in Karnataka is responsible for
preparing, maintaining and preserving spatial and non-spatial data relating to ownership of properties
in urban areas, it has been in the process of creating Urban Property Ownership Records (UPOR) in
four cities namely Mysore, Hubli-Dharwar, Bellary and Shimoga since 2011. This project is in the initial
stages and is being implemented through a Public Private Partnership (PPP) model.

          Extent of Illegal Land Sales


Here Illegal Sales are those in which the sale transaction is completed but the sale deed is not allowed
to be recorded in the database.

In Karnataka, only sub registrar offices are source of information as the sub-registries record sale
histories. However it is difficult to get segregated data of illegal transactions from these offices as it
reflects on their approach to work.

Data from the Bhoomi database provides us with information on the reasons for not recording land
sales into the database. Some of the reasons constituting non registration of sale deed are shown in



                                                                                                      47
                                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                       2014



the table 4.1.4. These reasons largely pertain to anomalies in the sale process which can be
understood as an illegal land sale.


 Table 4.1.4 – Number of Transactions rejected during registration

                                                                                      Number of transactions rejected while
 Reason for rejection
                                                                                      inserting new owner (2010-Present)

 Impersonation during registration                                                    3637
 General power of attorney is not registered and invalid                              463
 General power of attorney does not allow transfer of rights                          400
 Joint holding and not all joint owners are party in the registration deed            5524
 Seller is not an owner in Record of Rights                                           1586
 Transacted property is not part of general power of attorney                         301
 Person not belonging to family has been included in inheritance transaction          3251
 Grant/re-grant/regularization/LR grant document issued on government land seems to
                                                                                      388
 be duplicate
 Value of the property is shown as less than Rs 100 to avoid the registration fee     179
 Unregistered oral partition - registration fee not paid                              4087
 Non-alienation condition period not completed                                        314
 Relinquishment deed not registered                                                   2376
 Certified copy of grant order not enclosed                                           3808
 Details of intimation slip of registration and attached deed does not match          440
 Will talks about property number instead of survey number                            7
 Proxy checklist generated                                                            2175

              Extent of Illegal Land leases


Private land owners have full rights over the land, including the right to transfer the land except in the
case of land granted by the government and in the case of all kinds of agricultural land. Various
restrictions have been placed on the rights over agricultural land and granted land under Section 79
of the Reforms Act and the Karnataka Land Revenue Act- 1964.

However, amendments brought in 1995 to the Karnataka Land Reforms Act relaxed some of these
conditions as follows,

   I.     Agriculture land can be leased for aquaculture for a period of 20 years in the districts of
          Dakshina Kannada and Uttara Kannada up to 40 units (around 220 acre)
  II.     Up to 180 acres of D Class agriculture land can be leased to housing project up to 21.6 acres
          can be leased for educational institution


                                                                                                                         48
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



 III.   Up to 108 acres of D Class land can be leased for horticulture, floriculture and agro-based
        industries.

Even though the restrictions on the lease of agricultural land was justified at the time when they were
imposed over the years the conditions on the ground have changed and now there has been a demand
for a comprehensive review of such restrictions. Moreover, the restrictions have been violated all over
the state and the agricultural land is leased out on a large scale in practice.

Non-agricultural lease transactions mostly in urban areas are considered legal through the creation
and registration of a lease deed as per Section 17 of the Indian Registration Act. However, as per a
report on land and land planning laws in Karnataka (Alternative Law Forum, 2003), “ingenious parties,
with a view to avoid payment of stamp duty often enter into an “agreement to lease” (as against a
“lease deed”). The entire lease is thereby governed by the agreement to lease which requires nominal
stamp duty and does not require compulsory registration under the law in force. The consequences
of non-registration of a transaction which requires compulsory registration is that there exists no
document which can be produced as evidence in a court of law. In this sense, such lease transactions
could be considered illegal. However data to determine the extent of such transactions does not exist.

Since in both agricultural and non-agricultural land we find that even while legal restrictions are
formally instituted, they are violated in various ways both in rural and urban areas either because they
are not fully justified in the changed circumstances (restrictions on agricultural land) or they are not
fully understood (in the case of urban property lease restrictions).

           Recording of Women’s Right to Land


Records of rights in the Bhoomi Database show that women owners constitute only about 18% of total
recorded owners. Data to determine what proportion of women owners are not recorded in the
database is unavailable. However, since Bhoomi Data base is restricted to rural agriculture land, the
extent of women’s ownership in urban areas is not known. Fieldwork conducted by Brown,
Ananthupur & Giovarelli (2002) in Karnataka on Women’s access and rights showed that in general
women in Karnataka were not aware of how the registration process worked and did not seem to be
very involved in the registration of land that they might have an inheritance claim to. Second, the
study noted that often when the head of household dies the family continued to hold the land in his
name. Third, the authors note that this practice of not updating registration records is most likely the

                                                                                                    49
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



result of the joint- family system in which all males are considered co-owners of ancestral land. Thus
they do not see a need to change the ownership records unless there is a dispute and they decide to
partition the joint-family property into individual parcels. Fourth, under the Hindu Succession Act joint
owners are supposed to partition out the deceased person’s share at the time of his death so that it
can be divided among female heirs, most importantly the dying person’s widow. However, this step is
not being taken and by leaving the land in the deceased’s name and only partitioning it if there is a
dispute, widows do not have the opportunity to assert their rights to their portion of the joint family
land.

There have been some attempts by the state government to record land in the name of women.
Karnataka Land Grant rules have been amended to make all future land grants in the name of both
husband and wife.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

       The procedure for individualisation of rights can be further simplified. One specific suggestion
        is to reduce the current 30-day notice period for confirming change of ownership (mutation)
        can be reduced to quicken the process.
       There is an urgent need to create digital repository of spatial data (tippans / FMBs) with geo
        referential co-ordinates for all agricultural lands so that land parcels can be identified and
        located easily both on satellite imagery and physically. This will help in tracking the
        developments taking place in land parcels and one can use this to analyse land use pattern
        and violations of zonal regulations, if any.
       There is an urgent need to create ownership records for the gramthana land on the lines of
        the urban property ownership records (UPOR) and to strengthen the capacity of the gram
        panchayat to manage these lands.
       Since there are no ownership records (except for tax assessment registers) as well as spatial
        data in urban areas, there is an urgent need to create the same. The Government should
        prioritize the UPOR project discussed above and expand this project to all urban areas across
        the state.

       Illegal transactions can be controlled by following measures
            o   Build electronic integration among the different systems so that fake documents are
                not used for transacting land parcels.
                                                                                                     50
                                                                   KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
               2014



           o   Avoid dual identities for same land parcel.
           o   Stop impersonation during registration using bio-metric credentials of sellers and
               buyers.

      Government land/ public lands need to be clearly identified in land records database and no
       transactions on these land parcels should be allowed.
      Restrictions on leasing out agricultural land may be relaxed.
      In order to check leasing out urban land/property without registration, the registration
       procedure can be simplified.

Urban Property Ownership Records project should be completed on a priority basis and must identify
women property owners as a separate category.




                                                                                               51
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014




4.2. Panel 2: Rights to Forest and
    Common Lands & Rural Land Use
        4.2.1. Panel Context



          Introduction


Karnataka state has a geographical area of 191791 sq km of which 43356.47 sq km has been identified
as forest, including both notified and deemed forest. The area of Notified Forest is 33331.56 sq km.
which includes Reserved Forests, Protected Forests, Village Forests and Private Forests. The remaining
is categorized as Deemed Forest measuring about 10024.91 sq km. Non Forest related common lands
in Karnataka can be divided into major and minor commons. The management of all types of Forest
land comes under the Forest Department of the state. Joint Forest Management programme has been
a key intervention in the management of forest lands. The non-forest common lands are managed by
the Revenue Department and the local bodies. People’s right to the forest land and forest produce,
especially in the case of indigenous groups, has been a contentious issue in Karnataka as it was
elsewhere in the country. The Forest Rights Act 2006 was a major step taken by the Union Government
in addressing this problem and the Act has been under implementation in Karnataka too. The official
reports, however, point to a rather slow progress in conferring rights to the claimants under this Act.
Karnataka has made some progress in implementing the Joint Forest Management Project. As regards,
non-forest common land, there has been a considerable confusion with regard to their identification.
The legal and institutional mechanisms which govern such land have also been marred by a lack of
clarity. Given this state of affairs, there have been large scale encroachments on and diversion of both
forest land and non-forest common lands. Multiplicity of laws and institutions with overlapping
jurisdictions has complicated the problems associated with the rights to forest and common land.

Rural land use and planning also seem to be an area in need of urgent attention of the government.
There are a series of restrictions on rural land use and these restrictions have been imposed to serve
pubic interest but their enforcement has been generally weak. Rural local self-governments which are
vested with the land use planning function do not have the capacity to carry out this function
effectively, nor is there any monitoring of plan implementation in rural areas.

                                                                                                    52
                                                                         KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



Some of these general issues pertaining to forest land, common land and rural land use are discussed
in the rest of this section. The next section will analyse a set of indicators focussing on more specific
areas of strengths and weaknesses relating to forest land, common land and rural land use.

            Implementation of Forest Rights Act


Before the Forest Rights Act was implemented in 2006, forest settlement officers would declare
demarcated areas under the Forest Act and the Wildlife Protection Act as being “settled” to honour
the rights of peoples occupying or depending on those areas. This mechanism was found untenable in
divesting the large number of claims. The Forest Rights Act was implemented to create a framework
to recognize and vest rights of forest-dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers
who had been residing in those forests for many generations, but whose rights could not be recorded
or formalized.13

The administrative authorities under the Act have all been established in Karnataka so far, Gram
Sabhas have set up 2,251 Forest Rights Committees across the state. According to the Status Report
issued by the Union Tribal Affairs Ministry in September 2013, 1,65,638 individual claims and 3,080
community claims were received under the Forest Rights Act in Karnataka. Of these, 6,487 individual
titles and 90 community titles, amounting to a total of 34,856.77 acres of land. have been disposed
of.14 Karnataka ranks very low in the proportion of titles distributed to claims received. While one of
the reasons for this could be the large number of spurious claims from “other traditional forest
dwellers (OTFDs)” (totaling to 1,41,531 claims), media reports have repeatedly suggested that the
implementation in terms of processing and transferring title has been found severely wanting. It
appears that the clarification that OTFDs need not prove 75 years of residence on that precise plot of
land for which the claim is being made, as opposed to residence in that “area”, has not had any impact
on their claims for ownership.15 Further, the difficulties of community management of land have been
exaggerated by the delay in identifying tribal habitats (and on occasion, misidentifying them, as was




13
   S. Lele, A Defining Moment for Forests? 42(25) ECONOMIC & POLITICAL WEEKLY 2379-2383 (June, 2007).
14
   Status Report of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs on the implementation of the Forest Rights Act, found at
http://tribal.nic.in/WriteReadData/CMS/Documents/201311011205276091728MPRforthemonthofSeptember
2013.pdf
15
   M. Ramnath, Surviving the Forest Rights Act: Between Scylla and Charybdis 43(9) ECONOMIC & POLITICAL WEEKLY
37-42 (Mar, 2008).
                                                                                                         53
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



the case with the Betta Kuruba community, who were wrongly identified under the generic class of
Kadu Kurubas) under Schedule V of the Constitution.

            Joint Forest Planning and Management Programme


The National Forest Policy, 1988 shifted the forest conservation debate beyond the sole prerogative
of industrials and cultivators by highlighting the urgent need to protect and preserve forests for their
own sake with the necessary involvement of village communities in the regeneration of degraded
forest lands. Karnataka was one of the earliest states to issue a Government Order in 1993 for the
implementation of the programme for the protection and management of degraded forests with a
canopy density less than 0.25, and to provide a 50% share in forest produce to Village Forest
Committees (VFCs) set up in JFPM areas. Since then, even wastelands that are transferred by the
Revenue Department for the implementation of programme, and non-forest land in the control of the
Forest Department such as roadsides and canal foreshores, have also come within the ambit of the
JFPM. National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries fall outside the scheme of the JFPM (Lele, 1998).

Amendments to the JFPM programme in 1996 sought to introduce gender equity by providing co-
membership of spouses to Village Forest Committees and also went on to revoke the canopy density
limitation for forest areas chiefly inhabited by Scheduled Tribes. As observed earlier, the Karnataka
Forest Act was amended to provide a statutory backbone to the JFPM programme. A comprehensively
revised G.O. was issued in 2002 to enhance share proportion from 50% to 90% in respect of non-
timber forest produce, and 75% in plantation assets.16 The 2002 order also raised the mandatory
representation of women and marginalized groups in VFCs to 50% and 60% respectively. Over the last
two decades, nearly 5,200 VFCs were constituted, bringing around 340000 hectare of degraded forests
under the JFPM.17

Between 1992 and 2000, the JFPM programme was implemented in the Western Ghats largely under
the aegis of the British Department for International Development. Of a total plantation area of 56,632
ha, JFPM was implemented in 20,835 ha at a cost of Rs 110 crore, leading to the creation of about 600




16
 http://www.karnatakaforest.gov.in/English/joinedforest_managenemt/jfpm_scheme.htm
17
 http://www.karnatakaforest.gov.in/English/joinedforest_managenemt/jfpm_pre.htm
                                                                                                    54
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



VFCs. The Japan-funded Eastern Plain forestry project began in 1996 across 23 districts, aiming to
cover 1,97,000 ha of forests under 4,000 VFCs at a cost of Rs. 1240 crore.

There are several issues with the JFPM programme as it exists. By restricting the lands that the JFPM
would apply to, problems of open access continue to remain in forests with a greater canopy cover
and in lands such as gomaalas, assessed wastelands and other lands which are similar in nature to
forest lands, but under the control of the Revenue Department (Kolavalli, 1995). A significant portion
of forested lands in the Western Ghats are under “individual access” systems (soppina bettas, kumkis,
baanes etc.), whereby only certain households have exclusive rights over use. Bringing these lands
under the JFPM has been problematic. The common mistake under all these programs is the mantra
of “plantations first, JFPM afterwards”, replicating the flaws of the 1980s social forestry projects (Lele,
2001).

            Rights to Common Property Resources


Common lands vary significantly in their location and density across the state, and exact data
regarding each of the categories of common land is unavailable at the village -, taluka-, or even
district-level.
Constrained by the absence of the direct typological data, the land use data published by the
Department of Economics and Statistics is the closest to an approximation of the extent of these
lands, but critically this does not portray the range of access rights, being simply divided as forests,
pastures and fallow/cultivated wastelands. The mapping of the condition of these lands has been
made difficult by the lack of reference points. 18 To quote an example, “ a gomaal with zero canopy
cover will look ‘degraded’ in the eyes of the forester and will register low on measures of forest
cover, but this gomaal may be fully meeting local needs. ” As a result, there is widespread
misclassification on official maps with say, grasslands getting misclassified as ‘degraded scrub’. 19
The most important consequence of data inadequacy, both in terms of its insufficiency as well as




18
  Robinson, E. J. Z. (2008). India’s disappearing common lands: Fuzzy boundaries, encroachment, and evolving
property rights. Land Economics, 84(3), 409 –422.

19
  S. Lele, S. Purushothaman and S. Kashyap, Village Commons, Livelihoods and Governance: An Assessment of
Karnataka’s Experience, in S. Purushothaman and R. Abraham (eds.) LIVELIHOOD STRATEGIES IN SOUTH INDIA:
CONSERVATION AND POVERTY REDUCTION IN FOREST FRINGES (2014).
                                                                                                        55
                                                                          KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



inaccuracy, is that the allocation of institutional roles and responsibilities is severely scuttled.


Another consequence of this incompleteness in mapping these land resources is that most
transactions in this space are shrouded in informality – either due to improper surveying, or
illegality – due to large-scale encroachments. Both the Revenue Department and the Forest
Department have taken advantage of this allowing them to claim, illustratively, forest lands in
Chikmagalur for coffee planters, and lands reserved for grazing. The reports of the AT
Ramaswamy20 and Balasubramanian Committees 21 have documented the grabbing of more than
10 lakh hectares of Government land. Even after the enactment of the Forest Conservation Act,
the last round of forestland regularization in 1997 which was categorized as pre-1980
encroachments, close to 15000 hectares were regularized. 22 In this environment, encroachment
of these lands has become so pervasive, as much due to poverty as due to greed, that officials
have taken to suggesting that the only effective way to regulate them would be to legislate upon
and regularize these illegal encroachments. 23 Nevertheless, there has been a steady decline even
in officially recorded figures of encroachment due to land grant programmes as well as mining,
dams, wind farming and other industrial activities. 24 Though there is the straightforward economic
argument in favour of conversion of common lands to private agricultural plots, i.e., that the yield
is much greater when these lands are individually maintained, it does not and cannot accurately
take into account the impact of the conversion on the rest of the community also dependent on
it. The worst hit of all common land resources are permanent pastures, which are not borne down
by proscriptions under the Forest Conservation Act, 1980.25



20
   Part I found here
http://www.indiawaterportal.org/sites/indiawaterportal.org/files/AT%20Ramaswamy%20JLC_Encroachment%
20of%20Bangalore%20Urban%20Lands_Interim%20Report%201_Feb%202007.pdf and Part II here,
http://www.indiawaterportal.org/sites/indiawaterportal.org/files/AT%20Ramaswamy%20JLC_Encroachment%
20of%20Bangalore%20Urban%20Lands_Interim%20Report%202_July%202007.pdf
21
   Found here http://bangalore.citizenmatters.in/docs/2011/GoKVBalaTaskForceReport.pdf
22
   http://www.deccanherald.com/content/340783/need-integrated-land-use-policy.html
23
   S. Lele, Private Property Rights and Forest Preservation in Karnataka, Western Ghats, India: Comment 75
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS 492-495 (May, 1993).
24
   Nadkarni, M. V. (1990). Use and management of common lands: Towards an environmentally sound strategy.
In C. J. Saldanha (Ed.), Karnataka state of environment report IV (pp. 31 –53). Bangalore: Centre for Taxonomic
Studies, St.Joseph’s College.
25
   Menon, A., & Vadivelu, A. (2006). Common property resources in different agro-climatic landscapes in India.
Conservation and Society, 4(1), 132–154.
                                                                                                          56
                                                                         KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014




The most recent instance of large scale change of land use is the case of the diversion of grasslands
in Challakere taluk in the Central Karnataka District of Chitradurga to various research
organizations such as the Defence Research & Development Organization and Indian Institute of
Science, to a smaller extent to a private investor for a solar plant, and to the Karnataka Housing
Board.26 Predictably, the community of nomadic shepherds who rely on the land, and the
government, have locked horns over whether the land was categorized as amrit mahal kaval,
which falls under the category of district forests, or unassessed wasteland, maintained by the
Animal Husbandry department. 27 It has been reported that these grasslands, spanning 4,856 ha
are the largest remaining contiguous grasslands in the state. Since Independence, the extent of
grasslands has fallen from nearly 1,61,874 ha to a mere trifle of 18,210 ha. 28 This instance simply
reiterates the collateral damage that results from relying on “bad” data to govern over land, and
raises the urgent need to clarify on the distribution of these public and semi -public lands.


Another recent issue has been the amendment to the Karnataka Land Revenue Act to permit the
alienation of jamma land, a type of a common property resource, in the Kodagu district. 29 The
ownership of these lands was in the hands of the clan, and it was managed by the pattedara, the
head of the clan. Previously, the cul tivator of these lands was only a ‘deemed owner’, but the new
legislation has conferred him the title of ‘occupant owner’ and allows the sale of land. The
legislation would legitimize the large-scale denudation of trees, and the increased human
habitation that would result from this move would severely impact the flora and fauna of the
adjoining forestlands. The alienation of these lands deeply disrupts local livelihoods, displacing
indigenous communities that had collectively enjoyed the benefits of these lands for several
centuries.30




26
   http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/graziers-protest-land-diversion
27
   Krishna Murthy, T. S. (1989). History of Amruth Mahal Kaval Lands in Karnataka. Proceedings of the Workshop
on Rangelands Revegetation Project. Bangalore.
28
   http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/graziers-protest-land-diversion
29
   http://www.deccanherald.com/content/346652/permission-sell-kodagu039s-jamma-lands.html
30
   See also G.K. Karanth, Privatization of Common Property Resources: Lessons from Karnataka 27(31/32)
ECONOMIC & POLITICAL WEEKLY 1680-1688 (Aug, 1992).

                                                                                                         57
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



          Rural Land Use: Restrictions and Pubic Interest


The Karnataka Land Revenue Act lays down the land revenue administration in Karnataka, which
includes the assessment and settlement of revenue, the procedure for collection of revenue, the
creation of necessary authorities, determinations on the status of certain public lands, a framework
for grant of land and the procedure for conversion of agricultural land into non-agricultural land. Over
time, the Act has been amended several times to create and preserve green belts around towns and
cities, to vest minerals in the State to curb illegal mining, for enabling the Revenue Department to
update village, taluka and district boundaries, and on many separate occasions, regularizations of
unauthorized occupation and conversion. The Act is supplemented by the Land Grant Rules that
determine the beneficiaries of the grant programmes of the State.

The Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act was enacted to set up a uniform law for the regulation
of planned growth of land use and development by making and executing town planning schemes in
the state. The legislation mandates the maintenance of a land use map, and establishes planning
authorities to develop outline development plans and master plans, and enables them to execute
these plans by empowering planning authorities to acquire lands as necessary, subject to the prior
approval of the plans by the state government.




                                                                                                    58
                                                                                             KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                         2014



               4.2.2     Assessment and Score
This section analyses in detail the specific elements related to the rights to forest s and common lands;
and rural land use in Karnataka. These elements are divided into Indicators which in turn are broken
down into several Dimensions. Indicators provide a relatively exhaustive assessment of relevant land
governance issues through specific dimensions which define areas for investigation, quantitative
measurement or qualitative assessment.31

Land Governance Indicator 1. Rights to forest and common lands



 LGI            Dimension Description                           Score   Score Description

                                                                        Forests and common lands are clearly identified, responsibility
                Forests are clearly identified in law and
 1     1(i)                                                     B       for land use is clearly identified but implementation is
                responsibility for use is clearly assigned
                                                                        ambiguous.

                Common lands are clearly identified in law
                                                                        Common lands are not clearly identified and responsibility for
 1     1(ii)    and responsibility for use is clearly           D
                                                                        land use is not defined
                assigned

                Rural group rights are formally recognized              The tenure of most groups in rural areas is not formally
 1     2                                                        D
                and can be enforced                                     recognized

                Users’ rights to key natural resources on
                                                                        Users' rights to key natural resources are not legally recognized
 1     3        land (incl. fisheries) are legally recognized   D
                                                                        and often not protected in practice
                and protected in practice
                Multiple rights over common land and
 1     4        natural resources on these lands can            C       Co-existence is possible by law but rarely respected in practice.
                legally coexist

                Multiple rights over the same plot of land
 1     5        and its resources (e.g. trees) can legally      C       Co-existence is legally possible but rarely respected in practice
                coexist.

                Multiple rights over land and mining/ other
 1     6        sub-soil resources located on the same plot     C       Co-existence is possible by law but rarely respected in practice
                can legally coexist

                                                                        Although there is demand, the law provides no opportunities for
                Accessible opportunities exist for mapping
 1     7                                                        D       those holding group land under customary, group, or collective
                and recording of group rights
                                                                        tenures to record and map land rights

                                                                        10-40% of the area under communal and/or indigenous land
 1     8        Boundary demarcation of communal land           C       has boundaries demarcated and surveyed and associated
                                                                        claims recorded




31
     Land Governance Assessment Framework: Implementation Manual
                                                                                                                                         59
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014




Analysis

           Identification of Forest Land and Responsibility for its Use


Forests, as such, are not defined under a central or state legislation. In T. N. Godavarman’s case ((1997)
SCC 267), the Indian Supreme Court held that “the word forests must be understood according to its
dictionary meaning [the Oxford English Dictionary defines ‘forest’ as an extensive tract of land covered
with trees and undergrowth, sometimes interlined with pasture]. This description covers all statutorily
recognized forests, whether designated as reserve, protected or otherwise … The term will not only
include forest as understood in the dictionary sense, but also any area recorded as forest in
government record irrespective of the ownership.” The KARNATAKA FOREST ACT, 1963, which is in pari
material with the INDIAN FOREST ACT, 1927, creates a four-fold classification of forests, namely Reserved
Forests, Protected Forests, Village Forests and District Forests.

Under Section 3, the State Government may constitute land that is the property of the Government,
of any part of forests over whose produce the Government is entitled as a Reserved Forest. The Forest
Settlement Officer will then publish the limits of the proposed forest area so as to facilitate the raising
of claims over the use of that land. The Officer then assesses entitlements of rights of way, pasturage,
produce and water resources made by the claimants, and disposes of them by providing some other
reasonably convenient means of realizing these rights on another plot of land or by excluding those
lands from the purview of reserved forests, or permit the claimants to continue to enjoy these rights
to an admitted extent according to such rules framed by them. Under Section 20, no right can be
acquired in or over a reserved forest, except by succession, grant or a contract by the Government or
a person in whom the power to create such a right was vested by the Forest Settlement Officer while
settling claims over the land. Under Section 21, no alienation by sale, lease, mortgage or otherwise
can be carried out without the sanction of the State Government, except when such land is append
ant to any land or building that is being sold. Acts prohibited in Reserved Forests are enumerated
under Section 24. Broadly, these cover the destruction of the forest resources, clearance of forestland,
damages forest fencing so on and so forth, in contravention of the rules set by the State Government.
The State may also grant privileges for use, as opposed to export or merchandizing.

The State Government may constitute lands at the disposal of the Government as a Village Forest for
the benefit of a village community, or a group of communities. The State Government may make rules
                                                                                                       60
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



to regulate the management of these forests under Section 30 by prescribing conditions under which
the community or a group of communities may avail of forest produce or pasture. District Forests
include all land at the disposal of Government not included within the limits of any reserved or village
forests nor assigned at the survey settlement as free grazing ground or for public or communal
purposes. Privileges and rules are assigned to persons in the same manner as they are in the case of
Village Forests. Some district forests may be deemed as Protected Forests in view of their subsequent
settlement and constitution as a reserved forest, with conditions placed on their use. In protected
forests, the rights over use shall continue as they were before the assignment, unless changed by the
State Government. On occasion, the Wildlife Protection Act is invoked to demarcate forest lands as
national parks, sanctuaries or tiger reserves.

The SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER TRADITIONAL FOREST DWELLERS (RECOGNITION OF FOREST RIGHTS) ACT, 2006
is a Central legislation that was implemented to create a framework to recognize and vest rights of
forest-dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers who had been residing and
cultivating in those forests for many generations, but whose rights could not be recorded or
formalized. Section 3 of the Act endows these forest inhabitants with title rights over land that is
already being farmed by tribal or forest dwellers (subject to a maximum of 4 h.a.), use rights over
minor forest produce and pasturage, rehabilitation rights that protect them against forced
displacement and involves them in community forest management. It is important to clarify that no
new lands are allocated to these communities, but simply recognizes their rights over lands they are
already cultivating. The Karnataka Forest Manual directs the Forest Settlement Officer to update the
Record of Rights to reflect the vesting of forestlands to members of these communities.

Karnataka was one of the earliest states to issue a Government Order in 1993 for the implementation
of the programme for the protection and management of degraded forests with a canopy density less
than 0.25, and to provide a 50% share in forest produce to Village Forest Committees (VFCs) set up in
JFPM areas. Since then, even wastelands that are transferred by the Revenue Department for the
implementation of programme, and non-forest land in the control of the Forest Department such as
roadsides and canal foreshores, have also come within the ambit of the JFPM. National Parks and
Wildlife Sanctuaries fall outside the scheme of the JFPM (Lele, 1998).

Amendments to the JFPM programme in 1996 sought to introduce gender equity by providing co-
membership of spouses to Village Forest Committees and also went on to revoke the canopy density


                                                                                                    61
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



limitation for forest areas chiefly inhabited by Scheduled Tribes. As observed earlier, the Karnataka
Forest Act was amended to provide a statutory backbone to the JFPM programme. A comprehensively
revised G.O. was issued in 2002 to enhance share proportion from 50% to 90% in respect of non-
timber forest produce, and 75% in plantation assets.32 The 2002 order also raised the mandatory
representation of women and marginalized groups in VFCs to 50% and 60% respectively. Over the last
two decades, nearly 5,200 VFCs were constituted, bringing around 3,40,000 ha of degraded forests
under the JFPM.33

Between 1992 and 2000, the JFPM program was implemented in the Western Ghats largely under the
aegis of the British Department for International Development. Of a total plantation area of 56,632
ha, JFPM was implemented in 20,835 ha at a cost of Rs 110 crore, leading to the creation of about 600
VFCs. The Japan-funded Eastern Plain forestry project began in 1996 across 23 districts, aiming to
cover 1,97,000 ha of forests under 4,000 VFCs at a cost of Rs 1240 crore). Around twenty odd minor
state- and centrally sponsored schemes are also under implementation (Rao, 2002). There are several
issues with the JFPM programme as it exists. By restricting the lands that the JFPM would apply to,
problems of open access continue to remain in forests with a greater canopy cover and in lands such
as gomaalas, assessed wastelands and other lands which are similar in nature to forest lands, but
under the control of the Revenue Department (Kolavalli, 1995). Furthermore, a significant portion of
forest lands in the Western Ghats are under “individual access” systems (soppina bettas, kumkis,
baanes etc.), whereby only certain households have exclusive rights over use. Bringing these lands
under the JFPM has been problematic. The common mistake under all these programs is the mantra
of “plantations first, JFPM afterwards”, replicating the flaws of the 1980s social forestry projects (Lele,
2001).
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS:

         All types of forest and non-forest common property resources need to be surveyed and
          boundaries clearly demarcated.
         The rights of various indigenous and non-indigenous groups to the forest and non-forest
          commons should be clearly enumerated and recognized.




32
 http://www.karnatakaforest.gov.in/English/joinedforest_managenemt/jfpm_scheme.htm
33
 http://www.karnatakaforest.gov.in/English/joinedforest_managenemt/jfpm_pre.htm
                                                                                                       62
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



             Identification of Common Land and Responsibility for its Use


Common lands broadly cover all lands under common use. There is no single category or classification
of land use that corresponds to all of these lands. Variously, they are classified as forestland, grazing
land, gram Sabha land, gram panchayat land, or simply, “wasteland”, with the only common feature
that unites all of them being that they are government-owned (Gopalakrishnan, 2012). Depending on
the type of common land in every individual case, they may either be governed by forest laws or
revenue laws. The KARNATAKA FOREST RIGHTS ACT, 1963 does not explicitly refer to customary rights over
the use of land, except in the context of permitting them in the case of private forests, without
prejudice to the power of the State Government to legislate over them if the need arises. In the case
of other forests, a forest settlement officer records and assigns rights over the use of forest land or
produce to individuals. The Act is silent on the basis for the right claimed by an individual, though
ostensibly these rights may be customary. However, the Act has the detrimental effect of reducing a
customary right over the use of these lands to individualized lands, without recognizing them as
common property resources.

Under Section 67 of the KARNATAKA LAND REVENUE ACT, 1964, all lands that are not the property of
individuals or an aggregate of persons, and all public roads, paths, rivers and streams, are declared to
be the property of the State Government. Most common lands fall under this category. Section 71
empowers the Survey Officers and the Deputy Commissioner to set apart lands that are the property
of the State Government for free pasturage for village cattle, for forest reserves or for any other public
purpose. Specifically regarding certain types of common lands, Section 79 recognizes and ratifies
privileges that are enjoyed by custom or any other order in respect of Kumki lands, Bane lands and
Kane lands in South Kanara District, Betta lands and Hadi lands in North Kanara District, Kane and
Soppina Betta lands in Mysore Area, Jamma and Bane in Coorg and Motasthal wetlands in the
Gulbarga areas, exempting them from rulemaking addressed at the regulation of the supply of
firewood and timber for domestic or other purposes (subject to special orders). Thus, we see that
these common lands are neither identified in law, nor does any statute clarify the responsibility for
their use.

Broadly, the table 4. 2.1 illustrates the range of forests and common lands in Karnataka, with their use
described as understood customarily –



                                                                                                      63
                                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



 Table 4.2.1: Forest ad non forest common land in Karnataka


 “Pure” Forests     For instance, wildlife sanctuaries,            The general public usually does not have any access or use
                    biodiversity reserves and national parks.      rights.

 Forest-related     Reserve forests (primarily in Southern and     Users have rights as stipulated by the Forest Settlement Officer or
 commons            Northern maidaans of Karnataka), minor         the State Government.
                    forests (primarily in Uttara Kannada) or         Soppina bettas are patches of forest assigned to arcane
                    protected forests.                                  cultivators in the Western Ghats. Cultivators collect the
                    Individual or group-access forest lands such        biomass necessary for its cultivation from these lands.
                    as –                                                Sometimes, they may be open to the village community for
                              Soppina Bettas                           cultivation.
                              Kumkis                                Kumkis are government wastelands where the entire
                              Jamma-Baane                              community may collect minor forest produce. There is a
                    Parts of sanctuaries and national parks.            pending proposal to vest these lands absolutely to poor farmers
                                                                        by amending the Land Revenue Act.
                                                                     Baane lands are forest lands adjacent to jamma land that was
                                                                        hereditarily granted to wet-rice farmers in the Coorg district.
                                                                        Minor forest produce may be collected by groups of
                                                                        households.
                                                                   Users have rights to minor produce on conditions stipulated by the
                                                                   State Government.

 Major non-forest             Gomaala                                   Gomaala: These are grazing lands primarily found in the
 commons                      Amruth Mahal Kavals                        Shimoga district which feature open community access.
                              Hullu-Banni                               Amruth Mahal Kavals: Originally meant for grazing by a
                              Assessed Wastelands                        special breed of cows brought by the Mysore king, these
                                                                          lands are usually reserved for state use, but may sometimes
                                                                          be open for community access.
                                                                         Hullu-Banni: Grasslands with the ‘banni’ trees, i.e. prosopis
                                                                          spicigera, which are considered sacred, found mainly in the
                                                                          Northern plains, available for community access.
                                                                         Assessed Wastelands: Primarily found in Dakshina
                                                                          Kannada, these lands are usually used as pasturage.

 ‘Minor’    non-    Parambog (areas permanently open to public use, e.g. rivers, roads), gundu-thopu (small plantations),
 forest commons     gramthaanas (settlement areas), kere-angala (lake foreshores), smashaana (graveyards, crematoriums), etc.
                    which are typically administered by the gram panchayats. These lands are not typically “used” as pasturage or
                    for biomass unlike the other categories.

                                                                          Source: DES Nine-fold Classification of Land Use (Saldanha, 1986)




Chapter X of the KARNATAKA FOREST MANUAL, 1976 recognizes customary privileges that forest villagers
enjoyed, cautioning that these privileges are not to be understood as rights, classing them into two
categories – general privileges that extend to all districts, and special privileges that apply to North
Karnataka, Shimoga, Chikmagalur, Mysore and Hassan. The produce that is removed in the exercise
of these privileges cannot be bartered or sold. Special privileges are granted for cultivation in areas
that are otherwise restricted. A full list of extant privileges and villages to which it extends is found in




                                                                                                                                   64
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



the Manual.34 The enjoyment of these privileges cannot be understood as enforceable entitlements,
and do not improve the security over the use of these lands.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

         The overlapping jurisdictions between the forest and revenue departments over certain kinds
          of common land should be cleared once for all.
         The forest common pool and property resources should be identified and surveyed with clear
          specification of different community uses of each type of commons.

             Recognition and Enforcement of Rural Group Rights


As discussed in the previous section, the KARNATAKA LAND REVENUE ACT recognizes the existence of
common property land resources whose use is regulated by custom. Under custom, access to these
lands is largely open and rights have evolved to vest with the entire village community around the
commons. Section 72 clarifies that in the context of free pasturage, only herders from that village, and
no other, shall have the rights of grazing. In some commons, such as soppina bettas, which are usually
privately held, the use is sometimes restricted to a few households that cultivate areca-nut on nearby
plots (Lele, Purushothaman and Kashyap, 2013). Group rights over common lands, understood in the
sense of rights belonging to a particular community, are therefore not formally recognized or
enforced.

The stated purpose of the FOREST RIGHTS ACT, 2006 is to recompense the historical injustice faced by
Scheduled Tribes and other forest dwelling communities, arising from the sustained threat they were
facing in the use and enjoyment of rights over land that they had been inhabiting over several
generations. While one legacy of the Act has been the individualization of these customary rights, it is
significant to note that many of the rights recognized by Section 3 are in the nature of community
rights. Not only is the right to hold and live claimable for common occupation, it includes the right
over minor forest produce, and community rights over fishing and grazing. Most importantly, these
communities are indispensable in conservation and management of these forests, and their right to
participate in this process is codified under the Act (Section 3(i) and 5), independent of existing Joint




34
     Available at http://bandipurtigerreserve.in/docs/KFD_Manual_1976.pdf.
                                                                                                     65
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



Forest Planning & Management Programmes. However, the status report for the implementation of
the Act published by the Tribal Affairs Ministry in September 2013 reveals community rights are hardly
ever realized in Karnataka.35 In fact, they constitute only 2% of the total applications received (i.e.
3,080 community claims as opposed to 1,65,638 individual claims) and only 90 such titles have been
granted under the Act. As State Governments have primarily viewed the Act as one that settles land
title claims, the realization of community rights over land resources has been severely under-realized,
as predicted by scholars in the early days of the Act (Ramnath, 2008).

Thus we see that rural group rights are almost formally absent in the case of customary lands, but do
exist in the case of some forestlands under the Forest Rights Act, though only in the Statute books.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

         There is a need to create awareness about the means of formalizing group rights over common
          land under the Forest Rights Act, 2006

            Recognition and Protection of Users’ rights to key natural resources on land
            (incl. fisheries)


Common property resources exist to ensure community access to key natural resources, be it for
grazing, collection of biomass towards cultivation, for minor forest produce subject to levies by the
Revenue or Forest Department, as appropriate, or for fuel wood and fodder for personal consumption.
As stated earlier, the existing framework of revenue laws implicitly accepts these rights and only
explicitly lays down provisions that either, (i) empower the State Government to facilitate the
regulation of their use, through the offices of the Deputy Commissioner (or the local Grama Panchayat
under the PANCHAYATI RAJ ACT, 1993), or (ii) restrict the use of certain common resources - for instance,
Section 72, KARNATAKA LAND REVENUE ACT, holds that the right of grazing on free pasturage lands only
extends to cattle of the village or villages to which those lands have been assigned and will be subject
to rules made, generally or for particular instances, by the State Government. The unauthorized




35
  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs - Government of India, Status Report on Implementation of Scheduled Tribes
and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 [for the period ending in
September, 2013], available at
http://tribal.nic.in/WriteReadData/CMS/Documents/201311011205276091728MPRforthemonthofSeptember
2013.pdf
                                                                                                        66
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



removal of natural resources from these lands is punishable under Section 74. The definition of “land”
under Section 2 of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act includes fisheries, though the rest of the Act does
not contemplate any specific regulation in that regard. The Forest Rights Act formalizes some
customary fishing rights for selective communities under Section 3. All other inland fishing is regulated
by the KARNATAKA INLAND FISHERIES (CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 1996. Under
Section 3 of the Act, no person is entitled to fish in any waters except under the terms and conditions
stipulated by the license granted for that purpose by the local authority.

Therefore, users’ rights to key natural resources in common lands are not statutorily validated, but
rules framed by administrative authorities under some statutes facilitate the enjoyment of these
rights, without any provisions that specially uphold a right over these resources (except in the Forest
Rights Act which are limited in their scope only to certain classes of users, and only in respect of certain
classes of rights).

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS:

       Amendments should be made to all the relevant statutes to recognize community rights/
        privileges in non-forest Common Property Resources (tanks, Soppina bettas etc.)




                                                                                                        67
                                                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                        2014



 Table 4.2.2: No of RTCs with more than one rights recorded in various districts
 District                               Total No of RTCs                           No of RTCs with one or more   Percentage of RTCs with one or
                                                                                   rights recorded               more rights recorded
 Belgaum                                1095927                                    477376                        43
 Bagalkot                               418798                                     81829                         19
 Bijapur                                580759                                     149430                        25
 Gulbarga                               468430                                     65208                         13
 Bidar                                  306406                                     52649                         17
 Raichur                                450353                                     56251                         12
 Koppal                                 315945                                     36141                         11
 Gadaga                                 278581                                     63800                         22
 Dharwad                                371871                                     71458                         19
 Uttara Annada                          567113                                     282533                        49
 Haveri                                 443068                                     167094                        37
 Bellary                                574632                                     101868                        17
 Chitradurga                            476041                                     48767                         10
 Davanagere                             457825                                     48269                         10
 Shimoga                                370143                                     35686                         9
 Udupi                                  917931                                     237356                        25
 Chikmaglur                             450830                                     148021                        32
 Tumkur                                 1133623                                    71587                         6
 Kolar                                  538976                                     49325                         9
 Bangalore Urban                        275476                                     44170                         16
 Bangalore Rural                        312341                                     63808                         20
 Mandya                                 1466080                                    174941                        11
 Hassan                                 957088                                     62913                         6
 Dakshina Kannada                       911659                                     390534                        42
 Kodagu                                 270241                                     23046                         8
 Mysore                                 684771                                     86634                         12
 Chamarajnagar                          337445                                     23969                         7
 Chikkaballapur                         454742                                     40326                         8
 Ramanagar                              406763                                     55923                         13
 Yadgir                                 258241                                     23519                         9


               Co-existence of Multiple rights over common land and natural resources


Multiple rights arise from the variety of uses that accrue from a common property land resource.
These have been discussed in previous sections in the context of commons resources on open-access
government land - where these various rights are not addressed, and forests – where these rights are
enumerated in the context of the Forest Rights Act. In both case, the management of rights takes place
through orders passed by local authorities. Besides these rights, easement rights such as the right of
way, right to fruit are protected in common law. Thus, disputes if any are resolved against the local
                                                                                                 68
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



government, as these multiple rights are individualized to each user or aggregate of users. Data is not
at hand to make conclusive remarks about the rate of resolving disputes concerning the existence and
exercise of these rights. The Bhoomi database provides details of Records of Rights registered in the
name of more than one user (Table 4. 2.2). While that is not directly translatable into an affirmation
of rural group rights, the data illuminates our understanding of collective ownership.

          Co-existence of Multiple rights over the same plot of land and its resources (e.g.
          trees)


Multiple rights exist over the same plot of land to an individual or an aggregate of individuals, insofar
as certain resources in the land are deemed to vest with the state government, while others continue
to remain with the occupant of the land. The Right to Trees under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act
offers a case study. Under Section 74 and 75, the right to trees will vest in the occupant except when
these trees are reserved by the Government or a Survey Officer, or are standing on Government
property. The multiplicity of rights over the same plot arises when the Government specially reserves
trees at the time of survey settlement. Such a situation also arises under Section 77 in the context of
road-side trees. When trees are planted on lands held by a private owner under the orders and
expense of the local authority, they vest in the State Government. In the event of such trees dying, or
being cut down under a Tehsildar’s order, the timber becomes the property of the holder. The lopping
of these trees can only be carried out with the authorization of the Tahsildar. The State Government,
through the Deputy Commissioner is empowered to frame rules under Section 79 to regulate the
availing firewood and timber to trees reserved under Section 75. Hence, the existence of multiple
rights over a property of land is an eminent possibility, though there is limited data to infer the
efficiency of dispute resolution.

          Co-existence of multiple rights over land and mining/ other sub-soil resources
          located on the same plot


Multiple rights over land and sub-soil resources can legally coexist. The MINES AND MINERALS
(REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 1957 lays down a framework for the management and mining of
mineral resources. The rights to mines, minerals and mineral products vests absolutely with the State
Government, and the State Government is the administering authority for the disposal and enjoyment
of rights over these mines. The Act recognizes three kinds of mineral concessions issued to private
parties interested in mining an area –

                                                                                                     69
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



       Reconnaissance Permit – which is granted for preliminarily prospecting minerals by surveying
        and mapping the area;
       Prospecting License – which is granted to explore, locate and identify mineral deposits;
       Mining Lease – This is granted for the extraction of the mineral resource.

The State Government issues these permits as appropriate, except in the case of minerals included in
the First Schedule of the Act, which requires the approval of the Central Government. The Central
Government notifies ‘minor’ minerals from time to time, which is under the exclusive prerogative of
the State Government through all stages, from deciding procedures, determining conditions for
granting concessions, fixing rates of royalty so on and so forth. The Karnataka Minor Mineral
Concessional Rules, 1994 governs this aspect, with Sections 32-35 specifically addressing the mining
of minor minerals and quarrying on patta, or privately held lands. Here too, there is a clear
demarcation between the licensee and the owner/occupant of the land in question. Neither the Act
nor the Karnataka rules recognize any preferential right of those who have surface rights, thus creating
a regime where multiple rights operate over the same plot of land.

Since the dimension takes into account the status in practice, it must be noted that much of the mining
happens on improperly acquired land, or on land where surface rights to do not exist. Thus the
provisions of the law are not respected in practice.

POLICY RECOMMENDATION

       There is a need for greater clarity on the legalities of mining minor minerals and sand

          Accessible opportunities for mapping and recording of group rights


There is no existing legislative structure in place that recognizes group rights over common lands. The
FOREST RIGHTS ACT, 2006 comes closest to recognizing the rights of certain communities that have
historically inhabited certain forestlands. As discussed earlier, the implementation of the Act has been
poor in respect of recognizing community rights. In most of these communities, there is very little
awareness about the means of formalizing their rights over land that comes in the way of realizing
these rights, let alone recording them. However, if and when they are recognized, the Forest
Settlement Officer is expected to record such an allotment.

          Boundary demarcation of communal land

                                                                                                    70
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



Communal lands straddle many administrative and land use classifications, with their only common
feature being that they are government lands. In Karnataka, the Survey, Settlement and Land Records
Department deals with land surveys and maintenance of historical land records in the form of maps
that depict the boundaries and extent of individual properties, and textual records that relate to
ownership, use and other land particulars. The computerization of these records was pioneered in
2002 as the Bhoomi project, having achieved nearly 100 percent mapping of rural land parcels with
landowners. By exclusion, some estimate of government lands may be arrived at. However, this
information does not allow us to draw up accurate estimates of the extent of common lands.

Constrained by the absence of the direct typological data, the land use data published by the
Department of Economics and Statistics is the closest to an approximation of the extent of these lands,
but critically this does not portray the range of access rights, being simply divided as forests, pastures
and fallow/cultivated wastelands. To quote an example, “a gomaal with zero canopy cover will look
‘degraded’ in the eyes of the forester and will register low on measures of forest cover, but this gomaal
may be fully meeting local needs.” As a result, there is widespread misclassification on official maps
with say, grasslands getting misclassified as ‘degraded scrub’ (Lele, Purushothaman and Kashyap,
2013). Hence, one can conclude that there is no clear demarcation of common lands. However, there
is some information about the demarcation of public lands. Though GIS technology has been in use to
demarcate forest cover, communal lands are not precisely demarcated and due to the absence of
reference points, there is great miscalculation. Individual forest rights are yet to be mapped.

POLICY RECOMMENDATION

All common lands should be surveyed and demarcated with proper fencing with a view to preventing
encroachment of such land.




                                                                                                      71
                                                                                               KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



Indicator 2: Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulation:


 LGI         Dimension Description                        Score     Score Description


 2     1     Restrictions regarding rural land            B         Regulations regarding restrictions on rural land use effectively serve public
             use are justified and enforced                         purpose but enforcement is weak



 2     2     Restrictions        on      rural    land    B         There are a series of regulations that are for the most part serve pubic
             transferability     effectively     serve              purpose but that are not enforced
             public policy objectives.


 2     3     Rural     land      use     plans     are    C         Public input is required and sought in preparing and amending land use
             elaborated/changed           via    public             plans but comments are not reflected in the finalization of land use plans
             process and resulting burdens are
             shared.


 2     4     Rural lands, the use of which is                 Not   --------
             changed, are swiftly transferred to          Graded
             the destined use


 2     5     Recognizing of rural land use                B         Processes for rezoning are public and clear but mechanisms to safeguard
             follows a public process that                          existing rights are not fully effective
             safeguards existing rights.


 2     6     Use plans for specific rural land            C         C: The share of land set aside for specific use that is used for a non-
             classes          (forest,      pastures,               specified purpose in contravention of existing regulations is between 30%
             wetlands, national parks etc.) are                     and 50%.
             in line with actual use




Analysis

           Justification and Enforcement of Restrictions regarding rural land use


Rural land use is driven by the social purpose of the land reforms undertaken by the Karnataka
government beginning from the 1960s. These reforms intended to allay chronic poverty, low yield and
landlessness by abolishing tenancy and allotting land to the ultimate cultivator. Restrictions on the
use of land have since evolved to prioritize agricultural use, personal cultivation and disadvantaged
groups, both those that faced historical injustice and those from weaker financial sections. Broadly,
                                                                                                 72
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



restrictions are also framed to ensure that there is fidelity to the purpose to which the land was to be
put to use.

The Karnataka Land Reforms Act- 1974 (Sections 79A, 79B and 79C) imposes various restrictions on
the purchase of agricultural land by non-agriculturists with the objective of regulating the use of
agricultural land. The KARNATAKA LAND GRANT RULES, 1969 lays down the framework and procedure for
the grant of land by the government to individuals. Rule 9 prescribes certain conditions on the use of
the land, the violation of which shall operate to terminate his grant. The grantee is expected to bring
the land granted under cultivation within three years from the date of taking possession over the land;
the grantee shall cultivate the land personally; the grantee shall not appropriate the land for any
purpose other than that for which it is granted, except with the prior approval of the granting
authority. Rule 9 prescribes certain conditions on the use of the land, the violation of which shall
operate to terminate his grant. The grantee is expected to bring the land granted under cultivation
within three years from the date of taking possession over the land; the grantee shall cultivate the
land personally; the grantee shall not appropriate the land for any purpose other than that for which
it is granted, except with the prior approval of the granting authority. These restrictions place entry
barriers on those who may avail of agricultural land. Similar provisions and penalties are also found in
the KARNATAKA LAND REVENUE ACT, 1964. Section 95 prescribes the procedure for the use of agricultural
land for certain specific non-agricultural purposes by attaining the permission to convert such land
from the Deputy Commissioner. Section 96 lays down the penalty for using agricultural land without
appropriate permission. A notice may be served to the offender directing him to use the land for its
original purpose, and may require that he remove the structures built, or excavations undertaken in
contravention of these conditions. The Deputy Commissioner may also impose fines and further
penalties as fit. If no action is undertaken, the Deputy Commissioner himself may take steps to
effectuate those demands. The restrictions under Section 95 and 96 are also made applicable as
appropriate to non-agricultural lands held for specific purposes by Section 97. Section 192A also
imposes punishment for the sale of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes without prior
approval from the competent authority.

These restrictions justify the purposes behind their existence, but data needs to be manually collected
to draw meaningful conclusions about the extent of enforcement, though media reports have
consistently highlighted severe issues of corruption in the allotment and selective persecution of those


                                                                                                    73
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



found to be in violation of land use restrictions. Conversations with revenue department officials also
reveal that enforcement of restrictions is weak.

          Restrictions on rural land transferability and public policy objectives


Restrictions are placed on rural land transferability so that land may be used for the purpose it is
sought to be used, and so that the grantees, most of whom are intended to be poor, landless farmers,
would not be beguiled out of their rights over the land. In a large number of cases, landholders from
disadvantaged backgrounds are often cheated of their land or are simply not able to prioritize the
long-term interest of land security over short-term cash gains that could result from such transfer. To
balance the decision- making agency of impoverished grantees against being able to ensure financial
stability, these legislations stagger the time periods beyond which alienation may be possible subject
to administrative oversight.

The KARNATAKA LAND GRANT RULES, 1969 imposes restrictions on the alienation of land. Under Rule 9,
the grantee shall not alienate agricultural land for a period of twenty five years from the date of taking
possession. However, he may seek the permission of the Deputy Commissioner if he wants to alienate
the land after five years. The Deputy Commissioner shall only grant the permission if he is satisfied
that the alienation is for the purpose of acquiring other land or improving the remaining land and the
grantee credits fifty percent of the market value of the land to the Government. A grantee who has
obtained such permission becomes ineligible for the grant of Government land. Similarly, housing sites
granted under Rule 18 cannot be tenanted for a period of five years from the date on which the
grantee takes possession, and cannot alienate it for a period of fifteen years. After five years, the
grantee may alienate the site with the approval of the Deputy Commissioner and after crediting the
Government with an amount equal to fifty percent of the market value of the site. In all of these
instances, alienation is understood broadly to cover all forms of disposing of the property, but an
exception is made for mortgages to select Government Boards or Banks, so as to obtain a loan so that
the land may be put to optimal use. In respect to grants for industrial purposes, the grantee cannot
alienate the land for thirty years from the date of grant. If he intends to alienate it after that, the
industrial concern will first offer it to the State Government. The KARNATAKA LAND REFORMS ACT
generally prohibits transfer of agricultural property to non-agriculturists, and persons having source
of income more than Rs 2 lakh (average for last five years income), from non-agricultural sources.



                                                                                                      74
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



The KARNATAKA SCHEDULED CASTES & TRIBES (PROHIBITION OF TRANSFER OF CERTAIN LANDS) ACT, 1978 is an
overriding legislation that seeks to create land security for disadvantaged groups. It was enacted when
it was found that the non-alienation clause in the Land Grant Rules and the provision for cancellation
of grants were not sufficient to protect SC/ST grantees. It imposes a ban on the transfer of lands
allotted to landless, agricultural labourers who are SC/STs. If it is found that the land is alienated with
or without the knowledge of the grantee, the transaction will immediately be voided and the land will
be returned to the original holder, without any compensation to the purchaser. Land transferred
despite these provisions are prohibited from being registered under Section 6 of the Act. The
remaining restrictions on alienation in the Land Grant Rules continue to operate. The Karnataka High
Court intervened in the operation of the Act in 2011 to direct criminal action against grantees who sell
and re-sell granted lands, pleading ignorance of law, making off with profits from each “sale”.

As with the previous indicator, the stated aims of these legislations are laudable, but an accurate
conclusion regarding its effectiveness cannot be made without data regarding the implementation of
these rules in practice. Conversations with revenue department officials also reveal that enforcement
of restrictions is weak.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

The restrictions placed on the use of rural land need to be reviewed in the light of changed socio-
economic conditions and agrarian relations. There are reports that the restrictions imposed for non-
agricultural use of agricultural land (Sections 79A, 79B and 79C) have not served the purpose and they
need to be re-looked. The possibility of regulating the land use by strictly imposing zone regulations
rather than preventing sections of people from buying agricultural land can be examined. The
possibility of addressing the problems associated with conversion using zone regulations can also be
examined.

            Process of Rural land use planning and sharing of resulting burdens


The processes for the formulation of rural land use plans arise from the KARNATAKA TOWN & COUNTRY
PLANNING ACT, 1961. Planning Authorities constituted under the act sets aside minority representation
of members of local self-governing institutions such as gram panchayats. Before the planning authority
begins carrying out a survey to prepare the Outline Development Plans, Section 9, KT&CP Act,
mandates them to declare their intention to prepare such a plan, showing the boundary of the area

                                                                                                       75
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



proposed to be included in it. For two months, a member of the public may communicate a suggestion
regarding its use, which may or may not be accepted by the planning authority. Once the State
Government returns the Master Plan to the planning authority, the authority is expected to invite
public comments for a period of sixty days, after which they may once again resubmit a plan for
approval under Section 13. The final plan is then permanently displayed in the offices of the Planning
Authority. Though the legislation includes a few representatives in the process of creating land use
plans, the structure for this is very much top-down. It is also doubtful whether simply notifying the
public, without involving them in the process consultatively, connotes to a public process.

          Transfer of Rural lands to their destined use following change of their use


There is no information present at hand to rank this dimension. Data needs to be manually collected.
Changes reflected in the updating of databases across different government departments including,
but not restricted to, the Revenue Department, Forest Department, the Directorate of Town and
Country Planning, Directorate of Industries and Commerce, etc. can be used to infer some conclusions
regarding the duration to effectuate a changed land use.

          Process of Rezoning of rural land use and safeguards to existing rights


Under Section 14A, KARNATAKA TOWN & COUNTRY PLANNING ACT, a proposal for change of land use from
outline development plan needs to be published, inviting objections from the public for a period of at
least fifteen days. Similarly, draft variation in the final scheme to correct an erRecord of Rights or
irregularity, is displayed at the office of the planning authority so the public may inspect them.
Sections 23 and 24 of the Planning Act substitute the equivalent provision under the Land Acquisition
Act that lays down the matters to be considered in determining compensation to be awarded to the
owner of the property. Illustratively, these include the market value, the use to which the land was
put to use, and the potential injury to other property as a consequence of severance. Matters that are
not considered of relevance under Section 24 include any change in land value that results from the
use that it would be put to when acquired, degree of urgency of acquisition or any special suitability
of the land. While these safeguards address compensation, it does not tackle the issue of the owner’s
livelihood that would be detrimentally affected by this process. The process for rezoning is hardly
public, as it is merely notified for persons who are interested in finding out about it, and does not
involve them in the decision making process.


                                                                                                  76
                                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

The Rural Land Use regulations need to be enforced strictly and the capacity of the local self-
governments to plan and implement rural land use needs to be enhanced.

              Plans for Protected Rural Land Use (forest, pastures, national parks etc.) and
              the actual use

This data is not available as the available Survey Data is dated and not updated. However, there is
anecdotal evidence to suggest that the land set aside for specific use has been diverted to non-
specified purposes over the years. This diversion has taken place either in the form of encroachments
or in the form of allocation of land overlooking the existing norms. A recent example is allocation of
Amrut Mahal Kaval land in Challakere Taluka of Chitradurga District by the Deputy Commissioner to
various public purposes including setting up a campus of the Indian Institute of Science. The allocation
of Amrut Mahal Kaval land was in contravention of the government order (RD 47 LGP 96) which clearly
states that Kaval land should not be diverted to any other purpose. Similarly, the Comptroller and
Auditor General (CAG) which did a performance audit report (2011) of the Karnataka Industrial Areas
Development Board (KIADB) observed that “there was no prior consultation by the Board with the
Planning Authorities to ensure that land earmarked for non-industrial use was not notified for
industrial areas.” Similarly, a committee appointed by the government in 2011under the chairmanship
of former additional chief secretary Balasubrahmanian listed a number of instances where the land
set apart for specified purposes such as grazing, burial ground etc. having been allotted to private
individuals. In a few instances, the government has initiated measures to recover such land in the past
three years. The Government of Karnataka has also been planning to conduct a fresh survey of land In
view of this anecdotal evidence, although it is not possible to estimate the exact percentage of such
diversion. With respect to encroached forest land the following official figures indicate about 5% of all
forests (44 lakh acres) are encroached (2.06 lakh acres) in the state for various non-forests purposes36.




36
     Forest Minister’s Answer to a member’s question in the Karnataka Legislative Assembly
                                                                                                     77
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014




4.3. Panel 3:
Urban Land Use, Planning and Development
4.3.1. Context

          Introduction


Land use planning and development is a State subject under the Constitution, allowing respective
States to formulate policies and legislation to govern and plan urban areas. Legally, for all towns and
cities in India, there exists an urban local body. In Karnataka they are typically classified based on the
size of these settlements and specifically as per the provisions of Karnataka Municipalities Act and
Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act. The number of urban local bodies in Karnataka is given in the
table 4.3.1
 Table 4.3.1 No of urban local bodies in Karnataka
                  Urban Local Bodies                                        No
 1                Municipal Corporations                                    8
 2                City Municipal Councils                                   43
 3                Town Municipal Councils                                   68
 4                Town Panchayats                                           94
                  Total                                                     213
The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act passed in 1993 mandates the urban local bodies for
administering, managing and preparing master / development plans. Instead, planning in the form of
land-use planning and zoning regulations are vested with a parastatal agency created by an act of
State legislature. Significant decision-making powers in these areas with regard to delivery of various
services rest with various parastatal organisations. Apart from the urban local bodies represented by
the local elected representatives, the other organizations responsible for essential services can be
parastatals or private sector companies. Besides a limited level of autonomy they are largely within
the control of the State government. .

A critical aspect in the regulated development of urban areas is through proper implementation of
master plans / development plans. Although master plans / development plans for towns and cities

                                                                                                      78
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



have been prepared, their implementation has not been satisfactory due to a variety of reasons, which
in turn have resulted in mushrooming of slums and squatters, unauthorised and haphazard
development and above all environmental degradation and transportation problems within and
around the urban areas.

          Types of Urban Planning in Karnataka


Planning in the form of land-use zoning and regulation in the major urban areas of Karnataka are
vested with various Urban Development Authorities like Bangalore Development Authority (BDA),
Mysore Urban Development Authoritiy (MUDA), Tumkur Urban Development Authority, Hubli-
Dharwad Urban Development Authority (HDUDA). These authorities are parastatal agencies but have
been designated as the Local Planning Authority under provisions of Karnataka Town and Country
Planning (KTCP) Act of 1961 and are responsible for the preparation and revision of the master plans.
Despite the KTCP Act itself being subjected to numerous amendments and ordinances to facilitate
‘urban development’, debates have been raised on the effectiveness of these master plans. Until 2004,
Karnataka had a three-tier system of urban planning. The three tiers refer to planning being done at
three levels varying in their scope and details. The Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961
outlines this approach. The three tiers are -

    1. Outline Development Plan: This is meant for local planning area. This is prepared first. It
        indicates zoning of land use for residential, commercial, industrial, recreational, educational
        and other public purposes, proposed circulation pattern and a set of zoning regulations.
    2. Comprehensive Development Plan - This follows ODP. This includes details of zoning o land
        use. It also includes zoning regulations, complete street pattern, improvements to existing
        road patterns, reservation of areas for public purpose such as parks, playgrounds and other
        recreational uses, public buildings, institutions, areas for housing, etc.
    3. Town Planning Schemes - these are prepared for the defined planning areas in order to
        implement proposals of Comprehensive Development Plan.

An amendment to the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 was made in 2004. The
amendment prescribed preparation of Master Plan by all the planning authorities together. The
amendment removed Comprehensive Development Plan and Outline Development Plan from the
three tier system and consolidated it to a single Master Plan. The Master Plan is made in a two-step


                                                                                                   79
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



process beginning with an Interim Master Plan which includes regulation of land use pattern and road
pattern. The amendment has also made it mandatory to revise the Master Plan once every ten years.

The development plans / master plans are mostly documents prepared with limited forecasting
capabilities without capturing the entire dynamics. Besides this, these plans mostly restrict to
demarcate only land-use zones with little or no effective enforcement of the same. Further, with
planning authorities restricting to mostly land-uses, efforts to involve or integrate transport, housing,
water and sanitation, etc. in the planning process is limited. This results in, organisations involved or
catering to different services (transport, housing, health, water, energy, etc.) does not work in
integrated manner to address basic amenities. Lack of coordination among many agencies poses
challenges in sustainable use of land and other resources. For instance, one of the principal problems
in Bangalore’s governance is the mismatch in territorial jurisdiction of the planning and regulatory
institutions and the territory within which rapid commercial and residential development is presently
taking place. This mismatch results in a perpetual time lag between land development and the arrival
of regulatory and governance oversight.37

The problem of planning is compounded by the fact that power to regulate conversion of land from
agriculture to non-agricultural use lies with the competent authority under section 95 of the KLR Act.
The existence of this power has led to several distortions which have had adverse impact on the
development of the land markets and resulted in unplanned growth in the urban and peri-urban areas
in the BMR. The High Courts have commented upon the redundancy of this provision in areas covered
by a Master Plan, but the amendments carried out in the KLR Act have continued the operation of the
provisions relating to land conversion to non-agricultural use in LPAs.38

A stark contrasting fact with the planning authorities is its lack of acknowledgement of any city
functions: mobility, jobs, economy, energy, etc. On the one hand, planning authorities are focussed
on land-use plans and its regulation alone, accepting supplements of integrating land-use with
transportation for enhancing mobility. On the other hand, the local administration has to resolve




37
   Report of the Expert committee - Governance in The Bangalore Metropolitan Region and Bruhat Bangalore
Mahanagara Palike, 2008
38
   Report of the Expert committee - Governance in The Bangalore Metropolitan Region and Bruhat Bangalore
Mahanagara Palike, 2008
                                                                                                     80
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



overnight about daily operations management with little realisation on the implications of the
planning organisation ignoring the city functions.

The dispersal of the land planning functions by conferring zoning power on unelected development
authorities and land use power on the state government authorities makes the local level planning
framework envisaged by the constitutional provisions a non-starter as the power to regulate the
supply of urban land and the manner of its development is conferred on the state government and
not the local government.39

One notable issue on the master plan and its amendments has been with respect to the ‘regularisation
of unauthorised construction and development’ pursued by an amendment (under Section 76-FF of
KTCP Act) and the notification its rules subsequently. Though devolution of planning function is one
of the mandatory reforms to be fulfilled under JnNURM, the state government skirts this by issuing a
Government Order directing the planning agency to send the draft and final versions of the master
plan ‘for vetting and comments’ before the formal approval. However, only recently the Government
of Karnataka issued a draft notification for constituting a Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC) for
the Bangalore Metropolitan Region required by one of the mandatory reforms under JnNURM.

            Urban Development and Housing


Realizing the importance of shaping the urban areas better, Government of Karnataka has come up
with an Urban Development Policy for Karnataka during November 2009. In line with the Union
Government’s National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy – 2007, Government of Karnataka has also
prepared a draft housing and habitat policy during 2009. Both the national and state policies on
housing and habitat follow similar approaches and has raised concerns inviting comments from
different quarters. Notable among them is the critique on the state’s policy by Slum Janandolana.
Notwithstanding with prevalent policies, the MHUPA has prepared a ‘Model State Affordable Housing
Policy for Urban Areas’ recently (September 2013).




39
 Report of the Expert committee - Governance in The Bangalore Metropolitan Region and Bruhat Bangalore
Mahanagara Palike, 2008

                                                                                                  81
                                                                         KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



Following suit, the Department of Housing, Government of Karnataka has notified its version of
‘Affordable Housing Policy, 2013’. This policy sets clear guidelines and calls for private participation in
housing. With this, the State Government of Karnataka intends to formulate an Affordable Housing
Policy to augment affordable housing stock, particularly for Economically Weaker Section (EWS) and
Lower Income Group (LIG) categories. The policy will help operationalise the strategy envisaged in the
National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy (NUHHP) 2007 of promoting various types of Public Private
Partnerships - of the Government sector with the Private sector, the State undertakings, Urban Local
Bodies etc - for realizing the goal of Affordable Housing for all. The basic aim of the policy is to increase
affordable housing stock by encouraging affordable housing developers through incentives and
concessions.

For the state government to access funds from the centre, it needs to mend laws, craft policies and
implementing mechanisms in the process of fulfilling the requirements of the reforms agenda.. The
local bodies with limited capacity have to assimilate all of this and implement. Government of
Karnataka in one of the smart moves has established the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development
and Finance Corporation (KUID & FC - http://www.kuidfc.com/) as a public limited company during
1993. One of the key roles the KUID & FC has been performing is being the ‘conduit’ for most funds
received by the state from the Centre or any multilateral agencies as loans or grants. In the process,
it has been spearheading and leading the efforts pushing for any reforms and mechanisms towards
availing the grants. Given the prevalence of schemes like JnNURM and RAY along with their reforms
agenda, the KUID & FC has been working closely with the Urban Development Department,
Government of Karnataka in driving these reforms.

              The Context of Bangalore (the largest city in the state)


Bangalore has a population of 8,499,39940 and an area of 741 square kilometres. Bruhat Bangalore
Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) is the ‘urban local body’ (ULB), the local governmental structure
representing and responsible to the citizens for the city and outlying areas. Notified in December 2006,
the new Corporation replaced the erstwhile local bodies, Bangalore City Corporation (Bangalore
Mahanagara Palike), eight neighbouring councils (seven City Municipal Councils and one Town




40
     As per Census of India 2011
                                                                                                        82
                                                                                         KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                     2014



Municipal Council) and 111 outlying villages. Independent of the BBMP, which is governed by locally
elected representatives, several parastatal bodies controlled by the State government are responsible
for many essential services (see Table 4.3.2).



                            Table 4.3.2: List of various bodies providing urban services in Bangalore


                Organisations                                              Functional Areas (Scope of Work)

                                                 Urban local body responsible for overall delivery of services  Roads and road
                                                 maintenance including asphalting, pavements and street lighting; solid waste
 Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP)
                                                 management, education and health in all wards, storm water drains, construction of
                                                 few Ring roads, flyovers and grade separators

                                                 Land-use zoning, planning and regulation within Bangalore Metropolitan Area;
 Bangalore Development Authority (BDA)
                                                 Construction of few Ring roads, flyovers and grade separators
                                                 Planning, co-ordinating and supervising the proper and orderly development of the
 Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development       areas within the Bangalore Metropolitan Region, which comprises Bangalore urban
 Authority (BMRDA)                               district and parts of Bangalore rural district. BDA’s boundary is a subset of BMRDA’s
                                                 boundary
 Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board       Drinking water – pumping and distribution, sewerage collection, water and waste
 (BWSSB)                                         water treatment and disposal
 Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Ltd (BMRC)     Public transport system – Rail-based
 Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development      Urban infrastructure and Finance; handhold, coordinate and manage several central
 and Finance Corporation (KUID&FC)               / multilateral projects
 Karnataka Housing Board                         Provisioning affordable housing

 Karnataka Slum Development Board                For the welfare and improvement of slums




The BDA has been pursuing urban development for formation of layouts or construction of ring roads
mostly through ‘land acquisition’ under the BDA Act. With the slow pace of formation and
development of layouts by the BDA, private players have been aggressively developing layouts on
revenue lands. This has also resulted in significant applications and subsequent permit to change of
land-use. Further the existence of many parastatal organisations, each of them acting in its own
jurisdiction area, leading to challenges in coordinating different activities. Apart from the issue of a
common jurisdiction and the lack of coordinated effort, even basic information related to different
sectors is extremely difficult to collect, collate and to correlate. For effective planning it is imperative



                                                                                                                                  83
                                                                            KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                      2014



that all the basic information is gathered across a common jurisdiction with the effect of creating a
robust city information system.

               Slum Development


The Karnataka Slum Development Board (KSDB) previously known as Karnataka Slum Clearance Board
has been specifically established under the Housing Department to address the development of slums
in partnership with various stakeholders like the Urban Local Bodies and Water Supply Boards, etc.

 Table 4.3.3: Distribution of slums across Bangalore (BBMP, 2006)
 Agency / Authority                        No of slums   No of Households     Remarks

 Karnataka Slum Development Board (KSDB)   218           106,266              Declared

                                                         110,991
 Greater Bangalore City Corporation        324                                310 Undeclared & 14 Declared

 Grand Total                               542           217,257

The Revised Master Plan 2015 for Bangalore Metropolitan Area doesn’t indicate even a single
designated slum. There is no institutional mechanism to coordinate the planning and implementation
between the Karnataka Slum Clearance Board and the BBMP. The division of roles and responsibilities
between these two institutions needs further clarity and, perhaps, redefinition. The institutional
mechanism within the BBMP to deal with basic services to the urban poor is weak. The BBMP has a
welfare department that is not actively involved in slum redevelopment.41 After redevelopment by
the KSCB the slums are handed over to the BBMP for operation and maintenance. According to the
figures available with the KSDB, there are 542 slums in the state of which 324 are in Bangalore (Table
4.3.3)




41
  Report of the Expert committee - Governance in The Bangalore Metropolitan Region and Bruhat
Bangalore Mahanagara Palike, 2008 (Note: Estimates are based on 2001 Census)

                                                                                                             84
                                                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                      2014



4.3.2. Assessment and Score
This section analyses in detail the specific elements related to urban land use and planning in
Karnataka. These elements are divided into Indicators which in turn are broken down into several
Dimensions. Indicators provide a relatively exhaustive assessment of relevant land governance issues
through specific dimensions which define areas for investigation, quantitative measurement or
qualitative assessment.42

Indicator 1: Land rights are not conditional on adherence to unrealistic standards


 LGI              Dimension Description                    Score   Score Description


 1       1        Restrictions   on    urban       land    A       There are a series of regulations that are for the most part serve public
                  ownership/transfer         effectively           purpose and that are enforced
                  serve public policy objectives


 1       2        Restrictions on urban land use           B       There are a series of regulations that are for the most part serve public
                  (disaster risk) effectively serve                purpose but that are not enforce
                  public policy objectives




Analysis

               Restrictions on urban land ownership/transfer and public policy objectives:


Karnataka does not have any general restriction on land ownership and transfer but there are certain
specific, limited restrictions in operation. In order to ascertain if the restrictions on urban land
ownership and transferability effectively serve public policy objectives, the actual restrictions must be
discussed. Some of the restrictions are as follows -

       1. When an Urban Development Authority (UDA) allots sites or houses to beneficiaries, it is
             usually given on a lease period. It should be noted that the provision of sale or lease is a result
             of the allotment rules framed by these Authorities – there is no statutory requirement that
             this should be adopted in every case and many authorities have moved away from this. The




42
     Land Governance Assessment Framework: Implementation Manual
                                                                                                                                   85
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



        ownership right is not given; instead in such cases the allotted plots are bound by conditions
        of transfer which do not allow transfer or sale of the property to any other individual. Since
        these are encumbrance free properties with clear titles they fetch higher value in the market
        compared to the amount collected during allotment. Therefore in the absence of restrictions
        on sale, the allottees are likely to sell them and apply for a new site. The restrictions on sale
        and transfer prevent such misuses.
    2. Certain restrictions on transfer are stated in the Karnataka Land (Restriction on Transfer) Act,
        1991. This was passed to prevent large scale unauthorized transfer of land which has been
        already been acquired or notified to be acquired by the Government under the Land
        Acquisition Act, 1894. Under Section 3 of the Karnataka Land (Restriction on Transfer) Act,
        1991, a person is prohibited to transfer by sale, mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise any land or
        part thereof situated in any urban area which has been acquired by the Government under
        the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (Central Act 1 of 1894) or any other law providing for
        acquisition of land for a public purpose.

As far as housing site allotment is concerned the transfer effectively serves public purpose because
due to the restrictions the sale deeds are not executed and therefore no illegal transfer of land takes
place. However, there is no unique identification mechanism to track beneficiaries.

          Enforcement of Restrictions on urban land use and the public interest


Restrictions on urban land use can be examined under the following ways based on the Acts that
define such restrictions:

    1. Restrictions by the KTCP Act – It allows for the Local Planning Authority to make provisions in
        the town planning scheme to impose conditions and restrictions in regard to the open space
        to be maintained about buildings, the percentage of building area for a plot, the number, size,
        height and character of buildings allowed in specified areas, the purposes to which buildings
        or specified areas may or may not be appropriated, the sub-division of plots, the
        discontinuance of objectionable users of land in any area in reasonable periods, parking space
        and loading and unloading space for any building and the sizes of projections and
        advertisement signs.




                                                                                                     86
                                                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                      2014



The objectives of the zoning regulations and other restrictions on urban land use are to safeguard the
public interest and to respond pro-actively to the future needs of the city. However, their enforcement
has often been not effective. Despite the restrictions, buildings do come up on tank beds and other
risk prone areas. Moreover, frequent change in zoning also defeats the very purpose of such
restrictions. Successive master plans have altered the green belt to cope with population and income
pressure. One study (Venkataraman 2013)43 observes like this in the context of Bangalore, the state’s
largest city: ...

          When organically developed outgrowths are absorbed periodically into the city and
          infrastructure extended to service these areas, there is a perception created that the planning
          authority has not only fallen short of adequate planning measures on the land use side, but
          that the laws are also elastic and there are various levels of subversion possible at the time of
          enforcement. This led to an increase in speculative activity in green belt areas, based on the
          assumption that the administration would continue to deal with unplanned development by
          regularising unplanned and illegal construction within the green belt area.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
There should be stricter enforcement of restrictions on urban land use and conversion of greenbelt
should be discouraged.




43
  Venkataraman, Madalasa, Analyzing Urban Growth Boundary Effects in the City of Bengaluru (2014). IIM Bangalore Research Paper No. 464.
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2464946 orhttp://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2464946
                                                                                                                                   87
                                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



Indicator 2: Transparency of land use restrictions: changes in land use and management regulations
are made in a transparent fashion and provide significant benefits for society in general rather than
just for specific groups:



 LGI         Dimension Description             Score   Score Description


             Process of urban
                                                       Information on planned urban expansion and infrastructure
             expansion/infrastructure
                                                       development is publicly available with sufficient anticipation but the
 2     1     development process is            C
                                                       way in which land rights by those affected are dealt with is largely ad
             transparent and respects
                                                       hoc.
             existing rights


             Changes in urban land use
                                                       Public input is sought in preparing and amending land use plans but
             plans are based on a clear
 2     2                                       C       the public comments are largely ignored in the finalization of the land
             public process and input by all
                                                       use plans
             stakeholders


             Changes in assigned urban land            Between 30% and 50% of the land that has had a change in land
 2     3     use are swiftly followed by       C       use assignment in the past three years has changed to the destined
             actual land use change                    use




Analysis

           Transparency in urban expansion and respect for existing rights


Urban expansion and infrastructure development in Karnataka is largely guided by the KTCP Act. The
Department of Town and Country Planning, Urban Development Authorities and Local Planning
Authorities together are responsible for urban planning. These also ensure that the citizens have
access to the master plans, zonal regulations and new projects that are developed.

Transparency: The process for approving new housing layouts and plans are not transparent because
had they been transparent urban areas and large cities in particular would not have increasing number
of “revenue layouts”. A transparent process would have meant that the new layouts are proposed and
approved in a clear and open manner. Towards this a new system is being developed where statuses
of new layouts will be updated on a web-based system under the project eVinyasa. This will include
new layout approvals which are digitally signed and lists of released and unreleased layouts.
                                                                                                                      88
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



Rights protection: Rights of land holders and other stakeholders are protected only when the layouts
are developed and approved legally. Divergences from master plans are rife in case of revenue layouts.

POLICY RECOMMENDATION

There is an urgent need to regulate the haphazard growth of infrastructure in the urban periphery and
there should be coordination among various agencies involved to check such unplanned expansion.

          Is the process of urban land use change transparent and participatory?


Until the last master plan (Revised Master Plan 2015) the BDA invited comments or responses from
the public only after the draft plan is prepared. During 2007, the Government did constitute a
committee chaired by a retired senior bureaucrat, which looked into the comments received by the
public and gave its recommendation for the final plan. However, given that it is the prerogative of the
Government to accept the comments and address them in the final approved plan, many criticized
the Government for not taking into view of all the comments received after the public consultation on
the draft master plan.

Given that the BDA has initiated the process of revising the master plan, from the Terms of Reference
for the same, this now envisages public stakeholder consultation at multiple levels starting from
formulation of objectives for the plan to choosing the appropriate scenario for 2031 aided by an
Oversight Committee that not only supervises the Consultants during plan preparation but also looks
into its implementation.

POLICY RECOMMENDATION

The Master plan is prepared under the provisions of the KTCP Act which was enacted in the 1960s and
the Act does not have provisions for enabling citizens’ participation during the preparation of the plan.
The Act should be amended to make public participation mandatory and to lay down the form and
manner in which public participation can be ensured.

          Changes in assigned urban land use and actual land use


Land use changes in the state can be of two types-

    a) Land use change in the Master Plan: This means that a land is changed from one zone to the
        other. When such conversions are made they are done through due process and the land is
                                                                                           89
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



        finally put to intended use. The land use post conversion is not recorded but it is generally
        understood that an interested party undertakes the conversion because it has a clear intended
        use.
    b) Conversion of land category from agricultural land to non-agricultural land: When this type of
        conversion is done it usually has varying intentions. Changes are done to either bypass land
        ceiling limits or to bypass Sec 79 AB of Land Reforms Act. In such cases, change in the assigned
        land use need not be followed by actual land use change.

In the outer conurbation, opening of green belt has permitted conversion of agriculture land to non-
agriculture purposes leading to real estate development. Most of these prevailed before the
notification of Revised Master Plan 2015. However, by and large, the subsequent master plans seem
to acknowledge the changes and consider them as ‘current land use’ and prepare the revised master
plan with ‘proposed land use’. Given the poor implementation of the master plan, their effective
compliance has been a concern. The master plan making doesn’t quantify the exact proportions of
such violations. There is no mechanism to track whether the transferred land has been put to intended
use or not.




                                                                                                    90
                                                                                             KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                        2014



Indicator 3: Efficiency in the urban land use planning process: land use plans are current,
implemented, do not drive people into informality, and cope with urban growth




     LGI              Dimension Description             Score                                Score Description


 3         1   Policy to ensure delivery of low-cost    B       A policy for low cost housing and services exists but implementation is not
               housing and services exists and is               always effective. As a result, the number of those with inadequate shelter
               progressively implemented                        declines but still remains high.

 3         2   Land use planning effectively guides     C       In the largest city, while a hierarchy of regional/detailed land use plans is
               urban spatial expansion in the largest           specified by law, in practice urban spatial expansion occurs in an ad hoc
               city                                             manner with infrastructure provided some time after urbanization

 3         3   Land use planning effectively guides     C       In the four major cities in the country, while a hierarchy of regional/detailed
               urban development in the four next               land use plans is specified by law, in practice urban development occurs in an
               largest cities.                                  ad hoc manner with infrastructure provided some time after urbanization.

 3         4   Planning processes are able to cope      C       In the largest city, the urban planning process/authority is struggling to cope
               with urban growth                                with the increasing demand for serviced units/land as evidenced by the fact
                                                                that most new dwellings are informal




Analysis:

               Policy to ensure delivery of low-cost housing and its implementation


At the national level, the Government of India has already formulated the National Urban Housing and
Habitat Policy 2007 (NUHHP, 2007) keeping in view of the changing socio-economic aspects in urban
areas and rising demands of housing and allied amenities and infrastructure. In tune with most
contemporary policies, this also envisages a fair amount of ‘public private partnerships’ for realizing
the goal of ‘affordable housing for all’ with special emphasis on urban poor. On the similar lines,
Government of Karnataka too has come up with a draft Karnataka Housing and Habitat Policy in 2009.
Need for Karnataka Housing and Habitat Policy emerges from the growing requirements of shelter
and related infrastructure both at rural and urban centers as also the continues the changing economic
and social environment, growing urbanization, mismatch in demand and supply of developed land and
houses at affordable prices and inability of poorer sections of the population to have access to formal
land markets and finances from financial institutions.


                                                                                                                                      91
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



Both the national and state policies on housing and habitat follow similar approaches and have raised
concerns inviting comments from different quarters. Notable among them is the critique on the state’s
policy by Slum Janandolana and various other organizations. Notwithstanding prevalent policies, the
Department of Housing, Government of Karnataka has notified a version of ‘Affordable Housing Policy,
2013’. This policy is to augment affordable housing stock, particularly for Economically Weaker
Section (EWS) and Lower Income Group (LIG) categories. It sets clear guidelines and calls for private
participation in housing.

Evidently, some of the statements in the policy strike right chords even outlining the various schemes
right from their origins and their mechanisms. It emphasizes the use of GIS in monitoring, prevention
of encroachments, and map ‘slum prone’ areas. Notably, it stresses that land title will remain with the
government when the land is allotted to State Government for construction of housing for the poor.

On progressive implementation it can be said that the pace of welfare programs has not kept up with
the speed of urbanization. There is no synchronization between the two and therefore the city sees
rising number of illegal layouts.

           Does Land use planning guide spatial expansion in the largest city?


Bangalore being the largest city has hierarchical planning agencies. There exists Bangalore
Metropolitan Region Development Authority (BMRDA) that is technically the super structure
encompassing an area of 8000 sq. km. Within the BMRDA, is the Bangalore Development Authority
(BDA) as the local planning authority (LPA) for Bangalore metropolitan area which has an area of 1279
sq. km. As per the existing policies, the planning though carried out by the local planning authority has
to be vetted and forwarded to the government through the BMRDA. The BMRDA prepares a macro
structure plan that outlines a broad framework for urban expansion. However, given that BDA
undertakes planning independently, their adherence to the structure plan is minimal or notional.
Given that master plan mostly focuses on land use plans, provisioning of infrastructure and other
services rests with other state run agencies (parastatals) raising serious concerns on coordination.
Hence most of these are post facto – follows urban spatial expansion.




                                                                                                     92
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



          Does Land use planning guide development in the four next large cities?


The next four large cities in consideration are – Mysore, Hubli-Dharwad, Belgaum and Mangalore.
Land use planning is carried out separately by respective cities’ local planning authorities, according
to the provisions of the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act. Only for Bangalore the local
planning authority’s (BDA) plan notionally attempts to adhere to the BMRDA’s structure plan. The next
four largest cities of the state are out of BMRDA and hence there is no need for these cities and their
plans to adhere to the structure plan. However, all these plans are taken up for revision once in every
ten years. Given that master plan mostly focuses on land use plans, provisioning of infrastructure and
other services rests with other state run agencies (parastatals) raising serious concerns on
coordination. Hence most of these are post facto – follows urban spatial expansion.

          Does planning processes cope with urban growth?


As noted above the master plans are prepared according to the provisions of the KTCP Act, which
stipulate the revision once every 10 years. Despite this, given the dynamic nature of urban evolution,
adaptation to newer planning methods are minimal barring the use of GIS, has resulted in them lag
significantly cope with urban growth. As a consequence provisioning of housing, infrastructure and
services have lagged behind driving informality.




                                                                                                   93
                                                                               KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



Indicator 4: Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land uses: development permits
are granted promptly and based on reasonable requirements



 LGI         Dimension Description                 Score   Score Description


 4     1     Provisions for residential building   C       Requirements to obtain a building permit are technically justified but
             permits      are      appropriate,            not affordable for (and not complied by) the majority of those affected
             affordable and complied with


 4     2     A building permit for a residential   A       All applications for building permits receive a decision within 3
             dwelling can be obtained quickly              months.
             and at a low cost




Analysis

           Effectiveness of residential building permit process


The building permits are approved by the town planning department of the urban local body. This is
mostly based on technically justified building bye-laws laid out or notified during the revision of master
plans. The bye-laws very clearly specify the requisites and norms to be adhered during the
construction of residential building based on size of the plot and width of the street. Accordingly, it
specifies the permissible floor area ratio (limiting the no of levels) and requisite setbacks, among other
such norms that are applicable.

Bangalore has introduced Automatic Building Plan Sanction called as Suvarna Paravanige - Gruha
Nakshe.

However, while the conditions for obtaining building permissions seem appropriate and affordable,
the compliance of such bye-laws and construction of dwelling units in compliance with the approved
building plan is far from reality. Owing to this there has been widespread violation either in terms of
FAR or leaving adequate setbacks apart from land uses as well. As noted elsewhere, this is pardoned
off almost once in every two decades through regularization and collecting a nominal penalty. This
has raised concerns on the effective implementation and regulation of the bye-laws.

           Cost and time required for obtaining a building permit for a residential dwelling
                                                                                                                         94
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



The Government of Karnataka recently introduced Karnataka Guarantee of Services to Citizens Act-
2011 (Sakala), according to which a host of services offered by the Government is acknowledged to
be serviced in a specified time. One such service is also the approval of building plans up to 2400 sq.
feet. The applicant needs to adhere to the requisite forms and apply under this. This will now mostly
ensure that the permits are obtained between 15 and 30 working days. The cost of obtaining
permission includes payment of a variety of fees which include license fees, ground rent, development
charges, commencement certificate charges, labor welfare cess and so on. The total cost depends on
the size of the proposed building and fees are calculated per square metre. The rates were
substantially revised in 2007 but cost is generally considered to be reasonable.




                                                                                                   95
                                                                             KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



Indicator 5: Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas



 LGI         Dimension Description               Score   Score Description


             Formalization of urban
                                                         The requirements for formalizing housing in urban areas are such
 5     1     residential housing is feasible     D
                                                         that formalization is deemed very difficult.
             and affordable


             In cities with informal tenure, a
             viable strategy exists for tenure           Strategies to deal with urban informality exist but focus only on
 5     2                                         C
             security, infrastructure, and               either land or services but not both.
             housing


             A condominium regime allows                 Common property under condominiums is recognized but the law
 5     3     effective management and            C       lacks clear (or regulations) for management and publicity of relevant
             recording of urban property                 records.




Analysis

           Feasibility and Affordability of Formalization of urban residential housing


Formalizing informal housing is complex activity marred by political interventions rather than clear
policies. Though a variety of policies and schemes exist to ensure provisioning housing for urban poor,
their implementation has been lacking. The urban local body along with the state’s Slum Development
Board of the Housing Department notifies slums or informal settlements based on duration of
occupancy and size of such settlements. However, the process is not clearly defined and ad hoc giving
raise to political manipulations. With the JnNURM and RAY, they lay down certain guidelines in
characterizing the informal settlements, guidelines to formalize within the local bodies are lacking.

           Tenure security, infrastructure, and housing in the case of informal tenures


As noted earlier there exist many policies and schemes for housing and urban development in general.
Additionally, the state government does provide services like access to power, community sanitation,
street lighting, etc. Among these housing and land tenure take the back seat. Mechanisms to provision
housing exist but the supply so short and not affordable. Formalizing land tenure rests with
government invoking amendments or provisions within the Karnataka Land Revenue Act.
                                                                                                                       96
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



For the urban poor, with inadequate access to shelter and housing, slums have become an inseparable
aspect of any urban area across the globe. In recognition of this, the Government of Karnataka has
recently approved the amendment to Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964 inserting Section 94 CC to
‘grant land in case of construction of dwelling house in occupied land in urban area’. Despite several
laws and policies favoring rights and access to housing and their tenure, their implementation has
been dismally poor.

          Condominium regime


In Karnataka, management of common property resources rests with respective line departments
owning the concerned land. For instance parks in metropolitan area are mostly with the urban local
bodies and only a few with development authorities and the Horticulture Department. Similarly tanks
are with the minor Irrigation Department or the Forest Department. Yet, their management at times
has been a challenge, especially the tanks. Most tanks in the metropolitan area are only recently
transferred to the local body. Owing to ineffective enforcement there have been widespread
encroachment and changes to land use especially for tanks and tank beds. Karnataka Apartment
Ownership Act, 1972 provides for the ownership of an individual apartment in a building and to make
such apartment heritable and transferable property and for matters connected therewith. It also
provides a detailed outline of dealing with common property resources for condominiums. Overall,
there seems to be a lack of clarity with regard to condominium rights.




                                                                                                  97
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014




4.4 Public Land Management
4.4.1. Panel Context


          Introduction


Management of public land has emerged a major challenge in Karnataka. There are two main reasons
for this. First, there is an ever increasing demand for allotment of public land for both public and
private purposes. Second, in the absence of proper records and physical demarcation of public land,
there has been rampant encroachment of such land. The Government has initiated a number of steps
to rationalize the allotment and to arrest encroachments. However, the success of such efforts has
been limited so far in the absence of (i) a clear policy with regard to the allotment of public land and
(ii) proper land records to establish the government ownership of land under encroachment.

          Defining Public Land


With the advent of land reforms in the ryotwari areas, uncultivated lands which were not part of any
holdings held by the farmers were vested in the State. Karnataka Land Revenue Act – 1964 states that
all lands which are not property of others belong to the government. The emphasis is to the term
“owned”. In other words, for the purpose of this panel, the land owned by various individuals and
entities which include even the government entities are not considered. The lands which the revenue
department and local bodies own and manages directly, which include all types of common land
excluding forest land is considered here. The land owned by religious institutions and boards are also
excluded from this definition.

Public land under this definition, i.e., the land which both the state and local self-governments own
and manages directly can fall under two broad categories. First, category of public land one which is
owned and managed by the government but the people may have some user rights on such land. The
second category of public land is the land owned and managed by the government on which the
people have no such user rights. Under the former category some kind of land are available for the
use of the individuals and some other kind are available to the community as a whole. Public land on
which user rights are available to individuals are generally adjacent to the private land and the owners

                                                                                                    98
                                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



of the private land either cultivate that land or only collect its produce for cultivating their private
land. The public land on which people have rights collectively include lands such as grazing land, burial
lands, lake beds and so on. Some of these lands were used for grazing and other common purposes
and became common property resources over time. These include: Gomal lands (those used for
grazing the cattle); Gundu thopu (those used for planting trees for common use); Poramboke (or the
cultivable waste); uncultivable waste lands; lands used for public utilities including lakes and roads
etc. The land on which the people have no such rights is commonly known as government land.

           Extent of Public Land


The extent of public land under these two categories in Karnataka were determined at the time of
initial survey settlement and since then their size has been declining since the government has been
transferring these land (barring some kind of public land in the first category above) to various other
public and private entities. The extent of public land has also been dwindling because of rampant
encroachment of public land across the state. The district-wise extent of land available under the two
categories of land is given in table 4.4.1.

           Disposal of Public Land


Disposal of lands or other property belonging to State Government under section 67 — subject to such
rules as may be made in this behalf, the State Government, the Regional Commissioner, the Deputy
Commissioner, the Assistant Commissioner in-charge of a Taluk or Taluks and the Tahsildar, may
dispose of land or other property belonging to the State Government under section 67 or otherwise,
for purposes of agriculture, industry or any public utility and subject to the provisions of construction
of buildings. The process involves submission of an application by the applicant containing the details
of the proposal, purpose etc. The DC after appraising the proposal, if satisfied can transfer the land
invariably by lease. Though the Section 69 A, states that, the state can auction any such land to fetch
higher price, it is rarely used these days. Moreover though the DC is empowered, of late every such
case is placed before the cabinet for approval.




           Table 4.4.1 Extent of public land which includes common land in various districts of
n
o
i
t
a
r
o
p
r
o
C
d
n
a
L
c
i
l
b
u
P
a
k
a
t
a
n
r
a
K
:
e
c
r
u
o
S




                                                                                                     99
                                                             KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



                              Karnataka as of January 2014
No.     District            Public lan ( in acres)
1.      Bangalore( Urban)   83114
2.      Bangalore Rural     128901
3.      Ramnagar            286070
4.      Bagalkot            223747
5.      Bellary             592329
6.      D.K.Dt              625380
7.      Haveri              139084
8.      Davangere           274725
9.      Shimoga             1197361
10.     Mysore              413246
11.     Hassan              419297
12      Gulbarga            163443
13.     Bidar               110940
14      Bijapur             77053
15      Belagam             398301
16      Chitradurga         446797
17.     Dharwad             86076
18      Kolar               327107
19      Raichur             173700
20      Kodagu              4 37739
21      Udupi               442432
22      Tumkur              572800
23.     Chikballapur        446247
24      Chamarajnagar       228962
25      Chikmagalur         845206
26      Gadag               102342
27      Koppala             171144
28      Mandya              196558
29      UttaraKannada       16211586
30      Yadgir              106843
Total                       11576967

                                                                                  100
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



The Deputy Commissioner also has powers to grant public land in his jurisdiction to certain
marginalized sections of society. Further, the government from time to time regularizes certain kind
of encroachment on public land which also involves transfer of the ownership of the land from the
government to the occupant of such land. Such regularization is subject to various restrictions, both
in rural and urban areas. However, certain kind of public land which falls in the category of common
land is not allowed to be disposed of in any manner.

Section 71 deals with the powers of the state to assign any public “land for special purposes and when
assigned, shall not be otherwise used without sanction of the Deputy Commissioner.”

           Restrictions on the disposal of Public Land


There are several restrictions on disposing of certain kinds of public land if the land in question falls
into the category of common land. There are also restrictions on regularizing the encroachment of
public land by the poor if the land in question falls within a certain distance from the city limits.

The Karnataka Land Revenue Act as amended in 1991 prohibits regularization of unauthorized
cultivation of public land within 18 kms of Bangalore Municipal Corporation limits, 10 kms from the
limits of the Corporations of Hubli-Dharwad, Mysore, Belgaum, Mangalore and Gulbarga and 5 kms of
every city municipality in the state. With effect from July 1994, the 5 km limit was extended to all
towns with a population of more than 50,000.

           Encroachment of Public Land


Encroachment of public land can take place in two ways. Sometimes people who do not have shelter
or any means of livelihood may occupy the public land for the purposes of housing or cultivation.
Generally, such encroachments or occupation of public land is regularized from time to time subject
to restrictions. The other kind of encroachment which is known by the name of land grabbing happens
when private individuals or entities create fake documents and claim the public land. Karnataka has
witnessed a spurt in this kind of encroachment on public land in the past decade.




                                                                                                        101
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



A Task Force for Recovery of Public Land and its Protection44 was set up in 2009 to investigate the
issue. The Task Force unearthed rampant encroachment of public land especially in the urban
periphery. Its report, titled “Greed and Connivance”45 reveals that 11.07 lakh acres of public land has
been encroached upon in Karnataka, which is 10 per cent of all government land. The report also
concedes that this is a grossly under-reported figure. The Task Force had tabulated the data based on
government sources and also complaints filed by the general public.

The report takes particular note of encroachments in and around Bangalore. It states: “This scramble
for land (in Bangalore) has resulted, especially during the past 20 years, in encroachments on
government and public land and land grabbing by powerful builders and land mafia with active
involvement of persons in power – in politics, administration and real estate.”

A recent document submitted to the Karnataka Legislature by the Karnataka Public Land Corporation
gives a revised estimate of 13.05 lakh acres of public land having been encroached. The report also
details the steps taken by the government to recover such land and the extent of land recovered from
encroachers. The table 4.4.2 below gives district-wise break-up of the extent of public land and the
extent of encroachment of such land. The figures in the table show that besides Bangalore, the
adjacent districts of Bangalore Rural, Chikkaballapur and Ramanagar have witnessed large scale
encroachment of public land. As regards the removal of encroachment, Bangalore Urban district tops
the list, where over 28% of government land has been encroached and 42% of the encroachment has
been removed.

In encroachment removal process, Bangalore Urban has about 34% land under trial process. In
contrast to this Bidar which has the highest government land encroachment rates has over 64% of
land in trial process. Also, Gadag appears to have near 100% encroached land under trial. These figures
can be used as a measure of departmental effectiveness in removal of encroachment and reversal of
the acquisition.




44
   Task Force Report available here:
http://bangalore.citizenmatters.in/docs/2011/GoKVBalaTaskForceReport.pdf
45
   Frontline Magazine – In No Man’s Land. Available:
http://www.frontline.in/static/html/fl2816/stories/20110812281603600.htm
                                                                                                 102
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



While there are a number of Central and State-level Acts – such as the Karnataka Land Revenue Act,
1964; the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1986; the Forest Conservation Act, 1980; and
the Wakf Act, 1993 – to check encroachment of public land, the glaring non-compliance witnessed in
Karnataka suggests that these laws have been ineffective.


                    Table 4.4.2 District-wise break-up of public land encrochment

 Divisions        Name of the District   Encroachment in acres        Encroachment cleared ( acres)

 Bangalore
               1 Bangalore Urban                             34111                            14280
               2 Bangalore Rural                             14393                             3229
               3 Ramanagara                                  74611                               964
               4 Chikkaballapura                             79563                             1085
               5 Tumkur                                      13062                             2165
               6 Kolar                                       56405                             1127
               7 Shimoga                                    149604                             1020
               8 Davanagere                                  31838                             2831
               9 Chitradurga                                 25859                             3550
                  Total                                     479446                            30251
 Mysore
              10 Mysore                                      34652                             2584
              11 Hassan                                      67388                               476
              12 Mandya                                      32719                             2972
              13 Chikballapur                               104280                               169
              14 Dakshin Kannada                            195638                               272
              15 Kodagu                                      47104                                33
              16 Chamarajanagar                              11184                               468
              17 Udupi                                       85969                               681
                  Total                                     578934                             7655
                                                                                             Contd…




                                                                                               103
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014




 Divisions         Name of the District     Encroachment in acres        Encroachment cleared ( acres)
 Belgaum
              18 Belgaum                                        9979                                  1938
              19 Dharwad                                        6445                                    310
              20 Bijapur                                        4178                                    690
              21 Uttar Kannada                                  2730                                    487
              22 Bagalkote                                        794                                   324
              23 Gadag                                          6441                                    923

              24 Haveri                                        61679                                  39474
                   Total                                       92246                                  44146
 Gulbarga
              25 Gulbarga                                      29738                                  6580
              26 Bellary                                       64018                                  9836

              27 Raichur                                        7080                                    147
              28 Bidar                                         38742                                    128
              29 Koppal                                         4232                                  1359
              30 Yadgiri                                        7794                                    442
                   Total                                      151604                                  18492
               Grand Total                                  1302230                               100544
                                                             Source: Karnataka Public Land Corporation



In view of this problem, the Karnataka Legislature passed the Karnataka Land Grabbing (Prohibition)
Act 2007 which provides for measures to curb organized attempts to grab lands belonging to the
Government, Wakf or Hindu religious institutions and charitable endowments, local authorities or
other statutory or non-statutory bodies owned, controlled or managed by the Government. According
to the Karnataka Land Grabbing Prohibition Bill, 2011, the Government may, to institute speedy
enquiry into alleged land grabbing and trial of cases, by notification, constitute a special court.



                                                                                                      104
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



           Land Acquisition in Karnataka


Land acquisition is the process wherein agricultural and/or non agricultural lands are acquired by
government for various activities such as village/town extension, roads, culverts, reservoirs, canals,
military camps, railways, industries etc. Regular Assistant commissioners in the revenue sub-divisions
also act as Land Acquisition Officers along with special Land Acquisition Officers appointed by the
government, urban development authorities, Industrial development authorities, The National
Highways Authority etc. As it has been the case in other states, land acquisition in Karnataka was also
governed by Land Acquisition Act – 1894 till December 31, 2013. The Act lapsed with a new land
acquisition act titled The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 came into force on January 1, 2014. Karnataka January 1,
2014. Karnataka is in the process of finalizing the rules at the time of writing this report.

Under the Land Acquisition Act - 1894 (LAA) the State had full powers to acquire land. The only
restriction placed upon the acquisition process was that the project for which the land was being
acquired should have been for some “public purpose”. A certificate of “existence of public purpose”
by the government is not required if the property is acquired under some Special Act which does not
provide for such certificate directly or by implication. The following procedure was generally followed
at the time of land acquisition.

           The procedure


a) The acquiring body concerned files an application before the Deputy Commissioner (DC), giving
    the details of extent of land, sketch, survey numbers and details of the owners of the lands.
b) Considering the application the DC issues a preliminary notification under section 4 of LAA 1894
    and asks the acquiring body to deposit 80% of the probable cost.
c) In the meanwhile the Deputy Commissioner generally designates an Assistant Commissioner as
    LAO. After scrutiny of all available documents including the proposal/ application the DC issues a
    notification under 6(1) calling for objections and simultaneously he seeks opinions from various
    depts., like forest, agriculture, PWD, Horticulture to assess the valuation of various assets and
    arrive at compensation.
d) After the stipulated time, the DC conducts a public hearing and for those who file an objection, a
    separate individual enquiry is also held. After the enquiry and obtaining the reports from various


                                                                                                    105
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



      competent departments the compensation amount is fixed. Additional compensation as per
      certain norms is also added to this compensation.
e) The affected land owner is allowed to receive the compensation ‘Under Protest’, and is eligible
      for any additional compensation as per the court verdict.
f)    However the land is taken possession by the state and handed over to the acquiring body after
      getting the full payment of the acquired land. If the acquired land is considered excess to the
      proposed project of the acquiring body, only the state govt. (here the cabinet) had the powers to
      de notify the land.

Compensation: Compensation paid to the land owners has repeatedly been a bone of contention
between the government and land owners in Karnataka as it has been the case in other parts of the
country. Generally, compensation is fixed by the price-fixation committee headed by the Deputy
Commissioner. The committee would include special land acquisition officer concerned and
representatives of the land owners.

While this is the general procedure, slightly different procedures for payment of compensation is
followed when the land is acquired for industrial purpose by the Karnataka Industrial Development
Board (KIADB) the Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) and Karnataka Highways Improvement
Project, Krishna Bhagya Jala Nigam. According to the existing norms of the KIADB, for example, a land
loser will get 9,583 square ft of developed land per every acre of land acquired by the KIADB. (The
provisions relating to this are discussed in detail in the next panel). The entire gamut of compensation
payment is now being reviewed according to the provisions of the new Act.




                                                                                                  106
                                                                                              KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                        2014



4.4.2 Assessment and Score
Indicator 1: Identification of public land and clear management: public land ownership is justified,
inventoried, under clear management responsibilities, and relevant information is publicly
accessible.



 LGI       Dimension Description                       Score   Score Description


           Criteria for public land ownership are              Public land ownership is justified by the provision of public goods at the
 1     1   clearly defined and assigned to the right   A       appropriate level of government and such land is managed in a
           level of government                                 transparent and effective way.


           There is a complete recording of public             Between 30% and 50% of public land is clearly identified on the ground
 1     2                                               B
           land                                                or on maps.


                                                               All the information in the public land inventory is only available for a
           Information on public land is publicly
 1     3                                               C       limited set of public property and there is little or no justification why
           accessible
                                                               records are not accessible.

           The management responsibility for                   There is some ambiguity in the assignment of management
 1     4   different types of public land is           B       responsibility of different types of public land but this has little impact on
           unambiguously assigned                              the management of assets.

           Responsible public institutions have                There are significant constraints in the budget and/or human resource
 1     5   sufficient resources for their land         C       capacity but the system makes effective use of limited available
           management responsibilities                         resources in managing public lands.

           The key information on public land                  The key information for public land allocations (the locality and area of
 1     6   allocations to private interests is         C       the land allocations, the parties involved and the financial terms of the
           accessible to the public                            allocation) is recorded or partially recorded but is not publicly accessible.

Analysis

              Criteria for public land ownership and assignment of responsibility


Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964, defines public land and establishes the state government as the
sole custodian of all public land. The state through various other Acts assigns different kinds of public
land to various agencies. While the forest land is under the Department of Forests, all other kinds of
public land are generally in the custody of the Revenue Department. The ownership of certain kinds
of public land in urban areas is assigned to the urban local bodies. Following large scale encroachment
of public land in Karnataka, the State Government set up the Karnataka Public Land Corporation in
2006 to demarcate and manage the public land.
                                                                                                                                            107
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



Section 67 of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act – 1964 defines public land as all land which are not
property of others. Section 67(1) elaborates this as follows:

        All public roads, streets, lanes and paths, bridges, ditches, dikes and fences, on or beside the
        same, the bed of the sea and of harbours and creeks below high water mark and of rivers,
        streams, nallas, lakes and tanks and all canals and water-courses and all standing and flowing
        waters, and all lands wherever situated which are not the property of individuals or of
        aggregate of persons legally capable of holding property are….declared to be the property of
        the government.

Section 68 of the Act confers on the state powers to extinguish the right of public or individual on
certain road etc., which is the property of the state, thereby becoming the sole owner of such land.
However the law ensures that any individual who lawfully establishes certain rights over such land
shall be suitably compensated.
The district is the administrative unit under which the land ownership of each district is defined and
the deputy commissioner of a district is the custodian of the public land within a district.

POLICY RECOMMENDATION

The departments charged with the responsibility of managing the public land should systematically
identify public land and maintain a data-based which should be publicly accessible and updated from
time to time. A portal can be created to make this information available to the public




          Recording of public land


In the original survey settlement all public land was recorded and mapped manually. However, over
the years following the transfer of public land for various private purposes and encroachments of
public land, the records available with the government might not reflect the real extent of land held
by the government. At the time of computerizing the land records under Bhoomi project the existing
records were digitized, however these records are subject to inaccuracies in the absence of regular




                                                                                                  108
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



updating. The Government of Karnataka is now planning to undertake a fresh survey of land which
when completed is expected to give up-to-date inventory of public land. 46

Chapter V, Section 18, of KLRA, 1964, refers to the authority that is authorized to survey, assessments
and settlements of land revenue and the settlements of boundaries and connected matters. At
executive level the state has created a directorate of survey settlement and land records, which has a
structure of officers’ right up to village level.

          From KLRA, 1964:

          18. Survey Officers—(1) For purposes of survey, assessments and settlements of land revenue
          and the settlements of boundaries and connected matters provided for in this Act, the State
          Government may, by notification, appoint such officers as it may deem necessary. Such
          officers shall be designated 1[Director of Survey Settlement and Land Records], 2[Joint
          Director of Land Records, Joint Director for Settlement, Deputy Director of Land Records,
          Deputy Director for Settlement, Assistant Director for Settlement, Assistant Director of land
          Records], Settlement Officers and Assistant Settlement Officers, or otherwise as the State
          Government may deem fit. Each such officer shall be subordinate to such officer or officers as
          the State Government directs.

Overall, although public land in Karnataka is recorded, there may be some discrepancy between the
situation on the ground and the maps available with the Survey and Settlement Departments.

            Public Accessibility of Information on public land


Information on public land inventory is available but it is neither consolidated nor is it publicly
accessible. Various agencies seem to possess this information in a scattered manner. The Revenue
Department owns and manages the largest chunk of public land in the state but the department does
not have the information centrally available in its state headquarters. Bhoomi data base has figures
for the extent of public land available in rural areas but the land held individually by various agencies
of the government is not included in this. There is also the problem of defining various kinds of public




46
  The Revenue Minister recently announced that the resurvey with modern technologies will be undertaken on a
Pilot basis in 4 districts and will be extended to the whole state in a time bound manner.
                                                                                                      109
                                                                                KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



land categories such as forests, minor forests, and common land attached to private land, common
land available to the general public and so on. The information available with these agencies also is
not totally reliable because the records are not updated regularly. At the village level, the Village
Accountant is expected to maintain records of all the available public and private land in his or her
jurisdiction. However, because of rampant encroachment of public land and in the absence of strict
annual jamabandi47 until a fresh survey of all the land is taken up to update the records, the reliability
of the inventory of public land will remain a matter of concern.

              The management responsibility for different types of public land


There is no apparent ambiguity in assigning the responsibility of managing public land. Various kinds
of public land are assigned to various departments/agencies as indicated in the table 4.4.3

However, these institutions do not seem to be properly equipped to manage the land assigned to
them. As pointed out by the Task Force for Recovering the Encroached Public Land (V.
Balasubramanian Committee) in its report, none of the departments concerned could show an
inventory of land that they were supposed to be managing.

              Sufficiency of resources for public land management?


Institutions charged with public land management face considerable resource and capacity
constraints. As mentioned in the earlier section, KPLC is a relevant case which reflects the state of
affairs in the management of public land. The corporation till recently did not have a full-time
managing director, whose post was specially created to recover encroached government land and
protect such land. The government has been posting an IAS officer, holding other posts, as in-charge
managing director KPLC.

In a PIL against the corporation a Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court was also told that more
than 50 per cent of sanctioned posts are vacant in KPLC.48 In addition to this there is also a shortage
of staff at the field-level. Important executive level posts such as those of Tehasildars have remained




47
     Annual land audit which was conducted with great seriousness in the past but not in the recent years.
48     The    Hindu.     Karnataka     Court      seeks    action      plan     on     land    recovery.      Available:
http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/karnataka-court-seeks-action-plan-on-land-recovery/article5218150.ece
                                                                                                                  110
                                                                                          KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                        2014



vacant for a number of years for various reasons including the delay in the annual state civil service
recruitments. Serious shortage of surveyors has hampered the survey work of both public and


                . Table 4.4.3 Types of Public Land and Institutions Responsible for their Management

     Type of Land        Dept./Institution                      Relevant Law              Other relevant details

                                                                                          The state can transfer certain lands for
     Forest land (
                                                                Karnataka Forest Act      development of forestry, but cannot take it
     including Minor     Dept. of Forests
                                                                Forest Conservation Act   back except with the permission of GOI,
     Forests)
                                                                                          Ministry of F&E

                         Dept. of Minor Irrigation, GPs under   Karnataka Land
                                                                                          Lakes bigger than 40 acres are handed
     Tanks and Tank      Dept. of RDPR and Town and             Revenue Act
                                                                                          over to Minor irrigation and below are
     Beds                Municipal Councils/ City               Karnataka Panchayat
                                                                                          transferred to RDPR
                         Corporations                           Raj Act

                                                                Karnataka Land            Department of Mining and Geology is the
      Mining areas        Revenue Dept.
                                                                Revenue Act               recommending authority

                                                                The Land is transferred
     Orchards             Dept. of Horticulture                 for better upkeep and
                                                                public Purpose

     Grazing Lands                                              Karnataka Land
                          Revenue Dept.                                                   Villages can enjoy certain privileges
     and Commons                                                Revenue Act

     Other kinds of                                             Karnataka Land            These are lands on which public have no
                         Revenue Department
     public land                                                Revenue Act               user rights

private land. In January 201449, the State Legislative Assembly has been informed by the Revenue
Minister that the surveyors’ posts have been recently filled and they will be available for work from
this year.




                   Accessibility of Information on Public Land Allocation


The Deputy Commissioner is the competent authority to allocate public land for private use. In certain
cases, the DC will have to take approval of the government. The deputy commissioner’s office




49   Revenue Minister V. Srinivas Prasad’s answer to a Legislative Assembly question on January 27, 2014
                                                                                                                                     111
                                                                             KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



maintains the records of all such allotments and the districts regularly send updates to the state
revenue department. However, the information is not readily accessible to the public. Moreover, even
the RTI applications filed in the Revenue Department which is supposed to maintain consolidated
figures of all such public land allocations are routinely transferred to the district and taluk offices.
Although the information is recorded at some level; they are neither consolidated nor readily available
for reference.
Indicator 2: Justification and time-efficiency of expropriation processes: the state expropriates land
only for overall public interest and this is done efficiently


 LGI         Dimension Description                Score   Score Description


             There is minimal transfer of                 Between 30% and 50% of land expropriated in the past 3 years is
 2     1                                          C
             acquired land to private interests           used for private purposes.



             Acquired land is transferred to              More than 70% of the land that has been expropriated in the past 3
 2     2                                          A
             destined use in a timely manner              years has been transferred to its destined use.


             The threat of land acquisition
 2     3     does not lead to pre-emptive         B       In some cases
             action by private parties.


Analysis

           Extent of transfer of acquired land to private interests:


According to the statistics provided by the Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board (KIADB), a
total of 24284.13 acres of land has been acquired and transferred for private purposes in the past
three years. However, to calculate what percentage of total land acquired this constitutes, we should
have the details of all the land acquired in the past three years – both for public and private purposes.
Since no single government agency maintains the figures of the land acquired by multiple agencies for
various purposes, it is difficult to calculate the proportion of the total acquired land having been
transferred to private purposes.

The non-Industrial purpose land acquisitions include, lands acquired for highways, irrigation projects
and housing purpose The Government has been especially acquiring huge amount of land for the past
few years for its irrigation projects in the northern parts of the State. Once the land acquisition for

                                                                                                                   112
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



major irrigation projects end, the proportion of the acquired land used for public purpose may
decrease. As of now, in the absence of accurate figures one can guess that between 30 per cent and
50 per cent of land might have been used for private purposes in the past three years.

          Timely Transfer of Acquired land to destined use


As the acquisitions by definition are done on demand by the agencies or organizations vested with the
mandate of public purpose, the process of land acquisition begins with clear proposal by the agency
intending to take up the project (NHAI, GAIL, etc.)

          Threat of Acquisition and Pre-emptive Action


Cases of pre-emptive actions have been reported from time to time. In order to address this, the
government of Karnataka has enacted the Karnataka Land (Restriction on Transfer) Act, 1991 which
checks for this sort of pre-emptive action by private parties.

This Act is to impose certain restrictions on transfer of land which have been acquired by Government
or in respect of which acquisition proceedings have been initiated by the Government, with a view to
preventing large scale transaction of purported transfer, or as the case may be, transfers of such lands
to unwary public.

       Under Section 3 of the Act, a person is prohibited to transfer by sale, mortgage, gift, lease or
        otherwise any land or part thereof situated in any urban area which has been acquired by the
        Government under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (Central Act 1 of 1894) or any other law
        providing for acquisition of land for a public purpose.
       Further, under Section 4 of the Act, previous permission of the competent authority is
        required where a person transfers or purports to transfer, by sale, mortgage, gift, lease or
        otherwise any land or part thereof situated in any urban area which is proposed to be acquired
        in connection with the Scheme in relation to which the declaration has been published under
        Section 19of the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 or section 19 of the Karnataka
        Urban Development Authorities Act, 1987.


In addition to these legal provisions, recently the Bhoomi data base is linked to land acquisition
process to reflect the initiation of the land acquisition process on the Record of Rights. All these
measures have by and large ensured that no such pre-emptive actions are taken. However, there are

                                                                                                  113
                                                                            KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



anecdotal evidences of such cases having been reported from time to time. No specific data is
available as the cases are mostly in the private domain. However the very preamble of the Act gives
ample evidence of persons trying to transact the notified land.
Indicator 3: Transparency and fairness of expropriation procedures: expropriation procedures are
clear and transparent and fair compensation is paid expeditiously


 LGI         Dimension Description               Score   Score Description


             Compensation is paid for the
                                                         Compensation, in kind or in cash, is paid, however the level of
             expropriation of all rights
 3     1                                         D       compensation where rights are not registered does not allow for
             regardless of the registration
                                                         maintenance of social and economic status
             status


                                                         Where people lose rights as a result of land use change outside the
             Land use change resulting in
                                                         acquisition process, compensation in cash or in kind is paid such
 3     2     selective loss of rights there is   C
                                                         that these people do not have comparable assets and cannot
             compensated for
                                                         continue to maintain prior social and economic status.


             Acquired owners are                         Less than 50% of acquired land owners receive compensation within
 3     3                                         D
             compensated promptly                        one year.


             There are independent and                   Avenues to lodge a complaint against acquisition exist but are
 3     4     accessible avenues for appeal       C       somewhat independent and these may or may not be accessible to
             against acquisition                         those affected.


             Timely decisions are made
                                                         A first instance decision has been reached for more than 80% of the
 3     5     regarding complaints about          A
                                                         complaints about acquisition lodged during the last 3 years.
             acquisition


Analysis

           Is compensation paid regardless of the registration status?


As the acquisitions are done as per the Land Acquisition Act 1894, the compensations are paid as per
the provisions of the Act. The acquisition procedures are clear and transparent, however the term
‘Fair Compensation’ is subject to debate. The compensation is decided by the valuations based on
certain indicators which solely ignore the rehabilitation aspects generally the compensation is not
considered fair by the persons who lose land. Moreover in certain acquisitions like, for NHAI or GAIL
or Canals under irrigation projects, only certain strip of land is acquired. Compensation based on the
                                                                                                 114
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



sq meters of land acquired, ignoring the rest of the land mass which are likely to be affected by the
loss of strategic strip of land.

           Compensation for land use change resulting in selective loss of rights


Existing laws in general do not provide for such compensation. However, in Karnataka when the land
was acquired for major irrigation projects and for high way expansions etc, the government made
some provisions for paying compensation to people who were indirectly dependent on land although
they are not land owners themselves. Krishna Bhagya Jala Nigam, the special purpose agency which
acquired land for Upper Krishna Irrigation Projects formulated a rehabilitation and resettlement policy
which covered the selective loss of rights too. A similar policy was adopted while acquiring land under
Karnataka Highways Improvement Programme. However, there is no guarantee that the affected
persons or families are paid adequately to maintain their previous social or economic status.

           Acquired owners are compensated promptly


Section 11.2(1) of LAA describes the aspect of procedures to award compensation. The Law stipulates
that the DC shall award the final compensation within two years from the notification. If not the entire
notification process shall lapse. However, no data is available on how long it has been generally taking
for the payment of compensation. Going by media and popular reports it is unlikely that the owners
are compensated promptly. The CAG report on BDA mentions the following aberration of non-
payment.

“In 63 cases, BDA, instead of paying compensation for the entire area covered by the award, had
restricted the payment to a reduced area. BDA did not furnish the information about the period to
which these cases related. The area excluded from payment of compensation in these 63 cases
aggregated 16-20 acres. As per Sec 31 of the LA Act, the Deputy Commissioner, upon making of the
award, is bound to tender payment of compensation to the persons interested and entitled to receive
the same under the award. Where he is unable to do so due to any of the contingencies referred to in
Sec 31(2), the DC is required to deposit the amount of compensation in the Court. Withholding the
payment of compensation after passing of award lacked lawful justification. On the ground of non-
payment of compensation, BDA had not taken possession of these lands which did not, therefore, vest
with BDA. Thus, the land owners in these cases continued to enjoy possession of the land for which



                                                                                                  115
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



award had been passed.50 Experience in Karnataka is that, very few land owners receive compensation
within one year.

             Independent and accessible avenues for appeal against acquisition


The legal frame work provides avenues for appeal. Reference to Court and Procedure There on (LAA
1894)

18. Reference to Court. - (1) Any person interested who has not accepted the award may, by written
application to the Collector51, require that the matter be referred by the Collector for the
determination of the Court, whether his objection be to the measurement of the land, the amount of
the compensation, the person to whom it is payable, or the apportionment of the compensation
among the persons interested.

(2) The application shall state the grounds on which objection to the award is taken:

Provided that every such application shall be made-

(a) if the person making it was present or represented before the Collector at the time when he made
his award, within six weeks from the date of the Collector's award;

(b) in other cases, within six weeks of the receipt of the notice from the Collector under section 12,
sub-section (2), or within six months from the date of the Collector's award, whichever period shall
first expire.

Land Acquisition process can also be challenged and appealed on the grounds of fairness and the
public purpose involved. Appeal to the court of law, however, may be sometimes expensive and
therefore some accessibility constraints on this count cannot be ruled out. The courts operate
independently while deciding such cases but the appeals to the revenue authorities sometimes may
not very unbiased towards the land owners, especially considering the fact that courts have overruled
the decisions of the revenue authorities in a number of cases.




50
     . Ch.13, CAG report on BDA
51
     Deputy Commissioner
                                                                                                 116
                                                                 KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014




           Timely decisions regarding complaints about acquisition


Since the first instance decision is made by the revenue authorities, generally the complaints are
disposed of quickly.




                                                                                             117
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014




4.5 Panel 5: Transfer of Land to Private Use
4.5.1. Panel Context

           Introduction


The state facilitates the transfer of land, both public and private, to various private projects, mainly
industrial and housing projects. To facilitate and accelerate certain activities like housing and
industrialization through the transfer of land to private use, the Government has enacted two Acts:
Bangalore Development Authority Act (BDA) 1976 and Karnataka Industrial Areas Development (KIAD)
Act 1966 for transfer of land for private use. The Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board (KIADB)
is the principal agency which transfers the land for private industrial use whereas the Karnataka
Housing Board and the Bangalore Development Authority are the two agencies which facilitate the
transfer of land for private housing purposes. All the three agencies acquire land for this purpose and
in some cases use the available public land.

Although the transfer of huge tracts of land by these agencies for the private purpose has contributed
to a great deal toward industrialisation and the expansion of housing infrastructure, the process has
been marred by controversies and public protests. Some of the main issues associated with the
transfer of land to private use are: (i) the absence of a system to decide the actual land requirements
of a prospective investor, resulting in transfer of excess land; (ii) lack of a uniform policy to compensate
and rehabilitate land owners; (iii) absence of any provision to compensate dependents of land other
than the owners; (iv) absence of a system to monitor whether the land allotted is being used for the
purpose specified; (v) allotment of land with sometimes without considering environmental and social
costs and (vi) regional imbalance in land allotment with southern parts of the state accounting for a
majority of land transfers to industries. Some of these issues, especially those relating to
compensation, environmental and social impact are likely to be addressed by the new land acquisition
act – the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act – 2013 which is being implemented in Karnataka.




           Land Transfer to Industries through KIADB

                                                                                                      118
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



Large scale acquisition and transfer as a policy was initiated in the state of Karnataka with the
establishment of KIADB in 1966. This was the second such legal initiative in the country after
Maharashtra IAD act of 1962. The Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board was established
under the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act, 1966 to promote and assist in the rapid and
orderly establishment, growth and development of industries in the State. Apart from acquiring land
for industrial areas, KIADB also acquires lands to cater to the specific needs of individual industrial
units (Single Unit Complexes) and public infrastructure projects.


The KIADB facilitates transfer of land to private sector in the following ways:
    a) Land can be given to private industries from the KIADB-owned land (land banks or industrial
        areas).
    b) Partial KIADB involvement: negotiate with land owners to obtain consent for 70% of required
        land; KIADB helps with acquisition of the rest for a service fee (10% of land price).
    c) Direct acquisition: Buy land directly from owners and obtain permit from Deputy
        Commissioner in district for industrial use (if land to be acquired is agricultural land).
Table 4.5.1 presents the district-wise break up land acquired and transferred by the KIADB to the
industry between 2009-10 and 2013-14.



           Single Window Clearance for Industries


Karnataka Udyog Mitra is a 'single contact point' for all investors who are looking at setting up
businesses in Karnataka. As the nodal agency, its role is to facilitate investments and execute initiatives
to enable a smooth transition, from receiving an investment proposal to the eventual implementation
of the project. It functions as the Secretariat for grant of approvals and sanction of infrastructure
facilities for approved projects.

Project proposals that require approval are invited for the single-window committee meetings and
asked to make a presentation. Since the committee includes members from all the departments
whose approval would be required for the investor to set up his firm, this meeting serves as a one-
stop place for all the departments to obtain all relevant information from the investor. In case a project
is appearing before the State high level committee (investment greater than Rs.50 cr), it is screened
by a screening committee beforehand. After the meeting, in case additional documents are required

                                                                                                     119
                                                                            KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                       2014



by various departments, the investor is asked to produce them at Udyog Mitra which forwards them
to the requisite departments. Once all the departments grant their in-principle agreement, Udyog
Mitra approves the project.


          Table 4.5.1: Land acquired and transferred to private interests by KIADB (2009-10 to 2013-14)


                               2009-10      2010-11       2011-12       2012-13       2013-14       Total
            District
                               (in acres)    (in acres)    (in acres)    (in acres)    (in acres)   (in acres)
  S.No.




 1.         Bangalore          117.26       11.06         15.06         36.15                       180.13
 2.         Bangalore Rural                 167.10        60.07                                     227.17
 3.         Ramnagar           55.25        9.25                                                    65.10
 4.         Bagalkot           18.04        4.21          41.31         63.05                       128.21
 5.         Bellary            634.15       10126.1       2072.11       3482.23                     16315.10
 6.         D.K.Dt             104.28       53.29         11.17         1.19                        171.13
 7.         Koppal                                                      6.14                        6.14
 8.         Davangere          2.21                                                                 2.21
 9.         Shimoga            48.24        136.21                                                  185.05
 10.        Mysore             165.04       262.31                                                  427.35
 11.        Hassan             35.34        175                         177                         387.34
 12         Gulbarga                                                    27.35         1821          1848.35
 13.        Bidar              201.25                                                               201.25
 14         Bijapur            135.26       2938.36       107.10                                    3181.32
 15         Belagam            125          53.33         13.16                                     192.09
 16         Chitradurga        27.30        4.08          1.10                                      33.08
 17.        Dharwad            39.38                                                                39.38
 18         Kolar              -            -             -             117.13        7.06          124.19
 19         Raichur            -            -             -             166.17                      166.17
 20         Kodagu             17.27        10.33                                                   28.20
 21         Udupi              141.10       --            40.05         -             -             181.15
 22         Tumkur             -            66.32         -             60.27                       127.19
 23.        Chikballapur       -            -             -             70.23         -             70.23

 Total                         1871.17      14021         2362.32       4205          1828.06       24284.13




The approval granted by the single window committee only denotes in-principle agreement by all the
departments involved. Once the project begins, the investor has to apply to all the departments
separately as per their procedures and obtain formal approval. However, obtaining the in-principle
approval beforehand through Udyog Mitra has two benefits:

(1) All the departments process the application faster as they have already given their in-principle
agreement. (2) Udyog Mitra follows up with various departments in case of delays

Three committees have been established under the Industrial Facilitation Act, 2002 in order to
examine and approve various types of projects:
                                                                                                            120
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



Category I (Investment less than Rs. 3 Crore): A district-level single window committee with members
from all departments involved in clearing the project is formed. The Deputy Commissioner of the
district heads this committee. The committee meets once a month or more frequently when
necessary.

Category II (Investment 3-50 Crore): State-level single window committee headed by the Minister for
Industry. The committee meets once a month or more frequently when necessary.

Category III (Investment greater than 50 Crore): High Level Clearance Committee (HLCC) under the
Chief Minister. Includes minister for industrial development, principal secretary etc. The committee
meets once in 3 months.

With the establishment of the Single Window Clearance System through Udyog Mitra the process of
giving clearance for industries has been expedited. The clearance comes with the necessary approval
for the land sought by the industry. Since there is a competition among the states to promote
industrialisation, the government has been taking special interest in ensuring that this system works
well. However, with the acceleration of industrialization and ever increasing demand by private
investors for land, several issues have arisen.

First, in the process of land acquisition to create a land bank, the Acquisition process faced the
following problems: a) gap between preliminary notification and final notification; b) delay in final
notification and disbursement of compensation; c) gap between actual demand and the extent
acquired; d) de-notification due to extra legal considerations; e) disparity in compensation amount.

Second, while high power committees receive, scrutinize and approve proposals for industrial
enterprise based on the demand made in each proposal, KIADB acquires land as per the mandated
provisions. In practice, KIADB, in several instances, as noted by the Comptroller and Auditor General’s
report, acted in violation of the norms. Three notable areas of violation captured in the report are:

        e) Acquisition of land: here the Board has either acquired land in excess to the demand or
             acquired in an erratic fashion.
        f)   The payment of compensation: here it is either excess payment or without the scrutiny of
             the mandated documents.




                                                                                                  121
                                                                          KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



         g) Transfer of land: there have been several instances of violations of rules that hindered
               transparency in transfer of lands. Restriction of publicity, unauthorized transfer and
               reduction of allotment price are some of the violations.

The Karnataka Industrial Policy 2006-11 and 2009-14 aims at reducing the regional imbalances and
ensuring overall socio-economic development of the State. Streamlining land acquisition process
through inclusive development, improved management of industrial areas/estates, creation of quality
Infrastructure etc., are some of the strategies envisaged in the industrial policy to create enabling
environment for robust industrial growth.”

However, the available data speaks of lopsided industrial growth. Regional imbalances in establishing
industrial areas continue to persist and Northern Karnataka accounted for only 9 per cent of the
industrial area acquired by the Board during 2006-11 (Table 4.5.2)



                     Table 4.5.2: Land Acquired in Karnataka state from 2006 - 2011
 Particulars                  Extent of land acquired (in acres) 2006-11         Proportion to total

 Northern Karnataka           2378 acres                                         9%
 Southern Karnataka           24246 acres                                        91%
 Total                        26624 acres                                        100




                                                                                                  122
                                                                          KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



4.5.2. Assessment and Score


Indicator 1: Transfer of public land to private use follows a clear, transparent, and competitive
process and payments are collected and audited (with the exception of transfers to improve equity
such as land distribution and land for social housing)


 LGI           Dimension                      Score     Score Description

 1       1     Public land transactions are   D         The share of public land disposed of in the past 3 years
               conducted in an open                     through sale or lease through public auction or open tender
               transparent manner                       process is less than 50%. (Except for equity transfers).


 1       2     Payments for public leases     B         Between 70% and 90% of total the agreed payments are
               are collected                            collected from private parties on the lease of public lands.

 1       3     Public land is transacted at   C         Only some types of public land are generally divested at
               market prices unless guided              market prices in a transparent process irrespective of the
               by equity objectives                     investor’s status (e.g. domestic or foreign).

 1       4     The public captures benefits   C         Mechanisms to allow the public to capture significant share
               arising from changes in                  of the gains from changing land use are rarely used and
               permitted land use                       applied in a discretionary manner.

 1       5     Policy to improve equity in    B         Policy is in place to improve access to and productive use of
               asset access and use by the              assets by poor and marginalized groups, is applied in
               poor exists, is implemented              practice, but is not effective
               effectively and monitored




Analysis

             Openness in public land transactions


Public land in Karnataka is either leased or sold. Leases are generally given when use involves equity
objectives, such as educational institutions. However, these transactions are not disposed of either by
way of auction or open tender52. The specific processes and detailed procedures for such transactions
are laid out in the Karnataka Revenue Act 1964 and the Land Grant Rules 1969. At the district level,
Deputy Commissioners are empowered to decide on transfer of land for specific private purposes




52
  In an exceptional case, some public land recovered from encroachers was auctioned in 2007 but it is not a
general practice.
                                                                                                              123
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



taking into consideration the merit of the application. The extent of public land so disposed of is not
readily accessible. Even when public land in Karnataka is leased or sold, it has not been through public
auction or open tender in most cases. Thus, since the process of lease or sale of public land for private
use has an element of discretion in the process, this dimension gets score D.

          Collection of Payments for public leases


The agreed payments are generally collected at the time of the transfer of such land. However, in the
case of lease, indictments in the CAG report and media reports suggest that if the payments are to be
paid periodically, in some cases the agencies concerned fail to keep a tab on the defaulters. Normally,
such dues are cleared when the possessors of such land apply for a renewal of the lease or while
obtaining a license relating to land use. So, one can say the payments are collected by and large.

          Is public land transacted at market prices unless guided by equity objectives?


Generally, the market prices are not charged for such lands. A committee decides the price for such
land. The government has a lot of discretion in this area and the investor or the buyer may influence
the pricing decision.

          Do the public capture benefits arising from changes in permitted land use?


The existing law does not provide for any mechanisms by which the public can have a share in the
gains from land use change. The new land acquisition Act as applicable to Karnataka needs to be
studied to ascertain this. At the time of writing this report the draft rules for Karnataka were being
prepared by the government.

          Policy to improve equity in asset access and use by the poor


There are various policies in place to grant preferential allotment of certain categories of land to
certain disadvantaged sections along with restrictions on the sale of such land to individuals from
marginalized sections. The deputy commissioner has the powers to take such decisions. However,
there is no formal mechanism to monitor the progress. A certain proportion of available public land is
set aside for distribution among marginalized sections. However, in most parts of the state the
demand far exceeds the available land under this quota.



                                                                                                   124
                                                                                 KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                     2014



Indicator 2: Private investment strategy



 LGI        Dimension Description                    Score   Score Description


 2     1    Land to be made available to             B       A policy to identify land that can be made available to investors exists,
            investors       is          identified           based on ad hoc assessment of land potential but with community
            transparently and publicly, in                   consultation and agreement, and is applied in more than 90% of
            agreement with right holders                     identified cases.


 2     2    Investments are selected based           C       Process is in place but many investments go ahead that are either not
            on economic, socio-cultural and                  according to the policy or despite unfavourable outcomes.
            environmental impacts in an
            open process


 2     3    Public institutions transferring         A       Institutions to make decisions are clearly identified and have the
            land to investors are clearly                    necessary capacity (incl. resources for field verification) and strong
            identified and regularly audited                 incentives in ensuring socially beneficial outcomes in a way that
                                                             minimizes transaction costs.


 2     4    Public bodies transferring land to       A       A policy is in place for effective inter-ministerial and coordination to
            investors share information and                  ensure that decisions on land use and land rights are well coordinated
            coordinate to minimize and                       across sectors, and is applied effectively.
            resolve overlaps (including sub-
            soil).


 2     5    Compliance      with      contractual    B       There is regular monitoring of compliance, results are publicly
            obligations is regularly monitored               available but remedial action is taken only in some cases.
            and remedial action taken if
            needed


 2     6    Safeguards effectively reduce            B       Substantive application of safeguards (EIA, SIA, etc.) is in line with
            the risk of negative effects from                global best practice but only part of the information is disclosed.
            large       scale      land-related
            investments


 2     7    The scope for resettlement is            C       Resettlement policy exists, but is only in part of the cases applied.
            clearly     circumscribed        and
            procedures exist to deal with it in
            line with best practice




                                                                                                                           125
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



Analysis

            The process of identifying land to be made available to investors


According to the Land Acquisition Act 1894, which is the basic act governing all acquisitions the process
of acquisition has to start with a notification issued under Section 4 of the Act, which is mandatory,
and even in cases of urgency, the issuance of notification under Section 4 is mandatory before the
exercise of any further powers under the Act.

The object of issuing a notification is to have a public announcement by the government and a public
notice by the Deputy Commissioner to the effect that the land, as specified therein, is needed or is
likely to be needed by the government for the "public purpose" mentioned therein; and thereby
anyone affected by such acquisition may file objections. The notification also authorizes the
departmental officers or officers of the local authority to carry out their responsibilities as mentioned
in the Act. The notification has to be published in the locality and particularly persons likely to be
affected by the proposal have to be informed. The objections filed by the interested persons have to
be placed on record and oral hearing has to be given to them. Acquiring officers have to consider such
objections and give reasons either for accepting the objections or for rejecting the same in a report to
the government. The Government after evaluating the report will decide gwhether to go ahead with
the acquisition or not. The final notification under Section 6 will be made thereby further necessitating
award enquiry. The compensation and the documents for it will be considered for making award. After
passing of award, the party will have the opportunity to file application under section 18 seeking
reference to civil court for fixing the compensation. On the question of community consultation, it is
to be noted that this is in the form of public notice and not a direct consultation with the stakeholders
involved.

            Criteria for and the process of selecting investments


The process of identifying investment in Karnataka is multi-layered. The state was the first to bring the
industrial facilitation act to investors. Karnataka has a single window which acts as a one stop shop for
investments in the State of Karnataka.

There is a state high level clearance committee (SHLCC) chaired by the Chief Minister of the State of
Karnataka to approve projects with investments above Rs. 5 cr.


                                                                                                   126
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



The State Level Single Window Clearance Committee (SLSWCC) chaired by Minister for Large and
Medium Industries and meets every month to approve projects with investments between Rs.3 cr to
Rs.5 cr.

The District Level Single Window Clearance Committee (DLSWCC) is chaired by the Deputy
Commissioner of the District approves projects with investments up to Rs.3 cr.

           Identifying and auditing institutions transferring land to investors


The Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board (KIADB) was established under the Karnataka
Industrial Areas Development Act, 1966 to promote and assist in the rapid and orderly establishment,
growth and development of industries in the State. The Board acquires land, both Government and
private, develops industrial areas and makes these available for undertakings to establish themselves.
The Board also functions as an agency for acquisition of lands for Single Unit Complexes and Special
Economic Zones.

In terms of capacity, the board is adequately resourced with senior government officers in their ex-
officio capacities leading it.   The Board has several functional wings, including, acquisition,
engineering, allotment, projects finance and accounts and administration.

KIADBs key objectives derive from the incentive of promotion of industries as well as to acquire lands
for government and its various organizations for implementation of their projects, as well as schemes
of public importance.

           Do agencies transferring land to investors share information and coordinate to
           minimize and resolve overlaps (including sub-soil)?


KIADB is a specialized exclusive agency of the Government of Karnataka not only to acquire private
land and form industrial areas but also to provide land to stand alone industries. The Board works in
close coordination with the Revenue Department and the Industries Department. No overlap is
generally seen.

           Monitoring of compliance with contractual obligations


With the idea of ensuring compliance of all the statutory provisions of different Acts and Rules, the
Department of Labour, and the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) conduct random

                                                                                                 127
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



inspection of establishments. This inspection is not intended for fault finding but to ensure
compliance. To avoid repeated inspections by these departments at different levels and also to avoid
discretional choice of establishments for inspection, a mechanism for randomized selection of the
units for inspection has been evolved. Further, surprise inspections are conducted based on written
complaints, with the approval of higher authorities. With the objective of imposing self-discipline and
compliance within entrepreneurs, the concept of ‘Self Certification’ is accepted both at entry and
operational levels.

However, it is to be noted that the CAG Audit conducted in 2010 states that KIADB acquired land in a
restricted zone, developed it and allotted plots to industries “without obtaining prior Consent for
Establishment (CFE) from the KSPCB and prior environmental clearance from the State Level
Environment Impact Assessment Authority.”53

             Safeguards to reduce the risk of negative effects from large scale land-related
             investments


Certain types of projects require environmental clearance. The Special Economic Zones (SEZs) are
covered under the purview of State Environmental Clearance Committee (SECC) and would require
Environmental Impact (EIA) studies to be conducted and environmental clearance obtained from SECC
(read at – 3 above). However, individual units proposed to be set up in the SEZ do not require
environmental clearance from SECC except those units in the purview of Schedule – I of the EIA
notification (read at-2 above). These units require environmental clearance from Ministry of
Environment and Forests, Government of India. Consents for establishment and operation for such
units would be issued by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board. Public Hearing is mandatory for
establishing these industrial units listed under Schedule –1 of the EIA notification.54

             The scope for resettlement


In the existing laws in Karnataka, there is no clear re-settlement policy though in certain cases like the
displacement of people under irrigation projects resettlement has been provided. However, the
scenario is bound to change with the implementation of The Right to Fair Compensation and




53
     Pg. 10 CAG Audit Report 2010
54
     Government Order No. FEE 32 ENV 2001, Bangalore, Date: 5.5.2003.
                                                                                                    128
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 which includes a revised
resettlement policy.

Indicator 3: Policy implementation is effective, consistent and transparent and involves local
stakeholders


 LGI         Dimension Description           Score    Score Description

             Investors provide sufficient             Investors' business plans (application materials) require
             information to allow                     some evidence of technical viability, community
 3     1                                     B
             rigorous evaluation of                   consultation, and availability of resources but this is only
             proposed investments                     sufficient to identify project risk ex ante.


             Approval of investment                   All investment application related documents are reviewed
 3     2     plans follows a clear process   A        according to a uniform process and receive a response within
             with reasonable timelines                3 months of date of submission

             Right holders and investors              Those holding rights to land with potential for investment
             negotiate freely and directly            have clearly defined rights and incentives to properly
 3     3                                     B
             with full access to relevant             negotiate but opportunities to obtain relevant information
             information                              and assistance at reasonable cost are limited.


                                                      Modalities for benefit sharing included in a significant share
             Contractual provisions
                                                      of relevant contractual arrangements and affected parties
 3     4     regarding benefit sharing are   C
                                                      are aware of these and of ways to enforce them even though
             publicly disclosed.
                                                      there is limited public disclosure.




Analysis:

           Do Investors provide sufficient information to allow rigorous evaluation of
           proposed investments?


The Government has made significant efforts in making the state appear investor friendly and ensuring
that processing of new investment proposals is done in the shortest possible time. It has set up the
Karnataka Udyog Mitra, which is a 'single contact point' for all investors who are looking at setting up
businesses in Karnataka. As the nodal agency, role of the Udyog Mitra is to facilitate investments and
execute initiatives to enable a smooth transition from receiving an investment proposal to the
eventual implementation of the project.




                                                                                                             129
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



The procedures under this arrangement make it mandatory for the investors to provide necessary
information. However, the stringency of the information required and degree of scrutiny from the
competent authority is found to vary and would be difficult to comment upon.

It is to be noted that in order to simplify the regulatory frame work and to remove procedural
impediments at the entry and implementation level and also to reduce maintenance and submission
of repetitive documents during the operational level, several reform measures have been introduced
by the Government in the form of a single point clearance committees for facilitating new investments
, and a Combined Application Form (CAF) in order to reduce the number and duplication of application
forms required to be filed at entry level

             Does approval of investment plans follow a clear process with reasonable
             timelines?


Single window clearance system of Karnataka Udyog Mitra enables a clear process as well as a
reasonable timeline. It provides information on land, building regulations, tax regime, and incentives
etc., to enable investors to firm up with their investment decisions. Investors are also facilitated by
the Udyog Mitra to obtain necessary clearances / approvals from Government Departments / agencies
for their projects. Investors get information on policies and procedures from the Udyog Mitra. This
Nodal Agency closely monitors the implementation of projects.

             Do right holders and investors negotiate freely and directly with full access to
             relevant information?


The investors do not negotiate directly with the right holders. This negotiation is mediated by state
departments and agencies responsible for industries promotion and investments, like KIADB. The
compensation too is generally below the prevailing market prices. However, of late the Government
has allowed investors to deal with the right holders directly. The Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 also follows the same
principle.

             Public disclosure of contractual provisions regarding benefit sharing


Benefit sharing is built into the land acquisition terms and conditions. These are pre-defined by the
land acquiring agency of the state and are done in accordance with the guidelines of the Land

                                                                                                  130
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



Acquisition Act 1894. To this extent there is public disclosure of benefits. However, whether or not
this is affected in practice does not always become part of the public discourse.




                                                                                               131
                                                                              KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



Indicator 4: Contracts involving public land are public with agreements monitored and enforced


 LGI           Dimension Description               Score   Score Description

 4       1     Information on spatial extent and   C       Spatial information and temporal information is available to relevant
               duration       of       approved            government institutions but not accessible on a routine basis by
               concessions is publicly available           private parties.

 4       2     Compliance with safeguards on       C       There is little third-party monitoring of investors' compliance with
               concessions is monitored and                safeguards and mechanisms to quickly and effectively ensure
               enforced     effectively  and               adherence are difficult to access for affected communities.
               consistently

 4       3     Avenues to deal with non-           C       There is little third-party monitoring of investors' compliance with
               compliance exist and obtain                 contractual provisions and mechanisms to quickly and effectively
               timely and fair decisions                   reach arbitration are difficult to access for affected communities but
                                                           work for investors.




Analysis

             Public availability of information on spatial extent and duration of approved
             concessions


This kind of information is not publicly available although they can be obtained under the right to
Information law. The CAG audit report of Karnataka in 2010 lists out the following irregularities:-55

A list of lands that is required for ascertaining the availability of Government lands was not
prepared by the Tahsildars. Consequently, in the absence of such a database, Government was
not in a position to know the exact extent and status of land available for grant/auction/lease.
Guidelines were not prescribed to determine the market value of land granted to statutory bodies.
Criteria were not prescribed for determination of eligibility of institutions for relaxation of norms to
grant land at concessional rates and land had been allotted at concessional/incorrect rates to
these bodies. Rules prescribing procedures for auction of land were not framed. Guidelines were not
issued for fixation/periodical revision of lease rent. There was huge pendency in the disposal of
applications received for regularisation of unauthorised occupation of land for agricultural purposes.




55
   CAG Audit Report. Available:
http://saiindia.gov.in/english/home/Our_Products/Audit_Report/Government_Wise/state_audit/recent_repo
rts/Karnataka/2010/Revenue/Chapter_4.pdf
                                                                                                                      132
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



Several irregularities were observed in the cases that were regularised by the Committees formed for
the purpose.

           Is compliance with safeguards on concessions monitored and enforced
           effectively and consistently?


The state’s New Industrial Policy lists that:

1. Inspections by various authorities of different departments shall be minimized and regulated
    through a random annual inspection and inspections only on the basis of complaints.
2. Providing for a scheme of self-certification by the entrepreneur confirming compliance of the
    extant laws and rules. Such self- certification is to be supported by a stringent penalty structure
    for default.

           Do avenues to deal with non-compliance exist and obtain timely and fair
           decisions?


As discussed in the preceding dimension third party monitoring is not routine as a consequence of the
mandates in the Karnataka Industrial Policy (KIP).

Several other areas of land transfer administration and regulation need to be formalized before the
state can monitor and track the non-compliance in this area. As of now, there is no established third
party mechanism to monitor this, while some form of self-regulation forms a part of the land transfer
policy.




                                                                                                 133
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014




4.6. Panel 6: Public provision of land
information: registry and cadastre

4.6.1. Context


          Introduction


The central government’s Computerization of Land Records project has been enthusiastically pursued
in Karnataka under the name Bhoomi since the early 2000s. As a result, the registry of rural land
records have been made available in a digitized format allowing for relatively easy access by farmers.
However, since the existing manual records ridden with errors were digitized without first carrying out
corrections the accuracy of the accessible data continues to be an area of concern. The state has also
computerized the land registration process resulting in faster transactions and easy access of
registered documents and encumbrance. The registry and the registration process have been
integrated to facilitate faster updating of records.

As far as the cadastre is concerned, in rural areas, nearly 75% of land parcels have corresponding
cadastral maps. However, an upgraded version of the Bhoomi Project which is likely to be launched
mid-2015 aims to update all the existing records in the data base besides developing a robust land
information system covering all aspects of land governance.

For urban property records, Karnataka is in the process of implementing an Urban Property Ownership
Records (UPOR) project using latest available technology. At present, since tax accounts maintained
by local bodies are being used as property records in the absence of proper ownership documents, no
cadastre is maintained for urban properties.

          The Land Registry


In Karnataka, registry encompasses land records database managed directly by both the Revenue
Department and the Survey and Settlement Department. In 2002, the Revenue Department
introduced Bhoomi in which textual records of rights, tenancy and cultivation (RTC) of 20 million


                                                                                                 134
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



records of land ownership of 6.7 million farmers in the state were computerized. These records have
been made available through Bhoomi kiosks across 176 taluks in nearly 30,000 villages.

According to evaluation reports on Bhoomi, the time taken for processing RTC had come down
dramatically. A request for an RTC was addressed within 5-30 minutes as compared to the 3-30 days
earlier. A farmer needs to pay a smaller fee Rs. 15 for an online printed copy of the RTC by providing
the name of the owner or plot number at the computerised land record kiosks. Significant reduction
in corruption and bribery have also been reported though surveys conducted on the implementation
of Bhoomi.

The other department involved in managing the registry is the Survey, Settlement and Land Records
Department which deals with the land surveys and maintaining the historical land records. The
department is also the custodian of cadastral maps. The survey records are a prime reference for the
land administration systems. While there is no program for systematic registration of land rights in
Karnataka, information on rights are initially gathered during settlement surveys. In rural areas, the
survey records are maintained at a village level, and a unique parcel number is assigned to each
surveyed parcel in a village. In urban areas, City Survey Plans are prepared and a unique parcel is
assigned to each parcel on a City Survey Plan. The survey number is used to describe the parcel when
dealings are registered. If the dealing is a subdivision, the department conducts cadastral surveys to
re-establish boundary marks and to carry out subdivisions. When a deal in land is registered, notice is
given to local authorities and a period of public notice is required. If there is no objection, the records
are updated - the RTC records in rural areas or the Property Card in urban areas. The surveys
conducted by this department also play an important role for the allocation of public land under the
Karnataka Land Grant Rules 1969 to landless in the village, people residing in the village with
insufficient land and landless people residing in nearby villages.

For urban property records, the revenue department is in the process of implementing an Urban
Property Ownership Records project using latest available technology. The project which began in
2011, aims to create an accurate record of both spatial and textual ownership data of urban
properties. Further, this database is planned to be used to provide speedy land related services to
urban residents. At present, since tax accounts maintained by local bodies are being used as property
records in the absence of proper ownership documents, no cadastre is maintained for urban
properties.

                                                                                                     135
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



One weakness of the Bhoomi project is that the manual records were digitized without first
determining whether these records reflected the actual details of the land parcel or not. As a result,
the data in Bhoomi may not reflect the true situation on the ground. As far as the cadastre is
concerned, in rural areas, nearly 75% of land parcels have corresponding cadastral maps. Karnataka
has brought amendment to Karnataka Land Revenue Act making pre-mutation sketch compulsory for
all ownership-related changes (mutuation) on the textual records. Bhoomi has been enhanced to
capture the details of pre-mutation sketch and surveyors has been introduced in the mutation process
to ensure that proper division (podi) takes place simultaneously along any other type of transaction.
While this process has been appreciated at several levels, its dependence on the Bhoomi database
which as discussed above does not truly reflect the situation on the ground affects the quality of the
pre-mutation sketch.

However, an upgraded version of the Bhoomi Project which is likely to be launched in mid-2015 aims
to update all the existing records in the database besides developing a robust land information system
covering all aspects of land governance. The state has also taken up fresh survey of all land parcels on
a pilot basis but its scaling up has been hindered because of conflicting claims being made on a large
number of land parcels arising from discrepancies in the existing textual and cadastral records.

          Registration and the Registry


The District Registrars and the Sub-district registrars of the Department of Stamps and Registration
have the responsibility of registering all land sale deeds submitted to them and issuing a
Registered/Certified copy of the sale/purchase document. In addition, sub-registrars also have the
responsibility of issuing Encumbrance certificates which are used in property transactions as an
evidence of free title/ownership.

The programme related to the computerization of the process of registration of land documents with
the Department of Stamps and Registration in Karnataka is known as the Karnataka Valuation and e-
Registration Programme (Kaveri) and was also introduced in 2002. By 2003-2004 the department had
computerized all 235 Sub-Registrars offices and 33 District Registrar offices in the state. Under the
manually registering process, the documents registered were copied manually in specified books.
After they were verified with the original document, the hand written document was used for
authentication by registering officers. The registered book would become the permanent public
document and certified copies of these records would provide evidentiary value. Since the procedure
                                                                                                   136
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



involved hand writing each document that was registered, the time taken to hand over the original
registered document to the person registering the document would take anywhere between 2 to 3
months. Moreover it also meant 2-3 trips to the registration office to check if the document was ready.
This cumbersome process led to undesirable practices. In the Kaveri programme, a software system
carrying the existing registration procedure, property valuation and all associated activities was
created. Care was taken not to change the existing five stage process of registering documents that
citizens were familiar with.

Reports on the outcome of Kaveri have mentioned that despite the Government of Karnataka reducing
the rate of stamp duty on conveyance from 10% to 8% and Registration fee from 2% to 1%, in 2003
there is significant growth in revenue as the Kaveri system calculated the valuation of property
automatically eradicating the discretionary power of the Registering officer in accessing the valuation
of property.

          Integration of the registry with other land related transactions


In a significant step to keep land records updated with all the changes related to land rights, the
government has integrated the registry with at least three different transactions relating to land
handled by three different agencies. First, now the Bhoomi data base (the textual data) is integrated
with Kaveri (registration) and whenever an ownership change is registered that is automatically
communicated to the registry to initiate the process of updating the textual records accordingly.
Similarly, the Bhoomi data base is integrated with the process of lending by various banks and financial
institutions so that whenever a load is raised against a parcel of land the records reflect the liability.
The Bhoomi data base is also integrated with the process of land acquisition in such a way that
whenever the acquisition process is initiated with respect to a parcel of land the same is reflected in
the record of rights. This helps prevent any transactions on the land which has been identified for
acquisition by the government.




                                                                                                    137
                                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                       2014



4.6.2. Assessment and Score


This section analyses in detail the specific elements related to the land registry, with a focus on its
transparency and accessibility. These elements are divided into Indicators which in turn are broken
down into several dimensions. Indicators provide a relatively exhaustive assessment of relevant land
governance issues through specific dimensions which define areas for investigation, quantitative
measurement or qualitative assessment.

Land Governance Indicator 1. Mechanisms for recognition of rights



 LGI           Dimension                                       Score   Score Description

               Land possession by the poor can be formalized           There is a clear, practical process for the formal recognition
 1     1       in line with local norms in an efficient &      B       of possession but this process is not implemented effectively,
               transparent process                                     consistently or transparently.



               Non-documentary evidence is effectively used            Non-documentary forms of evidence are almost never used
 1     2                                                       D
               to help establish rights                                to obtain recognition of claims to property.



                                                                       Legislation exists to formally recognize long-term,
               Long-term unchallenged possession is formally
 1     3                                                       B       unchallenged possession but applies only to one specific
               recognized
                                                                       type of land (e.g. either public land or private land).


               First-time registration on demand has proper            On-demand registration includes proper safeguards to
 1     4(i)    safeguards & access is not restricted by high   A       prevent abuse and costs do not exceed 0.5% of the property
               fees – Agricultural lands                               value.


               First-time registration on demand has proper            On-demand registration includes proper safeguards to
 1     4(ii)   safeguards & access is not restricted by high   B       prevent abuse and costs do not exceed 2% of the property
               fees - Non-agricultural lands                           value.




Analysis

               Formalization of land possessed by the poor


There is a need to understand the difference between unauthorized occupation (possession) and
encroachment while analysing this indicator. Possession is unauthorized occupation of government
land which is not public land such as lakes, lake beds, water streams, forests etc. Further, if the
unauthorized occupier doesn’t own land of class ‘D’ of more than two hectares including land which is
                                                                                              138
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



part of unauthorized occupation, if such government land is situated away from the prescribed
distances from urban area and the purpose of occupation is for agricultural, such an occupation is also
termed as possession. If any of these factors are absent then such an unauthorized occupation becomes
an encroachment. There are enough laws to formally recognize the possession and also to evict the
encroachments. Section 94A of Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964 provides for formalization of
unauthorized occupation through a taluk level committee of five members. The committee can grant
possession subject to following conditions:

a. The committee shall have powers to grant to the person liable to be evicted under that section,
    the land which he had unauthorized occupied prior to the fourteenth day of April, 1990
    (hereinafter referred to as the said date) or any portion thereof, if he satisfies the prescribed
    conditions (including the extent of the land held and unauthorized occupied by him) and makes
    within a period of six months from the date of commencement of the Karnataka Land Revenue
    (Amendment) Act. 1990 (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment Act), an application for such
    grant in such form along with such fees as may be prescribed and on payment of the amount
    payable under sub-section (5).
b. Provided that the land so granted together with the land already held by such person, shall not
    exceed two hectares of ‘D’ class (Schedule I to the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961) of land or
    its equivalent thereto.
c. Provided further that no land shall be granted in the areas lying within the limits of cities and city
    municipalities
d. Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to Forest lands, plantation lands or lands referred
    to in sub-section (2) of section 79.

As explained above, any person who has unauthorized occupation has been directed by the
government to give application for regularization of the same and the time period has been extended
to provide opportunity for the needy to make use of the facility provided by the government. Last
amendment to extend the period was extended to three years from the date of commencement of
the Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 2000 Karnataka Act 15 of 2000). The said period of
                              th
three years has lapsed on 27 April 2003. Since 55267 applications in Form 50 and 753727 applications
in Form 53 are still pending, it is considered necessary to extend the period further for one more year.




                                                                                                   139
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
    LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



Under section 94C of Karnataka Land Revenue Act, there exists provision to regularize the
unauthorized construction of dwelling house with conditions such as date should not be later than
14th April 1998 and that the house is not constructed on forest land and doesn’t attract the provisions
of Karnataka Regularization of Unauthorized Constructions in Urban Areas Act, 1991.



The government of Karnataka has adopted the following procedure to formalize the possession by
slum dwellers
    Karnataka Slum Development Board (KSDB) will identify and prepare the list of persons who may
     be issued title deeds after a survey of notified slums.
    To be eligible, the applicant must be living in a slum area for 10 years from the date of application
     and be in possession of a valid ration card or voter ID. The applicant’s dwelling unit must have a
     minimum carpet area of 20’x30’ and not greater than 30’x40’.
    For slums on government land, the KSDB will take up redevelopment in consultation with the
     government agency owning the land.
    For slums on private land, KSDB will pay the land owner a compensation amount equal to 300
     times the property tax for the area used for redevelopment of slums.
    The land owner would also be allowed to utilise the Transfer of Development Right (TDR) on the
     land over which the development has been undertaken.
    Development of slums could be undertaken by KSDB either on its own or through public -private
     partnership.
There are enough provisions in the various laws to confer the rights to poor holding possession of the
land. However, when it comes to implementation, there are many challenges. As mentioned above
the Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964 provides for formation of committees which looks into requests
for regularization. These committees are constituted by the state government and get dissolved
automatically when ruling party loses power. It has also been observed that while appointing
nominees, the ruling party keeps political interests and appoints members; this sometimes leads to
prejudiced decisions and nepotism. When it comes to the formation of committee for regularizing
unauthorized occupation, it is not consistently constituted and there are instances where the ruling
government did not constitute committee for a period of four and a half years and constituted it just
when it was left with a remaining term of six months. Further, while regularizing, all the norms are not
kept in view as there are no software systems which can verify and validate the data before taking
decision. Even in case of agricultural lands wherein software like Bhoomi is in place, one can monitor
                                                                                                 140
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



the mutation transaction after grant / regularization is done by committee. Though laws are in place
to formalize the land possession by poor, but it will be difficult to say that implementation process is
effective, consistent and transparent.

          Use of Non-documentary evidence to establish rights


The need for non- documentary evidence arises where there is no physical or electronic evidence
available in the form of hand written documents, maps, government orders, electronic documents,
photographs, etc. Further when it comes to claiming ownership, one cannot become owner just by
paying a tax and tax receipts cannot be used to prove the ownership of the property. Similar is the
case with informal purchase agreements. Though this system is in practice in some remote areas of
the state, the government discourages any such transaction and doesn’t provide legal status to such
informal papers. These informal agreements result in great loss to the state revenue as registration
fee and stamp duty forms the major chunk of the state revenue. For analysing this indicator there is
need to discuss the issue under two different categories namely,
       Inheritance, family partition and regularization of unauthorized occupation.
       Transfer of rights / properties outside the family


Regularization of unauthorized occupation has been discussed at length in LGI 6.1.1. While regularizing
unauthorized occupation, the person in possession will not have any document to prove rights but still
the law provides for formalization of the rights. Under Section 128 of Karnataka Land Revenue Act
1964, one can also intimate the concerned officer orally about the acquisition of right to get the
property transferred in one’s name. In cases of inheritance and family partition, no documentary
evidences are necessary expect for some self-declarations such as a family tree and partition details
in order to get the property transferred to legal heirs.


When it comes to transfer of rights outside the family, only registered deeds are recognized as
instrument for effecting ownership change. No non-documentary evidences such as informal
purchase notes can be used to establish rights. Even the civil courts don’t recognize such informal
notes as such practice instead of enabling public to establish the rights might be misused for evading
tax. Encouraging informal agreements will result in non-updating of record of rights thus resulting in
outdated land records.


                                                                                                  141
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



           Recognition of long-term unchallenged possession


The Limitation Act, 1963 is the legislation that governs the period within which suits are to be filed to
take the advantage of adverse possession. As far as Public Land is concerned, the Limitation Act may
not be useful as public properties such as lakes, lake beds, forest, footpaths, bull-cart paths, canals,
natural water streams etc., which cannot be regularized or adverse possession can be formally
recognized as per various amendments to Acts based on Supreme Court judgments.


Every possession is not, in law, adverse possession. Under Article 65 of the Limitation Act, 1963, a suit
for possession of immovable property or any interest therein based on title can be instituted within a
period of 12 years calculated from the date when the possession of the defendant becomes adverse
to the plaintiff. By virtue of Section 27 of the Limitation Act, at the determination of the period limited
by the Act to any person for instituting a suit for possession of any property, his right to such property
stands extinguished. The process of acquisition of title by adverse possession springs into action
essentially by default or inaction of the owner. A person, though having no right to enter into
possession of the property of someone else, does so and continues in possession setting up title in
himself and adversely to the title of the owner. As far as the Government (Central or State) property
is concerned, the period of limitation for any suit (except a suit before the Supreme Court) is 30 years
and the starting point of limitation is the same as in the case of a suit by a private person (vide Article
112, Schedule I of Limitation Act).


The legal position as regards the acquisition of title to land by adverse possession has been succinctly
stated by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Perry vs. Clissold5: “It cannot be disputed that
a person in possession of land in the assumed character of owner and exercising peaceably the
ordinary rights of ownership has a perfectly good title against all the world but the rightful owner. And
if the rightful owner does not come forward and assert his title by the process of law within the period
prescribed by the provisions of the statute of Limitation applicable to the case, his right is forever
extinguished and the possessory owner acquires an absolute title.”


One can say that in case of private lands the Limitation Act 1953 would help in getting land formally
recognized. There are some disadvantages also with respect to adverse possession, illegal
encroachments of private properties by neighbours or anti-social elements for long time may deny

                                                                                                     142
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



justices to real owners who are not in a position to oppose money and muscle power or people staying
away from the place where property is located (ex. Non Residential Indians).

          First-time registration: safeguards & cost of access (Agricultural Land)


Introducing new names into the Record of Rights (Record of Rights) is covered under section 128 and
129 of Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964.           Any person acquiring by succession, survivorship,
inheritance, partition, purchase, mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise, any right as holder, occupant,
owner, mortgagee, landlord or tenant of the land or assignee of the rent or revenue thereof, shall
report orally or in writing his acquisition of such right to the prescribed officer of the village within
three months from the date of such acquisition, and the said officer shall at once give a written
acknowledgment of the receipt of the report to the person. Provided further that any person acquiring
a right by virtue of a registered document shall be exempted from the obligation to report to the
prescribed officer.
The Bhoomi project has implemented this aspect through workflow based software. As mentioned
above under this project about 20 million RTCs of 6.7 million farmers of Karnataka State have been
digitized. All these records have been verified and certified by the revenue authorities before making
digital database as the only source of land records. Manual records have been invalidated through
amendment to Karnataka Land Revenue Rules 1964. Any changes to record of rights will happen
through online mutation application (as part of Bhoomi) only. Changes to RTCs may be due to sale,
partition, inheritance, pledge, release, government order, court order, podi etc. Online mutation
application handles all type of mutation so that no manual intervention in updating land records
database. Workflow based user-friendly software designed and developed by National Informatics
Centre, Bangalore has bio-metric authentication to take care of non-repudiation and scanning
interface to scan important documents as evidence for electronic transaction. PKI (Public Key
Infrastructure) enabled Bhoomi database and application with integration of digital signatures is in
place to adhere to IT Act 2000.
Further Bhoomi has implemented all the provisions of section 129 of Karnataka Land Revenue Act
1964 wherein revenue officer after making entry in mutation register, post up a complete copy of the
entry (form-12 as generated by Bhoomi) in a conspicuous place in the chavadi (village community
Centre) and shall give issue intimation (form-21 as generated by Bhoomi) to all persons appearing
from the Record of Rights or Register of Mutations to be interested in the mutation, and to any other
person whom he has reason to believe to be interested therein. Bhoomi provides for raising objection
                                                                                                   143
                                                                                                                 KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                               2014



as facilitated in the Revenue Act and if objection is raised, case will be taken into dispute register for
hearing the affected parties before taking the final call. On approval of mutation by Revenue Inspector
on Bhoomi, transfer of entries from registers of mutation are transferred automatically to record of
rights thereby updating the Record of Right instantaneously.


Official cost of mutation for per survey number is Rs. 35 only which is very nominal and definitely less
than 0.5% of property value.


                                           Table 6.1.1: Report on number of transactions carried out to insert new owner

                               Number of transactions through which new owners inserted into Record of Rights




                                                                                                                                                                            owner insertion into
                                                                                                                                                                            Percentage of new
                                                                                                                                               Release of rights




                                                                                                                                                                            Record of Rights
             Total Number of




                                          Regularization
             transactions




                                                                                                                                                                            transactions
                                                                      Inheritance




                                                                                                                                    Donation
                                                           Re-Grant




                                                                                                                         LR Grant
                                                                                    Partition
                                 Grant




                                                                                                                                                                   Total
   Year




                                                                                                Sale




                                                                                                                  Will
                                                                                                         Gift
                     1435011
   2010-11




                                                                      178525




                                                                                                184650




                                                                                                                                                                   414905
                                                                                    12569




                                                                                                         12266




                                                                                                                                    12153




                                                                                                                                                                                   28.91
                                 2765


                                          1645




                                                                                                                  4263


                                                                                                                         1513




                                                                                                                                               4316
                                                           240
                     1552372
   2011-12




                                                                      259438




                                                                                                194592




                                                                                                                                                                   520099
                                                                                    16305




                                                                                                         16008




                                                                                                                                    15925




                                                                                                                                                                                   33.50
                                 3781


                                          2432




                                                                                                                  4536


                                                                                                                         1484




                                                                                                                                               5259
                                                           339
                     1503376
   2012-13




                                                                      257272




                                                                                                177258




                                                                                                                                                                   503011
                                                                                    17291




                                                                                                         16754




                                                                                                                                    16727




                                                                                                                                                                                   33.46
                                 3026


                                          2525




                                                                                                                  4428


                                                                                                                         1195




                                                                                                                                               6242
                                                           293




                   First-time registration on demand: safeguards & cost of access (non-
                   agricultural land)



The law makers of Karnataka have realized the importance of maintaining property records in village
sites and cities and have brought relevant provisions in Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964 pertaining
to maintaining property records for building and building sites. The City Survey manual of Karnataka
derives powers from these provisions of Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964. Government of Karnataka
after realizing the importance of maintaining property records for village sites and cities had taken up
survey in cities like Bangalore (as it existed in the year 1965-70), Mysore, Davanagere, etc. Totally
there are 48 towns in Karnataka where city survey is in practice. A document called property card is
                                                                                                                                                                   144
                                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



maintained by the survey wing of revenue department in these cities where city survey is in practice.
These property cards are record of rights for property with reference to cadastre data for each
property card. Property cards are maintained as per city survey manual which has been derived using
provisions of Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964.


Due to unabated urbanization and lack of government’s initiative to expand the city survey operations
in these 48 towns, city survey has been limited to about 30-40% of city area at the time of writing this
report. Further, the government did not extend the city survey activities to other parts of the state.
Due to this limited coverage, property cards started losing their importance as the situation on the
ground was not updated on the record and property cards were not available to every property. This
led to situation where tax accounts maintained by local bodies replaced property cards while executing
registered deeds for ownership transfers. As far as the registration department is concerned, they were
only bound by section 21 of Transfer of property Act 1882 wherein some document which uniquely
identifies the property is mandatory for registration of immovable properties. In this fashion tax
account of local bodies become ownership documents for the purpose of property transfers and
availing loans from financial institutions. A tax account maintained by local bodies doesn’t have
corresponding spatial data and cannot be used while resolving disputes. Since local bodies are
concerned about collecting property tax rather than ensuring legality in creation of property, one
cannot depend on these records to confer rights.

       Table 6.1.2: Report on number of property cards generated in pilot cities under UPOR
                           Total estimated   Total number draft property   Total number of Final property
  Sl.No.   City
                           properties        cards ready                   cards ready for issue

  1        Mysore          298583            67285                         11079

  2        Shimoga         81859             5335                          21101

           Hubli-
  3                        220943            11428                         0
           Dharwad

  4        Mangalore       80942             2087                          0



In Belgaum division which comprises of seven out of 30 districts of Karnataka, there exists a system
called Kammi Jasthi Patrike (KJP) which is basically a process of reducing total area under agriculture
and transferring same to non-agricultural usage in the record of rights. This is done every time an
agricultural land is converted for non-agricultural purposes, separate Record of Rights are created for

                                                                                                            145
                                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



each of the sites / plots created in non-agricultural areas for identity purpose and they are used for
property transfers. That essentially means that due to non-availability for proper mechanisms to
maintain non-agricultural properties, agricultural property registers are used for maintaining non-
agricultural land parcel details.


The Revenue Department has taken up the task of creating Urban Property Ownership Records (UPOR)
in 4 cities namely Mysore, Hubli-Dharwar, Bellary and Shimoga. This project is being implemented on
Public Private Partnership (PPP) model. Service Providers have been chosen through tendering process
to implement this project. Following are some of the advantages of the UPOR system:
           Accurate spatial and updated ownership data of all properties.
           Secured ownership documents.
           Confidence in transactions in the mind of property owners.
           Speedy land related services.
           Reduced property disputes due to fair handling of ownership records.


The salient Features of the UPOR Project are:


            The property details will contain both the building and land on which the building stands.
            The Property details captured will include :-
                       Spatial Details - Coordinates of the boundary points of land plot.
                       Area of the land, Building details - built up area, number of floors.
                       Rights on the property-Ownership, Mortgage, lease, Easement.
                       History of Transactions on the property.
            The Department has ensured that property ownership will remain confidential and shall be
             shared to only those parties that have an interest in the property.
            All mutations and changes to the property records will be certified through a PKI mechanism and
             biometrics by the authorized government officials.
            Different types of existing urban properties related data available with various government
             agencies such as urban local bodies and urban development authorities will be used as reference
             data in the project.
            The Project will be implemented through PPP Model where the Private Partners will be
             responsible for first time spatial data creation, creation of IT infrastructure and delivery of


                                                                                                          146
                                                                                            KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
    LGAF-INDIA
                         2014



                  services. The Department will continue to discharge its core responsibility including title enquiry
                  of the properties and approve any change to the property Record(Mutation)
                 Use of Modern spatial Technology- Global Positioning System (GPS), Total Station (TS), for ground
                  based Survey and use of ICT (Information and Communication Technology) for data
                  management, MIS Reports, and GIS tools for Mapping of data.
                    Table 6.1.3: Report on number of property documents generated through e-SWATHU since 14-06-2013
             District Name                                               Form – 9                                          Form - 11
Sl.No




                                       Within Village limits    Approved layout        Sanctioned under schemes    Total

1       Bidar                   21                             59                 0                               80       0
2       Uttara Kannada          4                              224                15                              243      8
3       Dakshina Kannada        111                            1506               124                             1741     113
4       Haveri                  0                              59                 0                               59       0
5       Bagalkot                35                             1590               37                              1662     0
6       Mysore                  162                            3912               89                              4163     48
7       Raichur                 14                             478                6                               498      4
8       Bellary                 112                            174                10                              296      0
9       Kodagu                  1                              78                 1                               80       18
10      Belgaum                 76                             414                1                               491      0
11      Chickmagalore           204                            259                218                             681      43
12      Gadag                   13                             147                26                              186      0
13      Kolar                   122                            2287               4                               2413     9
14      Shimoga                 129                            758                271                             1158     42
15      Bangalore Rural         7                              2489               118                             2614     33
16      Dharwad                 21                             45                 23                              89       1
17      Koppal                  8                              2333               53                              2394     0
18      Ramanagara              259                            2439               62                              2760     598
19      Chamarajanagara         0                              209                0                               209      0
20      Gulbarga                24                             340                15                              379      0
21      Chitradurga             104                            1785               1                               1890     8
22      Chickballapur           66                             3383               52                              3501     8
23      Bijapur                 5                              491                34                              530      1
24      Hassan                  261                            1453               85                              1799     8
25      Davanagere              200                            155                31                              386      0
26      Udupi                   6                              1863               222                             2091     41
27      Mandya                  101                            157                51                              309      3
28      Tumkur                  70                             1346               70                              1486     69
29      Yadgir                  23                             143                0                               166      0
30      Bangalore               65                             16073              548                             16686    11
        Total:                  2224                           46649              2167                            51040    1066




                                                                                                                                147
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
    LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



The High Court of Karnataka in Writ Petition NO: 12278/2007 has ordered that registration of illegal
properties should be stopped immediately by adopting software solutions. Gram Panchayats need to
provide the property details maintained by them to registration department to allow the transactions
on those properties which are not in violation of various acts and rules prescribed by the state
government. Rural Development and Panchayat Raj department has put in place e-Governance
solution called e-SWATHU (SWATHU means property in Kannada language) from 14-06-2013 to
monitor the activities of the Gram Panchayat with respect to maintenance, updating and issue of
property records under their jurisdiction for registration and other legal purposes. The approach
followed to create property records here is incremental in nature

Property records will be created after verifying the legality of property creation. Only difference
between this system and regular record of rights maintenance system is that there is no cadastre for
properties created using e-SWATHU. Cost of these mutations per property number one percent of
stamp duty which will be less than 0.5% of property value.

Since e-Swathu covers 30,000 villages of Karnataka and Belgaum division of Karnataka uses
agricultural property records document for maintaining non-agricultural properties, one can conclude
that expect for few towns and cities, some form of record of rights maintenance is in place and
indicator can be rated as B.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
    Karnataka Land Revenue Act has evolved over time and many amendments have been put in place
     time and again to include new provisions and restrictions. Though the concept of regularization
     committee has been visualized keeping social justice and public participation in view, it doesn’t
     seem to be functioning as per the expectations of law makers. It is high time to revisit the whole
     concept of regularization of unauthorized occupation by poor.
    There are instances of tampering of Form-50 and Form-53 registers which are proof of seniority
     and possession due to long time pendency and delay in regularization decision. There is urgent
     need to secure and preserve these registers and make them tamper proof using technology.
    One needs to put in place decision support tools and required data for the tools to automate the
     generation of reports which enforce the proper decision making.
    There is need to modernize land administration with the help of latest technologies so that it can
     be made efficient, effective, consistent and transparent.

                                                                                                  148
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
    LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



    Existing Acts and rules do provide for comprehensive procedures to recognize non documentary
     evidences to establish rights. There is urgent need of examining the existing laws and bring some
     revolutionary changes so that new provisions are put in place for the use non documentary
     evidences to establish rights without compromising on the revenue generation and orderliness in
     land records management system.
    Supreme Court has advised the Parliament to take a re-look at the outmoded adverse possession
     doctrine; the Court made various important alternative observations:
         o   The Parliament may consider abolishing the law of adverse possession or at least
             amending and making substantial changes in law in the larger public interest. And
             especially, if the governmental authorities, like the police try to use their might to acquire
             land using this doctrine, it is the most tragic – in the Supreme Court’s words – “a testament
             to the absurdity of the law and a black mark upon the justice system’s legitimacy“. Rather,
             the government should protect a citizen’s property and not ‘steal’ it.
         o   The Parliament must either require the adverse possessors to compensate the owners at
             the prevalent market value, or abolish the ‘bad faith’ adverse possession, or maybe
             increase the period of possession to claim adversely from the current 12 years to 30 or 50
             years.


         o   Finally the Court held that: “Adverse possession allows a trespasser – a person guilty of a
             tort, or even a crime, in the eyes of law – to gain legal title to land which he has illegally
             possessed for 12 years. How 12 years of illegality can suddenly be converted to legal title
             is, logically and morally speaking, baffling. This outmoded law essentially asks the judiciary
             to place its stamp of approval upon conduct that the ordinary Indian citizen would find
             reprehensible.”


         o   The doctrine of adverse possession has troubled a great many legal minds. It is high time
             that law makers start looking into the aspects discussed above and find alternatives.
             Otherwise there may be situation wherein “the protectors of law become the grabbers of
             the property (land and building), then, people will be left with no protection and there
             would be a total anarchy in the entire country.”




                                                                                                     149
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
    LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



    A fairly good process is there in place for bringing new owners into Record of Rights register with
     proper safeguards to prevent abuse. Land Revenue rules state a 30 day notice period for
     interested parties to raise objections if any for bringing new owners into the records of rights
     register. These provisions were proposed about 50 years back, with passing of time, transport
     and communication modes have increased and have become fast. Law makers should think of
     reducing the notice period from 30 days to something like 8-10 days so that overall turnaround
     time for mutation is reduced.
    There is urgent need to complete the UPOR project in four cities where it is in progress and same
     needs to be scaled up for other cities and towns in the state.
    Guidelines and processes should be put in place to have cadastre for property records that are
     being created using e-SWATHU.
    Since Grama Panchayats do not have legal backing for maintaining property records, Karnataka
     Land Revenue Act 1964 needs to be amended to enable Grama Panchayat secretary to officiate
     as ex-officio Village Accountant and Panchayat Development Officer to officiate as ex-officio
     Revenue Inspector for Village sites.




                                                                                                   150
                                                                                         KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



Indicator 2: Completeness of the land registry


 LGI           Dimension                                     Score   Score Description

                Total cost of registering a property                 The cost for registering a property transfer is equal to or greater than
 2     1                                                     D
               transfer is low                                       5% of the property value.

               Information held in records is linked to              Between 50% and 70% of records for privately held land registered
 2     2(i)    maps that reflect current reality –           C       in the registry are readily identifiable in maps in the registry or
               Agricultural lands                                    cadastre.


               Information held in records is linked to
                                                                     Less than 50% of records for privately held land registered in the
 2     2(ii)   maps that reflect current reality – Non-      D
                                                                     registry are readily identifiable in maps (spatial records).
               agricultural lands

                                                                     Relevant private encumbrances are recorded consistently and in a
               All relevant private encumbrances are
 2     3(i)                                                  A       reliable fashion and can be verified at low cost by any interested
               recorded – Agricultural lands
                                                                     party

                                                                     Relevant private encumbrances are recorded consistently and in a
               All relevant private encumbrances are
 2     3(ii)                                                 A       reliable fashion and can be verified at low cost by any interested
               recorded – Non-agricultural lands
                                                                     party.

                                                                     Relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded consistently and
               All relevant public restrictions or charges
 2     4(i)                                                  A       in a reliable fashion and can be verified at a low cost by any
               are recorded - Agricultural lands
                                                                     interested party.

                                                                     Relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded consistently and
               All relevant public restrictions or charges
 2     4(ii)                                                 A       in a reliable fashion and can be verified at a low cost by any
               are recorded – Non-agricultural lands
                                                                     interested party.

               There is a timely response to requests
                                                                     Copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property can
 2     5(i)    for accessing registry records -              A
                                                                     generally be obtained within 1 day of request.
               Agricultural lands


               There is a timely response to requests
                                                                     Copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property can
 2     5(ii)   for accessing registry records – Non-         B
                                                                     generally be obtained within 1 week of request.
               Agricultural lands


               The registry is searchable - Agricultural             The records in the registry can be searched by both right holder
 2     6(i)                                                  A
               lands                                                 name and parcel.



               The registry is searchable - Agricultural     A       The records in the registry can be searched by both right holder
 2     6(ii)
               lands                                                 name and parcel.



               Land information records are easily           A       Copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property can be
 2     7
               accessed                                              obtained by anyone who pays the necessary formal fee, if any.




                                                                                                                                  151
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



Analysis

           Total cost of registering property transfer


There is a continuous effort by various state governments to bring down registration cost as per the
directions of Government of India. Registration cost which was around 11 to 12% about 10 years back
has been brought down to 5% of the property’s guidance value. However that too remains high in
absolute terms.

The World Bank's report under the title “Reforming Public Services in India: Drawing Lessons from
Success” on the Stamps and Registration Department in Karnataka reveals that a staggering 77.5%
have to pay 'office expense' at the sub-registrar's office apart from the officially collected stamp duty
and registration fee.' Office expense', refers to a bribe — normally a flat 1% of the value of registration.
It also reports that 94% of citizens can't do registration without the help of middlemen.

Including the informal cost as worked out in World Bank study report mentioned above, the
total cost of registration computed using weighted average of number of transactions and cost
of registration is estimated to be 4%.


           Link between textual records and maps that reflect current reality –Agricultural
           lands


There are individual parcel maps maintained by survey department in Karnataka along with Village
maps. Two systems are prevalent in Karnataka with respect to individual parcel maps namely Tippan
and Field Measurement Book (FMB). While Tippan’s are based on base and offset concept, FMBs use
trianglarisation. When it comes to spatial data, one has to depend on village maps with survey number
boundaries. These village maps were initially prepared during the settlement survey carried out during
years 1900-1920. There about 4.9 million Tippans pertaining to full survey numbers in the initial survey
and if hissa tippans (When full survey number is sub divided, such ‘tippan’ is called ‘hissa tippan’) are
included it totals up to approximately 16 million Tippans / FMBs. Numbers indicate that on an average
there are three sub divisions on each survey number.

Karnataka State Remote Sensing Application Center under Department of Information Technology and
Bio-Technology, Government of Karnataka is executing several GIS based applications for the
Government. It has digitized and geo referenced the village maps with survey number boundaries.


                                                                                                      152
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



However sub divisions in the survey number have not been updated on these maps. This essentially
means that land parcels can be readily identifiable up to survey number only.

As explained earlier, there have been at least three sub divisions on each of the survey numbers on
an average thereby making it difficult for the ground reality to be reflected on spatial data.

          Link between textual records and maps that reflect current reality – Non-
          agricultural lands


As discussed in LGI 6.1.4a, City survey is in place for only 48 towns and area of operation has not been
expanded since the 1970’s. While cities and town have grown at least 4-5 times since then whatever
data that is available with city survey is also not complete. Further data which is there with city survey
is not geo referenced data. UPOR project which is creating spatial records for the properties located
in cities is handling about 0.68 million properties out of 13 million households in Karnataka (as per
2011 census there are 1, 31, 79,911 households, it is assumed that one household as one property,
there may be some exceptions in assuming households equal to properties as there may be more than
one household in single property and there may properties like commercial and industrial which are
not households).


In Bangalore, Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (Greater Bangalore City Corporation) is the local
body managing tax records (which are used as property records due to un-availability of proper
ownership records) has prepared spatial map with geo referenced co-ordinates. Bangalore is
estimated to have 1.6 million properties out which for one million properties verification and
validation of geo referenced coordinates have been completed and for remaining properties
validation is in progress. The Corporation has enabled a facility in their website for citizens to locate
their property on Google map using the PID (Property ID).
Totally about 2.28 million properties are readily identifiable in maps (spatial records) out of 13 million
properties, which roughly work out to be 18% of non-agricultural properties.

          Recording of private encumbrances– Agricultural lands


Here it is assumed that encumbrance means encumbrances created on record of rights and not the
encumbrance certificates issued by sub registrar’s office recording all the registered transactions.
Encumbrance could be created because of transfer of rights, partition of land among the family

                                                                                                    153
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



members / legal heirs, mortgage with possession or without possession either to individuals or to
institutions like banks, co-operative societies etc., All these are private encumbrances where no public
interest is involved. After registration, intimation is sent to Revenue Department for incorporation of
these transactions on Record of Rights. There are certain transactions which are executed without
registered document like inheritance, unregistered will, family partition etc. In these cases record of
rights get updated but encumbrance maintained in the Registration Department do not reflect these
transactions. Similar is the case with respect land acquisition, grant, conversion of land from
agricultural to non-agricultural purpose etc. While updating these encumbrances proper care is taken
to ensure that only valid and authentic encumbrances are recorded on record of rights through
workflow based online mutation process implemented through the Bhoomi project in Karnataka.

Registration department sends the intimation slip about all the transactions registered on land parcels
to the Tahsildar for incorporating the details on the Record of Rights. Bhoomi has achieved electronic
integration with registration department which enables KAVERI to send the XML data to Bhoomi once
the registration is completed without any human discretion. On receipt XML from KAVERI, Bhoomi
initiates the transaction to incorporate the encumbrance on Record of Rights in most transparent and
consistent manner with FIFO (First in First Out) principle. Similarly electronic integration with land
acquisition activities (BHOOSWADEENA software) and banks ensures that land acquisition details and
charges created / removed from banks get updated on the Record of Rights with minimum human
intervention.


Every encumbrance that is created on Record of Rights is printed conspicuously as part of liabilities.
Everyone who takes the copy of RTC or views it on web can know encumbrances on a particular record
of right. Cost of getting copy of record of right is just Rs.10 and viewing it on web is free of cost. There
is facility to get copy of mutation extract which is available for Rs.15 and can be viewed free of cost
on web. Mutation extract describes the consequences which give raise to incorporating encumbrance
on the Record of Rights.


There is no provision for updating liabilities on Record of Rights with respect to loans obtained by
farmers from private finances, mandi owners and other informal sources.




                                                                                                      154
                                                                               KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                     2014



      Table 6..2.1: Number of Record of Rights where private encumbrances are recorded as part of liabilities

                                                          Total Record of Rights with       Percentage of Record of
 District Name                Total Record of Rights      private encumbrances              Rights with private liabilities
                                                          recorded as part of liabilities   recorded
 Belgaum                      1096671                     819226                            74.70
 Bagalkot                     419116                      300587                            71.72
 Bijapur                      581500                      353317                            60.76
 Gulbarga                     468550                      155171                            33.12
 Bidar                        304833                      151761                            49.78
 Raichur                      443743                      172281                            38.82
 Koppal                       315994                      129258                            40.91
 Gadag                        278830                      208796                            74.88
 Dharwad                      372886                      250608                            67.21
 Uttara Kannada               567510                      350576                            61.77
 Haveri                       443293                      329783                            74.39
 Bellary                      574951                      245565                            42.71
 Chitradurga                  475848                      184208                            38.71
 Davanagere                   458177                      228210                            49.81
 Shimoga                      370372                      220037                            59.41
 Udapi                        918286                      240481                            26.19
 Chickmagalore                450944                      179346                            39.77
 Tumkur                       1134638                     392905                            34.63
 Kolar                        539443                      96809                             17.95
 Bangalore (urban)            275859                      28092                             10.18
 Bangalore (Rural)            314721                      70266                             22.33
 Mandya                       1463496                     377249                            25.78
 Hassan                       958373                      380621                            39.72
 Dakshina Kannada             911796                      321663                            35.28
 Coorg                        270275                      71486                             26.45
 Mysore                       685983                      249933                            36.43
 Chamarajanagara              337749                      97700                             28.93
 Chickballapur                454978                      123788                            27.21
 Ramanagara                   407053                      98268                             24.14
 Yadgir                       258328                      81003                             31.36
                              16554196                    6908994                           41.74



            Recording of private encumbrances – Non-agricultural lands


It has been discussed in detail while analysing the previous indicator that list of properties being
maintained by local bodies are tax account and not the property records. Local bodies maintain these
registers as part of tax accounts for collecting tax and not to give ownership rights to tax payers.
Hence, there is no practice of maintaining encumbrance on the properties.

Urban Property Ownership Records (UPOR) which is in place in four cities has provision for recording
the encumbrances on the property records created under the project. Processes are also put in place
UPOR to incorporate the encumbrances just like in case of agricultural lands. UPOR project is likely to
get implemented in Bangalore (Capital city of Karnataka) in second phase and remaining cities in
subsequent phases.
                                                                                                                      155
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



Since momentum has been set to create property records in urban areas through UPOR and in rural
areas through e-SWATHU, both projects have facility to record encumbrances and there exists legal
provisions also to do so. Keeping road map of Government of Karnataka, in having well established
property record system through UPOR and e-SWATHU projects in view, this indicator is ranked as ‘A’.

          Recording of public restrictions or charges - Agricultural lands


Government’s interest in the private lands is protected by imposing public restrictions. Public
restrictions on land are of two types namely, restrictions which are permanent and cannot be relaxed
under any circumstances and restrictions which can be relaxed based on the request and merit of the
case. In Karnataka, the RTC (Record of Rights) depicts the total extent along with karab extents. Karab
extents are of two types namely Karab-A and Karab-B. Karab-A land is uncultivable waste land within
the survey number which is not assessed, ownership of such land lies with the owner of the land parcel
and owner can bring this land under cultivation after getting permission for sub-divisional magistrate
(Assistant Commissioner). Karab-B is the portion of the land within the private survey number which
cannot be converted into cultivable land and ownership of Karab-B land even though, it is in private
survey number rests with the government. Typical Karab-B lands are like footpaths, bullock cart paths,
natural water streams, etc. Other restrictions which are imposed while granting the land are recorded
as part of liabilities in the Record of Rights. Typical examples of such public restrictions are non-
alienation condition for 15 years and non-alienation for lifetime in the case of land granted for weaker
sections (Scheduled Castes / Scheduled Tribes) under PTCL act etc., These restrictions which are
imposed while granting land can be relaxed by the government if convinced with reason for relaxation,
after imposing a fine as per the norms. Government restrictions are being maintained in Bhoomi and
are regularly updated as and when need arises using mutation process.

It is clear from the above discussion that relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded
consistently and in a reliable fashion and can be verified at a low cost by any interested party.

          Recording of public restrictions or charges: Non-agricultural lands


As discussed in earlier indicators, non-agricultural lands do not have Record of Rights and tax register
maintained by local bodies is used as land records. Public restrictions are implemented in these cases
by adopting different techniques such as not registering the property after allotment till restriction



                                                                                                    156
                                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                      2014



period is completed, a holder certificate issued to provide right to the owner to raise loan, getting
building plan approved etc., for the purpose of constructing the house.
                      Table 6.2.2. Number of Record of Rights where public restrictions are recorded
                                                 Number of Record of rights with public restrictions
                                                 Govt restriction (Lease
  District Name         Total Record of Rights
                                                 period/non alienation         PTCL     Others if any   Total     Percentage
                                                 condition)
  Belgaum               1096671                  1                             0        427775          427776    39.01
  Bagalkot              419116                   0                             2        74610           74612     17.80
  Bijapur               581500                   0                             8        130663          130671    22.47
  Gulbarga              468550                   1                             1        52727           52729     11.25
  Bidar                 304833                   0                             2        42461           42463     13.93
  Raichur               443743                   0                             0        47720           47720     10.75
  Koppal                315994                   0                             1        34185           34186     10.82
  Gadag                 278830                   0                             34       52973           53007     19.01
  Dharwad               372886                   0                             0        65689           65689     17.62
  Uttara Kannada        567510                   5                             106      196391          196502    34.63
  Haveri                443293                   0                             5        143558          143563    32.39
  Bellary               574951                   0                             4        84198           84202     14.65
  Chitradurga           475848                   1                             50       35450           35501     7.46
  Davanagere            458177                   0                             5        36855           36860     8.04
  Shimoga               370372                   0                             0        30330           30330     8.19
  Udupi                 918286                   8                             10       175197          175215    19.08
  Chickmagalore         450944                   0                             90       127543          127633    28.30
  Tumkur                1134638                  0                             4        45128           45132     3.98
  Kolar                 539443                   0                             4        47925           47929     8.88
  Bangalore (Urban)     275859                   0                             4        32484           32488     11.78
  Bangalore (Rural)     314721                   1                             16       54184           54201     17.22
  Mandya                1463496                  0                             0        105721          105721    7.22
  Hassan                958373                   0                             217      42858           43075     4.49
  Dakshina Kannada      911796                   0                             17       320917          320934    35.20
  Coorg                 270275                   0                             0        22863           22863     8.46
  Mysore                685983                   0                             7        63758           63765     9.30
  Chamarajanagara       337749                   0                             148      14350           14498     4.29
  Chickballapur         454978                   0                             17       31388           31405     6.90
  Ramanagara            407053                   0                             3        41514           41517     10.20
  Yadgir                258328                   0                             0        20132           20132     7.79
                        16554196                 17                            755      2523793         2524565   15.25




                                                                                                                          157
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



Although, there is no well-established procedure for recording restrictions, UPOR and e-SWATHU
projects are creating property records in local bodies with a provision to record public restrictions.
The relevant amendments are put in place to have public restriction as part of property records before
implementation of UPOR and e-SWATHU projects.

          Timely response to requests for accessing registry records - Agricultural lands


Section 193 of Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964 reads: “Subject to such rules and payment of such
fees as the State Government may from time to time prescribe in this behalf, all maps and land records
shall be open to the inspection of the public at reasonable hours and certified extracts from such maps
and land records or certified copies thereof shall be given to all persons applying for the same.”
Despite such a provision in the Act, accessing Records of Rights was difficult till they were digitized
under the Bhoomi project. Now these records can be obtained from the computerized kiosks by paying
a fee of Rs 15 per copy.

          Timely response to requests for accessing registry records – Non- Agricultural
          lands


Non-agricultural properties are managed by local bodies As discussed earlier UPOR and e-SWATHU
projects cover major portion of records. Towns / Cities where UPOR is not in place, local municipalities
/ corporations mange property records (in the absence of property record, tax records are used as
property records). The Government of Karnataka has notified issue of khatha certificates (property
records) under Guarantee services to Citizen Act (GSC Act) and notified that these documents should
be provided within seven days.

          Is the registry searchable - Agricultural lands


Record of Rights register with respect to agricultural lands is computerized under Bhoomi program
and the same is searchable. In taluk kiosk and rural tele centres, Record of Rights register is searchable
both on name of the holder and parcel number. On the web search is possible based on land parcel
number only (i.e., Survey number).

          Is the registry searchable – Non-Agricultural lands




                                                                                                    158
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



With respect to non-agricultural lands, all the residential properties in rural areas are handled by
concerned gram panchayat and there is database of all the properties in the form of Panchatantra and
e-SWATHU, any non-agricultural property is searchable using name or khatha number in the web
interface provided by Rural Development department (www.Panchatantra.kar.nic.in                       or
http://164.100.80.110/eswathu). As far as urban local bodies are concerned, some of them have
computerized their tax accounts and some are not. Wherever computerization has been carried out,
there is a facility to search the properties. UPOR project also facilitates search using property number
or name. There are very few local bodies where computerization is not taken up and in these places
manual search using khatha number or name is possible.

          Access to Land information records


Record of Rights and related land records documents pertaining to agricultural lands are easily
available through 203 taluk kiosks and about 1000 rural tele centres called Atalji Jana Snehi Kendra
(AJSK). Record of Rights are available for Rs 10.00 and all other land related documents such as
mutation extract, status report on mutation, khatha extract, Record of Rights form -5, Record of Rights
form-6, Scanned Tippan, scanned mutation register extract etc., are available for Rs 15.00 each. Since
all these land related documents have been declared as public documents, they are accessible by the
public. With respect to non-agricultural lands in villages records can be obtained by paying service
charge of Rs. 50.00 to Rs.300.00 depending on the rate fixed by gram panchayats. In the case of urban
local bodies are records are made available for a fixed service charge irrespective of whether records
are computerized or not.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

   • There is urgent need of enabling appointment based registration system. People should be given
      opportunity to apply for registration and upload of documents through a web based application.
      This will reduce / remove one to one contact between public and registration department officials
      before accepting the papers for registration. Once the papers are accepted for registration without
      personal contact between citizen and department officials, corruption can be reduced
   • Transfer of properties Act 1892 needs to be amended and provisions needs to be put in place for
      submitting ownership document by the seller before allowing registration.
   • Karnataka’s last full-fledged survey was conducted during 1900-1920 and there has been a lot of
      transactions since then and the number of land parcels has increased three fold. Manual instruments

                                                                                                   159
                                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                       2014



        used more than century back were not accurate and procedures adopted were not very robust. The
        need of the hour is a resurvey with latest technologies. This will ensure that all sub divisions will
        become spatially identifiable and maps are accurate.
     • There is a urgent need to complete the UPOR project in four cities where it is in progress and needs
        to be scaled up for other cities and towns in the state.
     • Rural Development and Panchayat Raj department has to work out an action plan for creating
        cadaster of village sites using modern technologies, so that form-9 will become record of rights with
        well-defined boundaries and authentic dimensions.

Indicator 3 Reliability: registry information is updated and sufficient to make meaningful
inferences on ownership



 LGI              Dimension Description                 Score   Score Description


                  Information in public registries is           Links are in place for all types of public land information registries;
                  synchronized to ensure integrity              mandatory checks are performed to ensure legitimacy of any
 3      1(i)                                            A
                  of rights & reduce transaction                transactions that materially affects certain parties' land rights before
                  cost – Agricultural lands                     they can be finalized.
                  Information in public registries is           Links are in place for all types of public land information registries;
                  synchronized to ensure integrity              mandatory checks are performed to ensure legitimacy of any
 3      1(ii)                                           A
                  of rights & reduce transaction                transactions that materially affects certain parties' land rights before
                  cost – Non-Agricultural lands                 they can be finalized.

                  Registry information is up-to-
                                                                Between 70% and 90% of the ownership information in
 3      2(i)      date and reflect ground reality –     B
                                                                registry/cadastre is up-to-date and reflects ground reality.
                  Agricultural lands


                  Registry information is up-to-
                                                                Less than 50% of the ownership information in the registry/cadastre
 3      2(ii)     date and reflect ground reality –     D
                                                                is up-to-date and reflects ground reality.
                  Non-Agricultural lands




Analysis

                Synchronization of information held in public registry: Agricultural lands


There is a well-defined procedure in Karnataka Land Revenue Act and Rules to achieve synchronization
between various types of registers and departments so that integrity of land records data is intact.
Sub registrars are mandated to send the transaction details of registrations on agricultural lands every
day and consolidated statement once in fortnight to the concerned Tahsildar. Every village accountant
should initiate inheritance transaction in the case of death of khathedar as village accountant is also
                                                                                                                               160
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



designated as registrar of birth and deaths. In case of Land acquisitions, Land Acquisition officer /
Special land Acquisition officer shall send the details of notification to Tahsildar for incorporation in
Record of Rights. In the case of farm credit, bankers are mandated to send the form-3 (declaration of
having taken loan) to Tahsildar for creating charge. BHOOMI has implemented all these through
electronic integration with registration department, land acquiring bodies and Banks. Data gets
transferred electronically and transactions are initiated automatically without any human discretion.

          Synchronization of information held in public registry: Non-Agricultural lands


As far as Urban local bodies are concerned, since there is no concept of maintaining ownership records
no such synchronization was in place till recently. It was the responsibility of the citizen to get the
ownership changed into his/her name using registered deeds. After implementation of UPOR and e-
SWATHU a procedure is put in place so that sub registrar sends intimation to concerned local bodies
about registrations done on particular property.

          Is the registry information up-to-date and reflecting ground reality –
          Agricultural lands


Extent of synchronization between textual data with spatial data is the point of discussion here. There
are individual parcel maps maintained by survey department in Karnataka along with Village maps.
Two systems are prevalent with respect to individual parcel maps namely TIPPAN and FMB (Field
Measurement Book). Initially while enacting Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964, its objective was to
carryout mutation (transfer of ownership or partition on paper) and podi (physical division on land)
simultaneously. Over the years, gap between mutation and podi widened. As a result record of rights
register not in sync with spatial data. Normally there is gap of about 15-20 years between textual and
spatial data. Integration achieved in BHOOMI with survey records through IMP (Integrated Mutation
Podi) is helping in synchronization of record of rights with spatial maps. IMP ensures that a pre-
mutation sketch is used for rewarding sale or partition. There are about 16 million Record of Rights
and about 12 million tippans and hissa tippans in Karnataka, hence nearly 75% of land parcels have
corresponding cadastral maps.




                                                                                                   161
                                                                                KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                     2014



               Is the Registry information is up-to-date and reflecting ground reality – Non-
               Agricultural lands


Since Tax accounts maintained by Local bodies are being used as property records in the absence of
proper ownership documents, no cadastre is maintained for these properties. UPOR is a novel attempt
to create ownership records with cadastre.


POLICY RECOMMENDATION
Need of the hour is to create cadastre for all non-agricultural properties. Government should scale up
UPOR project in towns / cities immediately. Rural Development and Panchayat Raj department or
Revenue department should take up the survey and prepare cadastre for village sites on priority basis.

Indicator 4: Cost-effectiveness and sustainability: land administration services are provided in a
cost-effective manner



 LGI             Dimension Description                      Score description
                                                    Score
 4     1         The registry is financially        A       The total fees collected by the registry exceed the total registry
                 sustainable  through   fee                 operating costs.      (Total operating costs include all non-capital
                 collection to finance its                  investment costs (i.e. salaries and wages, materials, transportation,
                 operations                                 etc.) associated with registry operating costs.)

 4     2(i)      Investment in land admin. Is       A       Investment in human and physical is sufficient to achieve or maintain
                 sufficient to cope with demand             high service standards and to proactively respond to future needs and
                 for high quality services –                new developments in the sector.
                 Agricultural lands

 4     2(ii)     Investment in land admin. Is       D       There is little or no investment in capital in the system to record rights
                 sufficient to cope with demand             in land.
                 for high quality services – Non-
                 Agricultural lands




Analysis

               Financial Viability of Registry


In the case of agricultural lands, all the RECORD OF RIGHTS registers are maintained digitally under
BHOOMI project. Service changes collected are used for provision and maintenance of infrastructure
such as computers, printers, scanners, biometric finger print readers, air conditioner, UPS etc., along
with recurring cost such as stationery, printer cartridges, electricity bills etc., Even technical manpower

                                                                                                                          162
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



at state and district level is also paid using service charges collected under the project. Only salary
and other allowances of government employees working on Record of Rights maintenance is paid by
the government. Revenue officials which perform Record of Rights maintenance handle many other
activities and their full time cannot be attributed to Record of Rights maintenance alone. Bhoomi has
earned about Rs 2250 million in the form of user charges since 2000.

As regards non-agricultural lands, local bodies have higher property tax rates compared to land
revenue. Tax collection is about 70-80 % in cities while 20-20% in rural areas.

           Sufficiency of investment in land administration


Reports below shows the increase in number of transactions handled in case of agricultural lands,
Government of Karnataka has sanctioned and recruited 1000 posts of village accountants to handle
Bhoomi operations in addition to existing strength of 10,000 village accountants. To improve the
spatial data / cadaster 1800 surveyor posts have be created and filled recently. All BHOOMI deputy
Tehsildars have been upgraded as special tehsildars to provide more power and responsibility.
Karnataka Land Revenue Act has been amended by mandating pre-mutation sketch as pre-requisite
for registration and this is a major step towards brining synchronization between textual and spatial
records.




                                                                                                 163
                                                                                KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                      2014



Indicator 5: Fees are determined transparently to cover the cost of service provision



 LGI             Dimension Description             Score   Score Description


                                                   A
                 Fees have a clear rationale –
 5     1(i)                                                A clear rationale exists for fixing fee for most of the services.
                 agricultural land



                 Fees have a clear rationale –
 5     1(ii)                                       B       Clear rationale for fixing fees does not exist for some services.
                 non-agricultural land


                                                   A
                 Informal payments are                     Effective mechanisms to detect and deal with illegal staff behaviour
 5     2
                 discouraged                               exist in all registry offices and all cases are promptly dealt with.


                                                   A
                 Service standards are published           Effective mechanisms to detect and deal with illegal staff behaviour
 5     3
                 and regularly monitored                   exist in all registry offices and all cases are promptly dealt with.




Analysis

               Rationale for Fees


Bhoomi was the first e-Governance project in the country to introduce service charges. All documents
issued from Bhoomi data base were made available to the public for Rs. 15.00. Recently the
Government of Karnataka has reduced cost of Record of Rights to Rs.10.00. Similarly, service charges
are fixed to different documents.

Schedule of fees are prominently published in every kiosk and on every document cost of the
document is being printed so that citizen is made aware of the service charge. Receipt numbers are
automatically generated in the software and money management module developed under Bhoomi
project take care of this. Since the system automatically counts the service charge as and when
document is issued, there is no scope for manipulation. Similar systems are in place for non-
agricultural records also in some form or the other.

               Informal payments


                                                                                                                          164
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



Several studies show that BHOOMI project has eliminated corruption with respect to getting RECORD
OF RIGHTS documents and reduced transport and opportunity costs to large extent. With the
introduction of the Karnataka Guarantee of Services Act 2011; informal payments are said to have
been reduced in the case of services provided with respect to urban land.

          Monitoring Service standards


After Guarantee to Services to Citizens Act, it has become mandatory for official to serve the citizens
request within the fixed period, failing which citizen can claim compensation up to Rs 500.00 at the
rate of Rs 20.00 for every day of delay. The amount of compensation paid to citizen will be recovered
for the salary of erring government servant.




                                                                                                 165
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014




4.7. Panel 7: Land Valuation and Taxation
4.7.1. Panel Context


          Introduction


A robust land valuation system leads to accurate determination of land tax, stamp duty and
registration fees, which adds to the government revenue. From the perspective of land owners, land
valuation impacts the compensation value where the state is compulsorily acquiring land, particularly
when the recent The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Act, 2013 proposes that “compensation for the owners of the acquired land shall
be four times the market value in case of rural areas and twice in the case of urban areas.” Proper
stamping and registration of documents relating to land in accordance with procedures established
by law is very important, in terms of recognizing title over the land (as mentioned earlier), and also in
court proceedings. Documents that have not been adequately stamped cannot be produced before a
court of law as evidence in any proceedings (as per Section 34 of the Karnataka Stamp Act 1957
discussed below). Documents that have been incorrectly stamped, or which are not stamped are also
not capable of being used or recognized by any public officer, as per Section 34 of the Karnataka Stamp
Act. The legal authenticity and overall validity of a document, in terms of vesting title in property or
being recognized by public officers or courts, is entirely subject to the stamping of the document.

The Karnataka Stamp (Prevention of Undervaluation of Instruments) Rules of 1977 set out the
principles for the determination of market value for land, house sites, buildings and other lands. The
levy and collection of stamp duty and registration fee is administered by the Department of Stamps
and Registration (DSR) headed by the Inspector General of Registration and Commissioner of Stamps
(IGRCS). There are 35 District Registrar (DR) offices and 241 Sub-Registrar offices (SRO) in the State.
The DSR is third highest revenue earning department under the Government of Karnataka.

          Land Valuation Process


For rural land a factor considered is the revenue assessment established during the settlement
surveys, which is updated every 30 years. A primary reference is the sales histories recorded by the
Sub-Registries, although this information has a number of distortions and there is often limited sales
information in rural areas. The area covered by the Sub-Registry is grouped into areas of like
characteristics and a roll of market values – in Rs/square foot in non-agricultural areas and Rs/Acre in
rural areas – is prepared and published in the Karnataka Gazette. The Central Valuation Committee
(CVC) constituted by the DSR determines or revises the market value periodically. The Deputy
Inspector General of Registration (Intelligence), is the Member Secretary of the CVC and is responsible
for compilation and publication of the data relating to the market value guidelines in accordance with

                                                                                                   166
                                                                          KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



the decision the committee. The CVC may also constitute Market Valuation Sub-Committees in each
Sub-District and District for the purpose of estimation and revision of the market value guidelines of
the properties. The members of these Sub-committees may be drawn from the department of
Revenue, Survey and settlement, Public works and the Municipal Councils or Town Panchayaths. The
sub-committee is headed by the Tahsildar of the concerned Taluk and the sub-Registrar of the said
sub-district shall be the Member Secretary. The CVC, in the first week of October of every calendar
year, sends instructions along with general policy guidelines to all the sub-committees in the state for
estimation of market value guidelines of properties for the next calendar year. The sub-committee
publishes the intention of such estimation or revision, as the case may be, in the local newspapers and
also on the notice board of important offices. A period of 15 days is allowed for receipt of objections
and suggestions from the public and all such suggestions and objections so received are processed by
the Secretary and placed before the sub-committee for discussion. The sub-committee meets as often
as required to discuss and decide on the estimation of market value rates for the guidelines and
prepares a statement showing the average rates of agricultural lands, residential, commercial and
industrial sites in village and municipal or any other local body area in its jurisdiction. The average
rates are determined keeping in mind the types of land - (i) Classification of land as dry, garden, wet
and the like; (ii) Classification under various classes of soil in the survey records; (iii) Other factors
which influence the valuation of the land in question; (iv) Value of adjacent land or lands in the vicinity;
(v) As far as practicable the nature of crop and average annual yield from the land for five consecutive
years till the determination and nearness to road the market, distance from village site, its location in
general, level of land transport facilities, facilities available for irrigation for irrigation, such as tanks,
well and pump sets.

A period, normally 30 days after publication, is allowed for the submission of objections. These
objections are considered and the valuation roll is approved by the Government and published in the
Gazette. Local publishers print copies of the valuation roll and this information is available from local
bookstores. The state government also publishes guidance values of residential properties. The
Guidance value is the minimum price below which a property cannot be registered.

In Karnataka, property can be registered at either the guidance value or market value. Stamp duty is
paid at 5% of the registration value while registration fee amounts to 1% of registration value.

Audits conducted by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) on the test records of 163
offices of the DSR during the year 2011-12 revealed evasion, non-realization, short levy of stamp duty
and registration fee, etc. amounting to INR 5.66 crore in 993 cases.56

Another evaluation study57 on Land valuation in Karnataka states that the system for the valuation is
still very rudimentary. Further, the sub committees described above are fairly autonomous in making
decisions about market values. The report claims that, the information collected by Government does



56
     Audit Report (Revenue Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2012
57
     Comparative Study of Land Administration Systems – Karnataka Case Study
                                                                                                         167
                                                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
  LGAF-INDIA
                      2014



provide some measure of relative values, but will lead to difficulties is establishing value where private
property is being compulsorily acquired by the State under the Land Acquisition Act – something that
is addressed in the Karnataka Industrial Development Act (KIDA). There is also limited experience in
the valuation of rural property to support a land market or mortgage market.

              Use of Technology in Valuation and Registration


The Government of Karnataka (GoK) embarked upon a scheme of computerization known as the
Karnataka Valuation and e-Registration Programme (Kaveri) on the activities of the Department in
2002. The aim of the computerisation as stated by the DSR was to make the process of registration
speedy, simple, transparent, accountable and to build in information about the market value into the
system. Under the manually registering process, the documents registered were copied manually in
specified books. After they were verified with the original document, the hand written document was
authentication by registering officers. The registered book would become the permanent public
document and certified copies of these records would provide evidentiary value. Since the procedure
involved in handwriting each documents that were registered the time taken to hand over the original
registered document to the person registering the document would take anywhere between 2 to 3
months. Moreover it also meant 2-3 trips to the registration office to check if the document was ready.
This cumbersome process encouraged undesirable practices. In the KAVERI programme, a software
system carrying the existing registration procedure, property valuation and all associated activities
was created. Care was taken not to change the existing five stage process of registering documents
that citizens were familiar with.

By 2003-2004 the DSR had computerized all 235 Sub-Registrars offices and 33 District Registrar offices
in the state. Reports on the outcome of Kaveri have mentioned that despite the Government of
Karnataka reducing the rate of stamp duty on conveyance from 10% to 8% and Registration fee from
2% to 1%, in 2003 there is significant growth in revenue as the Kaveri system calculated the valuation
of property automatically eradicating the discretionary power of the Registering officer in accessing
the valuation of property.

A positive impact of the programme can be seen from the figures given in the table 4.7.1

 Table 4.7.1: Budget Estimates (BEs) and actual receipts from stamp duty and registration fees


                        Budget
 Year                                                                       Actual receipts (INR in crore)
                        estimates (INR in crore)
 2007-08                4,400.00                                            3,408.83
 2008-09                4,195.84                                            2,926.72
 2009-10                3,566.62                                            2,627.57
 2010-11                3,500.00                                            3,531.08
 2011-12                4,030.00                                            4,623.20
                                     Source: Audit Report (Revenue Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2012

                                                                                                                168
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



The increases in 2011-12 was stated to be due to increase in market value and increase in the number
of registered documents.

The Government of Karnataka as part of its urban reforms process introduced Capital Value Based
property taxation system along with schematic GIS and MIS of all properties of urban areas. This
involved the computerization of the revenue department of ULB for efficient tax management.
Further, a GIS Based Property Tax Information System is put in place to improve property tax
collection. These processes bring transparency in property tax levy and collection, which was hitherto
criticized for inefficient tax management and low revenue collection




                                                                                                169
                                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



4.7.2. Assessment and Score
This section analyses in detail the specific elements related to land valuation in Karnataka, with a focus
on the efficiency and transparency of the valuation process. These elements are divided into Indicators
which in turn are broken down into several Dimensions. Indicators provide a relatively exhaustive
assessment of relevant land governance issues through specific dimensions which define areas for
investigation, quantitative measurement or qualitative assessment.

Indicator 1: Transparency of valuations: valuations for tax purposes are based on clear principles,
applied uniformly, updated regularly, and publicly accessible



 LGI         Dimension Description              Score   Score Description


 1     1     There is a clear process of        B       The assessment of land/property for tax or compensation purposes
             property valuation                         reflects market prices, but there are significant differences between
                                                        recorded values and market prices across different uses and types of
                                                        users; valuation rolls are updated regularly.

 1     2     Valuation rolls   are   publicly   A       There is a policy that valuation rolls be publicly accessible and this
             accessible                                 policy is effective for most of the properties that are considered for
                                                        taxation.



Analysis

           Process of property valuation



There is a well-established process for property valuation fixed by government of Karnataka which is
supposed to get revised every year. Due to various reasons such as elections, popular government
doesn’t want to increase burden of stamp duty on citizen etc., and as such they are not being revised
every year. Department of stamps and registration uses various sources to get the market value of
the property for fixing guidance value. The important sources are report from sub-registrars, District
registrars, Banks, real estate agencies; Advertisements issued by developers, National Housing Bank’s
Residex etc., the guidance value fixed by the government of Karnataka approximately about 70% of
the Market value.

Central valuation Committee constituted as per Section 45-B of Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 and Rules
made there under to estimate the value of properties to curb under valuation of the properties. The
committee publishes valuation in all places for the information of public, after estimation of the value
of properties.

POLICY RECOMMENDATION
No automated tools and GIS techniques are used for scientifically determining property valuation. For
example valuation of the property has to be more if it is in close proximity of public places like school,
                                                                                                     170
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



bus stand, railway station and market. At the same time one has to consider that if property is too
close to these type of public places then valuation should be less if it is residential property and more
if it is commercial property.

Following factors are to be taken into account while making analysis using comparative method:

i) Location: The value of land which is situated in a busy locality or centre of city or shopping district
will certainly be more than that of land which is situated far away from the town. The location of the
property is very important and it is quite likely that a slightly different location can cause a vast
difference to the market value. The location is said to be a prime factor in demand for land.

ii) Size: The size of plot also plays an important role in fixation of its value. The rate of a large land
cannot be compared to that of a small land. Usually, there will be keen demand for plots of certain
sizes in a particular locality. The rate of land with such sizes should be considered as the trend
prevailing in that locality for arriving at the value of open lands under consideration.

iii) Shape: People prefer to have land having regular shape. It is observed that plots of land with regular
shapes will be sold at a higher price than those with irregular shapes.

iv) Frontage and depth: It is quite clear that the most valuable part of a plot of land is its street
frontage and the value of rear portion of plot decreases as the distance from street increases.

v) Return frontage: A corner plot gets an additional return frontage and depending upon the
importance of intersecting streets or roads, there will be corresponding increase in the value of such
plots. The corner plot has better facility of entrance and egress & gives more light and ventilation. In
residential area, a corner plot gives wide scope for better layout of shops or offices with greater space
for show-rooms and advertisements.

vi) Level: If the natural level of land is lower than the road level, considerable amount will have to be
spent for filling and there will also be substantial increase in the cost of foundations. On the contrary,
if the natural level of land is considerably higher than the road level, there will be difficulty in laying
water / drainage lines and hence, the extra earth will have to be excavated to make the plot reasonably
level.

vii) Nature of soil: For lands with building potentiality, the bearing capacity of soil should also be
considered. If the bearing capacity is adequate, the cost of foundation will be reasonable in proportion
to the total cost of the building. If, however, the bearing capacity is poor, considerable amount will
have to be spent to make the structure stable. It is thus clear that the land with good bearing capacity
will command a higher rate as compared to the land with poor bearing capacity.

viii) Land-locked land: It sometimes so happens that a plot of land has no well-defined legal access
and it is surrounded on all sides by plots belonging to other owners resulting in less value.
                                                                                               171
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014




ix) Restriction on development: The permissible Floor Space Index or F.S.I should be studied for the
plot to be valued and scrutinized. The plot of land having more permissible F.S.I. will naturally be sold
at higher price as compared to the one having less permissible F.S.I.

x) Encumbrances: The plots of land which are subject to the easement rights of air, light or passage
will be less attractive to the prospective purchasers and depending upon the inconveniences caused,
there will be reduction in values of such lands.

xi) Miscellaneous advantages: In addition to the above consideration, if the property possesses some
special advantages because of its location or any other reason, the same should be considered while
arriving at the reasonable rate of open land


           Accessibility of Valuation rolls



Property valuation is publicly accessible in the website of Department of Stamps and Registration
(www.karnataka.gov.in/karigr). One can find out the property valuation of every parcel of land in
Karnataka. In the case of agricultural lands valuation is available village wise / survey number wise. In
case of urban areas it is available ward wise / street wise so that one can easily find out the valuation.

For agricultural properties market value is provided per acre for other types it is provided per sq. ft. In
the case of flat / apartment there exist different rates for different type of flooring and type of
construction. In the case of agricultural properties also rates are provided depending on whether land
is dry, wet or garden.




                                                                                                     172
                                                                                  KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                      2014



Indicator 2: Collection efficiency: resources from land and property taxes are collected and the yield
from land taxes exceeds the cost of collection.


 LGI             Dimension Description                Score   Score Description


 2     1         Exemptions from property taxes       B       There are limited exemptions to the payment of land/property taxes,
                 payment are justified and                    and the exemptions that exist are clearly based on equity or efficiency
                 transparent                                  grounds but are not applied in a transparent and consistent manner.


 2     2         All property holders liable to pay   B       Between 70% and 80% of property holder liable for land/property tax
                 property tax are listed on the tax           are listed on the tax roll.
                 roll


 2     3(i)      Assessed property taxes are          C       Between 70 per cent and 80 per cent of property holders liable for
                 collected – rural                            land/property tax are listed on the tax roll



 2     3(ii)     Assessed property taxes are          B       Between 50 per cent and 70 per cent of assessed land/property taxes
                 collected – urban                            are collected.



 2     4(i)      Receipts from property tax           D       The amount of property taxes collected is less than the cost of staff in
                 exceed the cost of collection –              charge of collection.
                 agricultural



 2     4(ii)     Receipts from property tax           A       The amount of property taxes collected exceeds the cost of staff in
                 exceed the cost of collection –              charge of collection by a factor of more than 5.
                 non-agricultural


Analysis

               Justification for and transparency of exemptions from property taxes payment


Exemption from property tax should be studied for both agricultural and non-agricultural lands.
Normally exemption (referred as remission) to land revenue of agricultural lands is given during
drought or natural calamities. Exemption to property tax is provided to charitable institutions,
educational institutions, religious institutions in case of non-agricultural properties. Normally when
remission is given, it is for a full year’s land revenue for all farmers. Following provisions are available
for providing provisions.

               PROVISIONS REGARDING ANNEWARI IN LAND REVENUE ACT.1964 / Rules 1966.


Section 194 of Chapter XV of the Land Revenue Act 1964 speaks about the Remission of Land Revenue.

Section 194 - Suspension /Remission of Land Revenue
                                                                                                                           173
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, but subject to such Rules as may be prescribed,
   where there is a failure of crops in any tract owing to inadequate rainfall or other cause and the
   state Government considers that it is necessary to suspend or remit the Land Revenue payable in
   respect of any land in such a tract, it may by notification 1).suspend the collection of Land
   Revenue 2)Remit the Land Revenue payable for any year.

Similarly the RULE 147 of the chapter XVI of LAND REVENUE RULES 1966 spells about Annewari
process, i.e. Crop cutting experiments.

RULE 147(1) - The Deputy Commissioner shall cause crop cutting experiments to be conducted in all
the villages every year in all the growing seasons, in order to determine the average crop wise yield
per acre. The Tehsildar shall conduct such crop cutting experiments in at least 5%of the villages in the
taluk, the Revenue Inspector in at least 20% of the villages in his circle and Village Accountant in all
the villages in his charge. The question of remission of Land Revenue shall be considered on the basis
of such experiments

Thus the Land Revenue Rules are clear to know that under what circumstances the Land Revenue
payable becomes eligible for recovery /suspension/Remission as the case may be, depending upon
the crop Annewari determined as per crop cutting experiments.

Hence proclamation of ANNEWARI NOTIFICATION by the Deputy Commissioners is a must so as to
ascertain as to whether the Land Revenue payable becomes eligible for recovery, suspension or
remission.

In the case of urban areas, percentage of exemption varies depending on type of institution. The
service charge instead of property tax is a recent rule in Bangalore. It was included under the
Karnataka Municipal Corporation (KMC) Act in 2002 for all municipalities across the state that followed
the capital value system (CVS). Bangalore being the only city with SAS then had to keep this on hold
considering the different system. Category 16 under revised SAS 2008 finally brought the rule into
effect. According to this, all educational institutions must calculate the regular tax rate and pay only
25% of the total amount as service charge to BBMP.

Amendments to the KMC Act 1976 having been legislated on 28 April 2012, the 50 % Exemption in
Property Tax extended to Ex-servicemen and Ex-Para Military Forces personnel has come into effect
from Financial year 2012-13.

Section 110(b) of the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 provides for exemption of property
taxes for various category of property tax.

It is difficult to declare that norms are applied in transparent and consistent manner especially in
urban local bodies while providing exemptions as it is subjective decision of the officer in charge and
human discretion sometime leads to nepotism.

                                                                                                  174
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



          Are all property holders liable to pay property tax are listed on the tax roll?


Normally all agricultural lands are listed in demand list as land revenue is one of the parameter in the
ownership records. In the case of non-agricultural lands which are being maintained by local bodies,
since khatha registers are not ownership records all properties may or may not be listed in the tax
registers. A 100 % recording on tax rolls is achieved in the case of agricultural lands except
unauthorized cultivation. In the case of urban local bodies, tax net may be up to 70-80%. With respect
to grama panchayats it is nearly 100% as it is easy to bring properties under tax net in villages as
compared to urban areas. For example Bangalore is estimated to be having 1.6 million properties and
about 1.3 million properties are under tax net. However JNNURM rate Bangalore and Mysore as 100%
coverage of tax in their reports

          Collection of assessed property taxes


DCB (Demand, Collection and Balance) register of the Revenue department, urban local bodies /
authorities and grama panchayats provide details into tax collection. According to estimates tax
collection touches up to 80%. Percentage of tax collections for agricultural lands is high as number of
transactions is higher here and revenue officials collect land revenue (tax) at the time of ownership
transfer. In the case of grama panchayat properties it is lower and may be around 20-25% of current
demand and 7-8% of total demand including arrears. Collection is low as the number of transactions
is minimal. In the case of urban areas tax collection is around 70-80% on an average. As per JNNURM
Bangalore’s tax collection rate is 100% and for Mysore it is 83%.


          Do receipts from property tax exceed the cost of collection


Land revenue for the state government is no more a major source of income. Over the years either it
has not been revised or it has been reduced. In the case of non-agricultural properties taxes are being
revised regularly and for local bodies property tax has become major source of income. There have
been continuous efforts by different governments to shift from annual rental value system to capital
value system to increase their revenue share.

In the case of agricultural lands, Village Accountants are assigned with job of collecting land revenue.
Since Village Accountants’ are assigned with multiple tasks and collection of land revenue is one of
minor activities, and the collection cost cannot be attributed to tax collection. In the case of Urban
local bodies / grama panchayats there are officials designated as ‘Bill Collector’ whose only job is
collection of revenue (assuming that no other activities are assigned to him/her).




                                                                                                  175
                                                                                                          KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



  Table 4.7.2: District wise demand, collections and balance for financial year 2013-14




                                                                                            Collection(Rs.in
                                            OB(Rs. in 1000)




                                                                                                                               against current
                                                                                                                               % of collection



                                                                                                                                                 % of collection
                                                              Demand(Rs.in



                                                                             Demand(Rs.in




                                                                                                               Balance(Rs.in
  District Name




                                                                                                                                                 against total
                                No of GPs




                                                                                                                               demand



                                                                                                                                                 demand
                                                              Current

                                                              1000)



                                                                             1000)


                                                                                            1000)


                                                                                                               1000)
                                                                             Total
                                163         258231            71656          329974         7923               322006          11.06             2.4
  BAGALKOTE
                                86          658607            637589         1296234        205630             1090555         32.25             15.86
  BANGALORE
                                98          347305            274110         621468         94364              527050          34.43             15.18
  BANGALORE RURAL
  BELGAUM                       486         1030469           318987         1349705        52031              1297523         16.31             3.85
                                189         226047            70332          296474         13436              282977          19.1              4.53
  BELLARY
                                175         220512            37119          257702         1798               255883          4.84              0.7
  BIDAR
  BIJAPUR                       199         401072            87761          488922         2989               485910          3.41              0.61
  CHAMARAJA NAGARA              120         196106            55617          251771         4348               247394          7.82              1.73
  CHIKMAGALUR                   226         224582            83717          308404         28629              279674          34.2              9.28
  CHITRADURGA                   185         393510            92681          486284         9869               476372          10.65             2.03
  DAKSHINA KANNADA              203         72036             119847         191989         51297              140593          42.8              26.72
  DAVANAGERE                    230         282682            81977          364784         28010              336648          34.17             7.68
  DHARWAR                       127         139042            33561          172658         10840              161760          32.3              6.28
  GADAG                         106         119098            28429          147580         10148              137383          35.7              6.88
  GULBARGA                      220         313899            66756          380756         11020              369672          16.51             2.89
  HASSAN                        258         330992            139175         470284         75190              394970          54.03             15.99
  HAVERI                        208         441302            97243          538646         30340              508196          31.2              5.63
  KODAGU                        98          66143             45666          111848         18351              93445           40.19             16.41
  KOLAR                         156         248745            77142          325977         10199              315715          13.22             3.13
  KOPPAL                        134         143364            37174          180610         4979               175592          13.39             2.76
  MANDYA                        232         438182            176072         614366         53500              560750          30.39             8.71
  MYSORE                        235         561952            209405         771482         45584              725787          21.77             5.91
  RAICHUR                       165         116523            23348          139930         2560               137353          10.96             1.83
  SHIMOGA                       260         161950            66428          228515         27507              200878          41.41             12.04
  TUMKUR                        321         594638            168877         763687         23449              740100          13.89             3.07
  UDUPI                         146         71512             91242          162844         24566              138200          26.92             15.09
  UTTARA KANNADA                208         48692             51880          100663         22277              78288           42.94             22.13
  CHIKKABALLAPURA               151         229937            71309          301318         9714               291545          13.62             3.22
  RAMANAGARA                    130         239319            121064         360439         34858              325532          28.79             9.67
  YADGIR                        117         174252            31437          205740         234                205505          0.74              0.11
                                5632        8750701           3467601        12221054       915640             11303256        26.41             7.49
  TOTAL



In the case of agricultural lands land revenue (tax) is very low and the government tries to keep it very
low in the interest of farmers. In fact it is about Rs. 2.50 per acre, and if the khathedar’s total extent
is less than 10 acres of dry land, his/her land revenue is waived off. Thus, the amount of land revenue
collected will be less than the cost of collection. In the case of urban areas tax rates are higher and
amount of property tax collected normally exceeds the cost of collection.

                                                                                                                                                         176
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014




4.8. Panel 8: Dispute Resolution
4.8.1. Panel Context


           Introduction


Land disputes in Karnataka may be classified under three broad heads- (i) acquisition disputes under
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894; (ii) revenue disputes under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 and
the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961; and (iii) transactional disputes such as succession and transfer
of property.

In Karnataka, as in other states in India, land disputes form a high proportion of cases before the courts
and are also seen to clog the formal legal system as they generally are not disposed of quickly. There
is a general lack of policy that specifically targets resolution of land disputes. While the union
government has formulated a National Litigation Policy, this policy does not focus on clearing the
backlog in land disputes. There is no mention of any approach that the Government must take towards
specific types of disputes such as land disputes that have been clogging the Indian legal system for
decades.

           Revenue and Civil Courts


The dispute resolution takes place both through the Revenue Courts and the Civil Courts. In the
Revenue Court system, the Tahsildar, who heads the revenue department at the Taluk/block level is
identified as the first level dispute resolution officer. Revenue officials heading the sub-divisions,
districts and division also hold dispute resolution powers. A large number of cases remain pending at
this level. Also, this system has been criticized on the grounds that this combines both the functions –
dispute resolution and as the executive functions, which may create a conflict of interest.

The civil litigation system mainly comprises the High Court, District Courts, Court of Civil Judge (Senior
Division), Court of Civil Judge (Junior Division) and Court of Small Causes. All courts are governed under
the Code of Civil Procedure 1908. The Courts of Civil Judge (Senior Division) and the Court of Civil Judge
(Junior Division) are established under the Karnataka Civil Courts Act, 1964. In addition to these civil
courts, Courts of Small Causes are empowered to take up suits on immovable property under the
                                                                                                    177
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



Karnataka Small Causes Courts Act, 1964. Courts of Small Causes may be established by the state
government in consultation with the High Court of Karnataka and thereupon define their jurisdiction.
These courts are primarily established to deal with small value cases.

In the civil litigation system, land acquisition cases filed in the last decade have increased substantially.
However, the same is not true for land revenue disputes. The former also have a higher disposal rate
than the latter.

In addition to regular courts, the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008 establishes formal rural courts (Gram
Nyayalayas) at the panchayat level. In the context of land disputes, Gram Nyayalayas are empowered
to adjudicate disputes related to rights to purchase a property, use of common pasturage, use of
irrigation facilities, wells and water channels and disputes regarding possession of village and farm
houses.

Finally, the state is mandated to make efforts towards clearing the backlog in courts through Lok
Adalats. Under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 states organise Lok Adalats or courts that are
specifically set up for speedy disposal of cases. The jurisdiction of these courts is limited to cases in
which the parties agree or file a complaint before this forum or when a Court deems it fit to refer the
case to a Lok Adalat. The award of this court is in the form of an agreement and appeals against such
awards are not allowed. However, the efficacy of the Lok Adalat system requires careful examination




                                                                                                       178
                                                                           KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



4.8.2. Assessment and Score
This section analyses in detail the specific elements related to land disputes in Karnataka with
reference to capacity, accessibility and affordability of the dispute resolution system. These elements
are divided into Indicators which in turn are broken down into several dimensions. Indicators provide
a relatively exhaustive assessment of relevant land governance issues through specific dimensions
which define areas for investigation, quantitative measurement or qualitative assessment.

Indicator 1: Assignment of responsibility: responsibility for conflict management at different levels
is clearly assigned, in line with actual practice, relevant bodies are competent in applicable legal
matters, and decisions can be appealed against



 LGI         Dimension Description              Score   Score Description


 1     1     There is clear assignment of       A       There are no parallel avenues for conflict resolution or, if parallel
             responsibility for    conflict             avenues exist, responsibilities are clearly assigned and widely known
             resolution                                 and explicit rules for shifting from one to the other are in place to
                                                        minimize the scope for forum shopp


 1     2     Conflict resolution mechanisms     A       Institutions for providing a first instance of conflict resolution are
             are accessible to the public               accessible at the local level in the majority of communities



 1     3     Decisions made by informal or      B       There is a community-based system or alternative dispute resolution
             community    based    dispute              system that resolves conflicts in an equitable manner but decisions
             resolution   systems      are              made by this system have limited recognition in the formal judicial or
             recognized                                 administrative dispute resolutions

 1     4     There is a process for appealing   C       A process exists to appeal rulings on land cases at high cost and the
             dispute rulings                            process takes a long time/ the costs are low but the process takes a
                                                        long time.




Analysis

           Assignment of responsibility for conflict resolution


This section describes the assignment of dispute resolution functions under various land laws in
Karnataka. The three major enactments - Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964; Karnataka Land Reforms
Act, 1961 and the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 use the revenue authorities in the state to resolve land
related disputes. As the following parts of this section elucidate, these laws create a bar on the
jurisdiction of civil courts to entertain land disputes. However, it is important to bear in mind that
                                                                                                                   179
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                     2014



citizens may engage the civil litigation system for specific types of disputes under these laws. In the
case of inheritance related disputes dispute resolution may either be done through litigation before a
competent civil court or through alternative dispute resolution methods.

             Land Acquisition


The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 empowers the State Government to acquire private land for a public
purpose. Acquisitions may be made by serving a notice of acquisition and providing a just
compensation for the portion of the land notified for acquisition. Prior to acquisition, it is incumbent
upon the state to make the reasons for acquisition known. Objections to acquisition may be raised on
two grounds- the true area or value of the notified land and that the compensation awarded is not
“just”. The District Collector or the Chief Revenue Officer of district is the appointed authority for
hearing disputes related to compensation58 or hearing objections59 against the acquisition.

             Land Revenue


The Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 broadly concerns the classification of lands for the purposes
of land revenue and land revenue administration. Disputes under this enactment are primarily those
that concern boundary marks, record of rights, and use of land. The enactment identifies revenue
officers as revenue courts. Section 24 of the Act vests powers of settling disputes in the Tahsildar,
acting as the revenue court. In addition to this, the Act also establishes the Karnataka Revenue
Appellate Tribunal, comprising the Regional Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners to hear appeals
against the orders of the revenue court60. In addition to this, the Act empowers civil courts to take up
matters against the government in certain cases or in the case of private rights. In the specific case of
a land boundary dispute, Section 141 empowers the parties to settle the dispute through arbitration.

             Land Reforms


The Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 governs land tenures related to agricultural land in the state.
This Act seeks to curb the exploitation of tenants by landlords and land owners by abolishing leases
and regulating tenures over agricultural land. The state’s revenue administration is responsible for




58 Section 5, Land Acquisition Act, 1894
59 Section 5A, Land Acquisition Act, 1894
60
   Section 40, Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964
                                                                                                   180
                                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



implementing the provisions of this law. The Tahsildar, a block level officer is in charge of settling
disputes relating to tenure. The dispute resolution and appeals processes are similar to those
mentioned under the Land Revenue Act, 1964

             Dispute resolution through courts


In India, inheritance is governed by religious personal laws for Hindus61 and Muslims62. The Indian
Succession Act, 1925 governs inheritance for other communities. These laws do not particularly
empower officers to resolve disputes. Disputes related to inheritance in India are mostly in the form
of partition suits and are regularly attended to by civil courts. In addition to inheritance related
disputes, civil courts also take up matters pertaining to private rights under the Karnataka Land
Revenue Act, 1964. If a person is being denied his right over land due to an entry in any record, he has
the right to file a suit for declaration under Chapter VI of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 provided that
the suit is not against the State Government or any government officer.

In addition to the formal legal system, alternative dispute resolution methods such as arbitration,
mediation and conciliation also play a significant role in resolving disputes. These alternative methods
are recognized under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; the Code of Civil Procedure, 190863;
Civil Procedure (Alternative Dispute Resolution) (Karnataka) Rules, 2005 and the Karnataka Civil
Procedure (Mediation) Rules, 2005. Moreover, formal forums such as the Lok Adalats are also
available for redressing land related disputes (See Section 2).

Therefore, the various avenues for conflict resolution clearly assign responsibilities between different
administrative and judicial forums with respect to different kinds of land disputes. The responsibilities
of individual forums are decided based on the type of dispute, the legislation it is governed by, the
geographical region in which the dispute arises and the value of the dispute. In addition to this, the
civil litigation system has established processes for transfer of cases from one court to another and
restrictions on appeals.




61 Hindu inheritance is codified under the Hindu Succession Act, 1956
62 Muslim inheritance is covered under Shariah laws which are not codified but applicable under the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat)
Application Act, 1937.
63
   Sections 89 and 122 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
                                                                                                                          181
                                                                          KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                       2014



              Accessibility of Conflict resolution mechanisms


The accessibility of conflict resolution mechanisms to local communities varies between different
legislation governing land disputes. The revenue administration system in Karnataka caters to the
public at various levels- village, block, district, zone and state.

              Conflict resolution of the first instance


The Tahsildar, who heads the revenue department at the block level (comprising 3-4 villages) is
identified as the first level dispute resolution officer under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 and
the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961. Therefore, conflict resolution institutions are available at the
local level under these Acts. The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 vests dispute resolution powers in the
District Collector, an officer at the district level thus raising questions about accessibility to the conflict
resolution mechanism under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

              Legal System


In Karnataka the civil litigation system mainly comprises the High Court, District Courts, Court of Civil
Judge (Senior Division), Court of Civil Judge (Junior Division) and Court of Small Causes. All courts are
governed under the Code of Civil Procedure 1908. The Courts of Civil Judge (Senior Division) and the
Court of Civil Judge (Junior Division) are established under the Karnataka Civil Courts Act, 1964. The
Act provides for one Court of Civil Judge Senior Division in each district64 and a fixed number of Courts
of Civil Judge Junior Division in every district65. In addition to these civil courts, Courts of Small Causes
are empowered to take up suits on immovable property under the Karnataka Small Causes Courts Act,
1964. Courts of Small Causes may be established by the state government in consultation with the
High Court of Karnataka and thereupon define their jurisdiction. These courts are primarily established
to deal with small value cases.

In addition to these courts, the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008 establishes formal rural courts (Gram
Nyayalayas) at the panchayat level66. In 2010, the High Court of Karnataka requested the state




64 Section 6, Karnataka Civil Courts Act, 1964
65 Section 7, Karnataka Civil Courts Act, 1964
66
   Section 3, Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008
                                                                                                         182
                                                                                KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



government to sanction 30 such courts in Karnataka67. These courts are empowered to entertain
specific criminal and civil cases. The procedure in Gram Nyayalayas is decided by the High Court from
time to time and these courts are expected to resolve disputes within a period of six months from the
date of filing a case68. Moreover, District Courts may transfer pending cases from any court under its
jurisdiction to a Gram Nyayalaya for speedy disposal69. Additionally, decrees issued by a Gram
Nyayalaya are on par with the decrees of a civil court and the Gram Nyayalaya may execute these
decrees in the prescribed manner70. These courts are also bound to resort to alternative methods of
dispute resolution in civil cases as far as practicable71. In the context of land disputes, Gram Nyayalayas
are empowered to adjudicate on disputes related to rights to purchase a property, use of common
pasturage, use of irrigation facilities, wells and water channels and disputes regarding possession of
village and farm houses72.

In addition to the regular civil litigation system, the state is mandated to make efforts towards clearing
the backlog in courts through Lok Adalats. Under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 states
organise “Lok Adalats” or courts that are specifically set up for speedy disposal of cases. The
jurisdiction of these courts is limited to cases in which the parties agree or file a complaint before this
forum or when a Court deems it fit to refer the case to a Lok Adalat. The award of this court is in the
form of an agreement and appeals against such awards are not allowed. However, the efficacy of the
Lok Adalat system requires careful examination.

            Recognition of decisions made by informal or community based dispute
            resolution systems


When there is questionable accessibility to conflict resolution institutions of the first instance at the
local level, the role of both formal and informal institutions that deal with conflict resolution becomes
important. Informal local governance institutions or customary village councils co-exist73 and often




67
     See “State’s first Gram Nyayalaya to be inaugurated in Chickballapur” The Hindu, October 3, 2010 available at:
http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-karnataka/states-first-gram-nyayalaya-inaugurated-in-
chickballapur/article810165.ece, last accessed on January 1, 2014.
68 Chapter V, Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008
69
   Section 16, Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008
70 Id.
71 Section 26, Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008
72 Part II, Schedule I, Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008
73
   “Dynamics of Local Governance in Karnataka” by Ananthpur K., Economic and Political Weekly February 24, 2007, page 667
                                                                                                                   183
                                                                                             KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                      2014



interact with the formal panchayat system74 in Karnataka. These institutions range from street
panchayats to customary village councils. These informal institutions are entrenched in traditional
power relations, caste politics and are legitimized by traditional and customary practices. They
perform a range of functions, including dispute resolution, sometimes complementing the formal local
governance bodies. Customary village councils adopt reconciliatory and consensus building
approaches of dispute resolution, thereby contributing to the maintenance of law and order in the
village. Land disputes before these informal councils primarily concern encroachment, partition,
ensuring the rights of destitute or widowed women to property and other minor property related
issues.75 While it is true that their decisions in disputes are not legally enforceable76, they are capable
of building social pressure to enforce their decisions in the village community. Despite the existence
of these informal institutions for dispute resolution, avenues to approach the police and formal legal
system remain open. However, the legitimacy of their decisions regarding disputes are contested and
the acceptance of their decisions requires further examination.

              Process for appealing dispute rulings


Appeals to administrative authorities: Apart from cases related to inheritance, appeals processes for
other disputes have been provided for in the respective enactments. The Tehsildar may sit as the
lowest revenue court under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 and the Karnataka Land Reforms
Act, 1961. In addition to the Tehsildar, orders may be passed by higher revenue officials such as the
Assistant Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner and the Regional Commissioner in similar capacity.
The Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 allows for two sets of appeals against an original order issued
by a revenue official. First appeals against original orders by any official below the rank of Assistant
Commissioner lie with the Assistant Commissioner. An appeal against an original order by the Assistant
Commissioner lies with the Deputy Commissioner, and from the Deputy Commissioner/Regional
Commissioner to the Karnataka Land Revenue Tribunal77. Second appeals against orders passed by the
Assistant Commissioner are available with the Deputy Commissioner. In the case of appeals against




74 Panchayats in Karnataka are institutionalised and organised under the Karnataka Panchayati Raj Act, 1993
75 Supra at N. 17
76 Informal local governance institutions are not recognised under any existing law, therefore, their capacity to arbitrate disputes of any

form is not legitimate. Moreover, settlement of land-related disputes must be made through legally enforceable instruments in order to be
valid. This makes the terrain of informal dispute resolution mechanisms in land cases fall outside the ambit of land governance.
77 Section 49, Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964



                                                                                                                                    184
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



orders passed by Deputy Commissioners, the appeal lies with the Tribunal. Further, where an order
on a first appeal is passed by the Assistant Director (Settlement) or Assistant Director (Land Records),
the appeal shall lie with the Director of Survey, Settlement and Land Records. However, appeals
against orders of Joint Directors are available with the Karnataka Revenue Appellate Tribunal78.

If any member of the public is aggrieved by a Government order declaring certain lands to be state-
owned property, or an order extinguishing public rights over roads or lanes as prescribed under these
sections, he/she can institute a civil suit or file objections before the Deputy Commissioner, within a
specified period of limitation (one year and 90 days, respectively). When land has been sold due to
default in revenue payments, the defaulter or owner has the right to apply to the Deputy
Commissioner to have the sale set aside, provided that he applies within 90 days of the sale and that
the grounds for setting aside the sale are as per the Act. In addition to the detailed appellate structure,
the Act also imposes limitation periods- sixty days from the date of the order in the case of a first
appeal and ninety days from the date of the order in the case of second appeals79.

             Karnataka Revenue Appellate Tribunal


Under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 appeals against the order of a Tahsildar lie before the
Karnataka Revenue Appellate Tribunal80. This Tribunal comprises a Chairman (an officer not below the
rank of a Regional Commissioner), three district judges and two other revenue officials not below the
rank of a Deputy Commissioner81. Appeals against an order of the Civil Judge (Junior Division) lie before
the Civil Judge Senior Division82, while appeals against an order of a Court of Civil Judge Senior Division
lie before the District Court83.

             Court Appeals


In India, states’ High Courts are subordinate to the Supreme Court, District Courts are subordinate to
the relevant state High Court and all other courts (civil courts, small causes courts) are subordinate to




78 Section 50, Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964
79 Section 51, Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964
80 Section 41, Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964
81 Section 40 (2), Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964
82 Section 20, Karnataka Civil Courts Act, 1964
83 Section 19, Karnataka Civil Courts Act, 1964

                                                                                                     185
                                                                                             KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                        2014



the District Courts. The appeals process here is determined by the Code of Civil Procedure, 190884. In
addition to the subordination of courts under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the Karnataka Civil
Courts Act, 1964 further divides lower civil courts (below the rank of a District Court) into Court of the
Civil Judge Senior Division and Court of the Civil Judge Junior Division85. Therefore appeals from a
Court of Civil Judge Junior Division are available at the Court of Civil Judge Senior Division.
In addition to geographic jurisdiction, the jurisdiction of lower courts is also determined by the
pecuniary value of the suit, known as pecuniary jurisdiction86. The Civil Judge Senior Division is
empowered to take up all civil suits from the specified district, while the Court of Civil Judge Junior
Division is empowered to take up civil suits where the suit value is below Rs 50,00087. In addition to
the above set of courts, the Karnataka Small Causes Courts Act, 1964 empowers Courts of Small Causes
to take up suits on immovable property where the value of the property does not exceed Rs 25,00088.
Appeals against orders of a Court of Small Causes lie before the relevant district courts, however, in
the case of Bangalore City, the appeal lies before the High Court89.

In the case of Gram Nyayalayas, an appeal over most matters lies before the relevant District Court90.
Appeals in certain cases91 are barred under the Gram Nyayalaya Act, 2008. In addition to these
restrictions, the Act imposes a limitation period of 30 days from the date of the judgment in the case
of all appeals against judgments of a Gram Nyayalaya.




84   Section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 describes the subordination of courts in India.

85 Section 3, Karnataka Civil Courts Act, 1964
86 Section 6, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
87 Section 17, Karnataka Civil Courts Act, 1964
88 Section 8 (2), Karnataka Small Causes Courts Act, 1964
89 Section 17, Karnataka Small Causes Courts Act, 1964
90 Section 34, Gram Nyayalaya Act, 2008
91 Appeals in cases where the judgment is passed with the consent of both parties, or the value of the suit is below Rs 1000 or Rs 5000

appeals to a District Court are barred under Section 34, Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008
                                                                                                                                186
                                                                                         KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                          2014



Indicator 2: The share of land affected by pending conflicts is low and decreasing



     LGI             Dimension Description              Score         Score Description


                     Land disputes constitute a small
     2       1       proportion of cases in the legal   Not Scored    Not Scored
                     system


                     There are few long-standing
                                                                      The share of long-standing land conflicts is between 10% and 20%
     2       2       land conflicts (greater than 5     C
                                                                      of the total pending land dispute court cases.
                     years).


                                                                      A process exists to appeal rulings on land cases at high cost and the
                     There is a process for appealing
     2       3                                          C             process takes a long time/ the costs are low but the process takes a
                     dispute rulings
                                                                      long time.



Analysis

                   Volume of land disputes as propotion of cases in the formal legal system:


The current legal system provides court facilities at the panchayat, taluk, district and state levels for
the resolution of land disputes. The problem of geographic access to courts is a relatively smaller one
when compared to the high costs and delays in the formal legal system (Anderson, 2000). Such high
rates of pendency and backlog of cases prevalent in all courts across India (Kumar, 2011)92 tend to
cripple speedy disposal of land disputes. Despite these shortcomings of the legal system, a remarkably
large number of cases related to land disputes are filed before the courts each year and tend to take
years or sometimes decades before they are resolved.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

                A title insurance system that allows the purchases to be insured against fraudulent
                 transactions must be introduced to reduce the incidence of land disputes.




92 Also see “Justice Without Delay: Recommendations for Legal and Institutional Reforms in the Indian Courts” by the Centre on Public
Law and Jurisprudence, O.P. Jindal Global University, Research Paper No. 4/2011, abstract and paper available at:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1679350. Last accessed on December 30, 2013.

                                                                                                                                187
                                                                                         KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                     2014




             Long-standing land conflicts (greater than 5 years)


There have been voices advocating the establishment of special courts for the disposal land cases as
they tend form a relatively large percentage of the cases in the civil litigation system93. The
establishment of mobile rural courts94, conducting Lok Adalats95 and the use of alternative dispute
resolution methods provide some hope in speedy disposal of land disputes.

Conflicts in the formal system are resolved in a fairly timely manner across the variety of land disputes
presented in this report. In land acquisition cases the average percentage of disposal of cases in the
same year if 70.1% and in land revenue rent cases this is almost one hundred per cent. Although the
data in relation to land acquisition cases demonstrates higher rates of pendency towards the end of
the decade, the initial parts of the decade witnessed high disposal rates.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS :

         It is recommended that there be a separate tribunal established to handle land related
          disputes.

             Process for appealing dispute rulings


There are many long-standing land disputes that have not been resolved. Media reports indicate an
increasing trend in pendency of land disputes under the jurisdiction of revenue officers.96 This is also
the trend that may be observed in the data presented in the background report. Land acquisition cases
take particularly long to be disposed.

Based on the data provided on land acquisition cases, 10-20% of the total pending cases are more




93   See “Special courts for disposal of land dispute cases sought” The Hindu, September 5, 2009, available at:
http://www.hindu.com/2009/09/05/stories/2009090551830300.htm last accessed on January 1, 2014.
94
    See “Funds crunch, lukewarm response mar Gram Nyayalayas”, Times of India, May 22, 2012, New Delhi Edition available at:
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Funds-crunch-lukewarm-response-mar-Gram-Nyayalayas/articleshow/13368644.cms              last
accessed on January 1, 2014.
95 Supra at N. 18
96
    See “Principal Secretary lays stress on speedy disposal of land dispute cases” The Hindu, December 9, 2013 available at:
http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-karnataka/principal-secretary-lays-stress-on-speedy-disposal-of-land-dispute-
cases/article5438415.ece last accessed January 1, 2014. Also see “Resurvey of Government Lands in Rural Areas Planned” The New Indian
Express, December 31, 2013 available at: http://www.newindianexpress.com/states/karnataka/Resurvey-of-Govt-Lands-in-Rural-Areas-
Planned/2013/12/31/article1974418.ece last accessed on January 1, 2014.
                                                                                                                               188
                                                                   KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



than five years old.




POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

We recommend that there is clear separation of dispute resolution functions and executive functions
within the state’s revenue department. Presently, the executive officers are also burdened with
dispute resolution functions and this has resulted in an increasing number of pending cases before
these authorities.

A title insurance system that allows the purchases to be insured against fraudulent transactions must
be introduced to reduce the incidence of land disputes.




                                                                                                189
                                                                         KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014




4.9. Panel 9: Institutional Arrangements and
Policies
4.9.1. Context


           Introduction


Land governance in Karnataka involves several departments, agencies offices and officials. To a large
extent the functions of policy formulation are separated from those of implementation and arbitration
in Karnataka. However, there is less separation between the functions of implementation and
arbitration (detailed analysis of this is as part of Indicator analysis in the Section 4.9.2).

Land policy formulation takes place at higher levels of government and the legislature. While major
changes in the land policy which requires changes in the existing Acts go through the legislature, other
changes to the statute are carried out by the department headed by the minister for revenue through
the principal secretary to the Department of Revenue. Karnataka does not have a revenue board. The
implementation of the legislation, policies and programs in the land sector takes place through the
field-level offices of the revenue department. These field-level offices are organized in a complex
arrangement under three different functional areas.

           Institutional Complexity


The Revenue Department is responsible for overall land administration in the State and it deals with
land titling, land reforms and manages spatial records of the rural agricultural land. It is also functions
as the estate department of the state in which role it owns all the land which is not owned by any
other private or public entities. The Revenue Department has its offices at various levels up to the
village. It represented by the Divisional Commissioners at the divisional level, Deputy Commissioners
at the District level, Assistant Commissioners at the sub-divisional level, Tahsildars at the Taluk level
and Village Accountants at the Village Level. These officials of the Revenue Department are also
responsible for the general administration function which leaves them with very little time to devote
to land related issues.

The functions of survey, settlement and creation and management of cadastral records are
                                                                                    190
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



undertaken by a separate department within the overall supervision of Revenue Department, called
the Department of Survey, Settlement and Land Records and is headed by a Commissioner. Under a
similar administrative arrangement, land registration and valuation has been assigned to the
Department of Stamps and Registration and is headed by an Inspector General of Registration-and-
Commissioner of Stamps. The Department of Survey, Settlement and Land Records has its offices in
districts and taluks. The Department of Registration and Stamps has a network of sub-registrar’s
offices across the state where the actual land registration takes place.

Any piece of rural land that had been transacted through sale at any point after 1882 entered the land
registry system, implying that its records are maintained not only by the revenue but also by the
stamps and registration department. This duplication of institutions increases transaction costs for
landowners without providing commensurate benefits. More importantly, it introduces a major
source of tenure insecurity and even fraud because, for a variety of reasons, the records maintained
by both institutions may well be inconsistent.

In addition to the Revenue Department, the local bodies also are involved in land administration. The
urban local bodies are responsible for managing the ownership and taxation matters relating to urban
land whereas the village homestead land is under the jurisdiction of the gram panchayats.

Within the arrangement for managing urban land, Bangalore, the largest city in the State has a
separate institutional set up at least in so far as its planning and land use management are concerned.
Due to its size Bengalore has hierarchical planning agencies. There exists Bengalore Metropolitan
Region Development Authority (BMRDA) that is technically the super structure encompassing an area
of 8000 sq. km. Within the BMRDA, is the Bengalore Development Authority (BDA) as the local
planning authority for Bengalore metropolitan area. As per the existing policies, the planning carried
out by local planning authorities, has to be vetted and forwarded to the government through the
BMRDA. The BMRDA prepares a macro structure plan that outlines a broad framework for urban
expansion.

Common lands and forests are spread across diverse administrative categories, with unique local
taxonomies, and controlled by the Forest Department, Revenue Department and, to some extent, the
local Gram Panchayats. The variance in the actual physical status of the lands does not allow a neat
division of responsibilities between the Forest Department and the Revenue Department based on
the type of land in question. These complexities are only exaggerated by the absence of any rigor in

                                                                                                 191
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



the estimates of the conditions of lands disaggregated by their types. (Lele, Purushothaman and
Kashyap, 2013; Nagendra and Gokhale, 2008). Securing the rights of forest dwelling individuals and
groups requires four departments - tribal welfare, revenue, forest and panchayati raj – working in
coordination.

Several departments are involved in land acquisition too. While the Revenue Department directly
handles some kind of land acquisition especially for public purposes, land acquisition for industrial
purpose takes place through the Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board which operates under
a separate Act. Similarly, for housing purposes both the Karnataka Housing Board and the Bangalore
Development Authority acquire land, empowered by different statutes. Karnataka Highways
Improvement Project and Karnataka Bhagya Jala Nigam acquire land for roads and irrigation purposes
respectively and they are guided by their own policies relating to compensation and rehabilitation of
the land owners.

These institutional and legal/policy complexities are brought out more vividly in the indicator analysis
in the next section.




                                                                                                  192
                                                                                  KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



4.9.2. Assessment and Score


Indicator 1: Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates concerning the regulation and
management of the land sector are clearly defined, duplication of responsibilities is avoided and
information is shared as needed



 LGI        Dimension Description                   Score   Score Description


 1     1    Land         policy     formulation,    B       In situations that can entail conflicts of interest or abuse (e.g. transfers
            implementation and arbitration                  of land rights) there is some separation in the roles of policy
            are separated to avoid conflict of              formulation, implementation of policy through land management and
            interest                                        administration and the arbitration of disputes


 1     2    Responsibilities of the ministries      C       The mandated responsibilities of the various authorities dealing with
            and agencies dealing with land                  land administration issues are defined but institutional overlap with
            do     not    overlap    (horizontal            those of other land sector agencies and inconsistency is a problem.
            overlap)


 1     3    Administrative (vertical) overlap       A       Assignment of land-related responsibilities between the different
            is avoided                                      levels of administration and government is clear and non-overlapping.



 1     4    Land right and use information is       B       Information related to rights in land is available to interested
            shared by public bodies; key                    institutions and although this information is available at reasonable
            parts are regularly reported on                 cost, it is not readily accessible as the information is not maintained
            and publicly accessible                         in a uniform way.


 1     5    Overlaps of rights (based on            C       The Legal framework and procedures for land-related matters (incl.
            tenure typology) are minimal and                renewable and subsoil resources) deal with land-related matters very
            do not cause friction or dispute                differently but have functioning mechanisms for redressing overlap in
                                                            place.


 1     6    Ambiguity        in     institutional   C       Different public institutions deal with land-related matters very
            mandates (based on institutional                differently but functioning mechanisms for coordination are in place
            map) does not cause problems                    and regularly used.




Analysis
                                                                                                                            193
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



           Land policy formulation, implementation and arbitration are separated to
           avoid conflict of interest


The relevant Acts under this dimension are discussed below.

Revenue Act – Under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964 officers of the Revenue Department are
charged with the responsibility of implementing various policies pertaining to land use, taxation, rights
and ownership. The Act also ascribes certain quasi-judicial functions to officers such as the power “to
inquire into or to decide any question arising, for determination between the State Government and
any person or between parties to any proceedings”, to hold enquires and hear cases and to take
evidence, summon persons to give evidence and produce documents. Thus, particularly in the case of
the Deputy Commissioner the implementation and arbitration roles seem to overlap.

Land Policy formulations seem to be clearly distinguished from the implementation and arbitration
functions. While major changes in the land policy which requires changes Revenue Act go through the
legislature, other changes to the statute are carried out by the department headed by the minister for
revenue through the principal secretary to the Department of Revenue.

Forest Act – Under the Forest Rights Act, 2006, members of the Gram Sabha are charged with the
authority to implement various policies under the Act such as the process for determining the nature
and extent of individual or community forest rights that may be given to the forest dwelling Scheduled
Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers within the local limits of its jurisdiction by receiving claims,
consolidating and verifying them.

Whereas, according to the Act, conflicts arising from the implementation are arbitrated by three
specific committees, the Sub-Divisional Level Committee, the District Level Committee and the State
Level Monitoring Committee consisting of officers from the departments of Revenue, Forest and Tribal
Affairs of the State Government. Also, policy formulations seem to be clearly distinguished from the
implementation and arbitration functions.




Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act - This Act clearly states that the State government determines
the policies pertaining to the administration of urban land which are implemented by the Corporation
established under this Act, suggesting no conflict between policy making and implementation.
However, in the case of arbitration, matters are more complicated. While the Act at several points
                                                                                             194
                                                                          KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
     LGAF-INDIA
                  2014



refers to the involvement of the Karnataka Appellate Tribunal or district court in determining sums
payable in disputes related to action taken by the Commissioner, as well as to costs, damages,
penalties, compensation, charges, fees, rents, and expenses contributions, it also specifies that in the
case of certain disputes, for instance those arising from whether places are markets or not, the
Commissioner of the Corporation will make a reference of this to the State government for the final
decision. Thus, it appears that the Commissioner, who is charged with the responsibility of
implementing policies determined by the government, also has a role in the arbitration of certain
disputes, suggesting some overlap between the two functions. Also, the policy making functions and
arbitration functions of the State government are in conflict in some instances as described above.
However, it must be noted the constituent member of the above mentioned appellate do not overlap
with the officers of the departments under this Act.97

Bangalore Development Authority Act - According to this Act, policies related to the development of
Bangalore (involving acquisition of land) can be drawn up by the Authority but their implementation
can happen only with the prior approval of the government. Additionally, the government may make
the Authority take up any developmental scheme or work and execute it under its direction. As far as
arbitration of disputes arising from the BDA’s land policies is concerned, the Act specifies that appeals
can be made to the concerned Appellate authority. As per information published by the BDA98, the
designated First Appellate authorities for the various departments are members from the department
itself. Thus some overlap is seen in implementation and arbitration functions under this Act.

Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1973 - The Karnataka Slum Clearance Board99
established under this Act is charged with the responsibility to carry out and execute such scheme and
works as the Government may direct. As such the policy making functions under this Act seem to rest
with the government while the implementation of these policies is the responsibility of the Board. As




97
   The Chairman shall be an officer not below the rank of the Divisional Commissioner and of the remaining
members, at least two shall be District Judges, (at least one shall be) an officer of the Commercial Taxes
Department not below the rank of the Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes (hereinafter referred to as (a
Commercial Taxes member) (at-least one shall be) an officer of the Department of Co-operative not below the
rank of a Joint Registrar of Co-operative Societies (hereinafter referred to as the (a Co-operation member) and
the rest shall be officers not below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner of a district having administrative
experience)
98
   http://www.bdabangalore.org/RIAPRO.pdf
99
   Now named as Karnataka Slum Development Board
                                                                                                         195
                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



far as arbitration of disputes is concerned, the Act is clear that in cases of disputes arising from the
acquisition of land for the improvement of slum areas, the arbitrating authority is the court, where
the court shall follow the provisions of Part III of the Land Acquisition Act 1894. For disputes arising as
a result of transfer of property from the Karnataka Housing Board to the Slum Clearance Board, the
Act states that the dispute shall be referred to the decision of the Government and its decision shall
be final.

Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act - According to this Act, the Board has been entrusted
with the rights to establish land policy pertaining to acquiring and holding property, both movable and
immovable as the Board may deem necessary for the performance of any of its activities and to lease,
sell, exchange or otherwise transfer any property held by it on such conditions as may be deemed
proper by the Board. The Board is also allowed to purchase by agreement or take on lease or under
any form of tenancy any land, to erect such buildings and to execute such other works as may be
necessary for the purpose of carrying out its duties and functions. However, according to the Act,
acquisition of all land can take place only after a notification put out by the state government.

Thus, policies related to industrialization seem to come under the gamut of both the State
Government and the Board while the Board is charged with implementation of these policies.

As far as arbitration is concerned, in matters relating to demolition or alteration of unauthorized
construction in industrial areas, any person aggrieved by such an order may within thirty days of the
said order appeal to the Board, which, after hearing the parties to the appeal may either allow or
dismiss the appeal or vary any part of the said order. This suggests that the Board has been entrusted
with the powers of arbitration, suggesting overlap with its implementation functions.

            Do Responsibilities of the ministries and agencies dealing with land overlap
            (horizontal overlap)?


Arising out of the Laws and policies mentioned in this report, there appear to be instances of overlap
between the mandates of ministries and agencies which are analysed below:

Overlap between mandates of local self-govenance and statutory authorities – According to a report
published by Alternative Law Forum (2003), a conflict appears to emerge between the bodies of local
self – governance and the statutory authorities, and it revolves around the core issue relating to
control over land and planning. According to the report, this has arisen because of the incomplete

                                                                                                     196
                                                                          KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
  LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



devolution of powers to local bodies resulting in ambiguity regarding the mandate of the
constitutionally endorsed panchayats, municipalities and district/metropolitan planning committees.
Further, the introduction of the 73rd and 74th amendments bestowed certain powers on the local
governance bodies that were hitherto held by other parastatal authorities. This sets the context for
the conflicts arising out of overlapping provisions in different Acts and their statutory agencies, with
specific regard to revenue land control, regulation, usage, management and collection of revenue. i.e.
at the level of the authorities, a direct conflict between the Panchayats / Municipalities and various
authorities such as the BDA, KIADB, BMRDA, Revenue Department, etc, and at another level, the
conflicts and contradictions in overlapping provisions of the Constitution and various Acts such as the
Karnataka Panchayati Raj Act, Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, Karnataka Municipalities
Act, Land Acquisition Act, Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act, Karnataka Land Revenue Act,
Bangalore Metropolitan Regional Development Authority Act, BDA Act, Karnataka Town and Country
Planning Act, etc. Specifically, conflicts in mandate seem to arise in the domain of development plans
affecting revenue land-use change.




              Overlap between mandates of Urban Local Bodies


On certain issues, for instance the maintenance of public lands such as lakes100, there has been
confusion between the mandates of the Bangalore Development Authority (BDA), the Bruhut
Bangalore Municipal Corporation (BBMP), the Revenue Department and the Minor Irrigation
Department. Most recently, this has resulted in the BBMP refusing to take the responsibility of
maintaining 12 lakes in Bangalore stating that if a lake is less than 40 hectares, it is with the Revenue
Department. If it is more than 40 hectares, it belongs to the Minor Irrigation Department and the BDA
is the trustee of the lakes, entrusted with the task of development of the lakes. While the BBMPs own
mandate includes the development of the city which include development of water bodies.

Another area of confusion over mandates pertains to issuance of Occupancy certificates. While, the
BBMP claims it is the only civic body which is authorised to issue these certificates under the provisions




100
      See http://bangalore.citizenmatters.in/articles/bda-devlops-lakes-but-bbmp-yet-to-take-them-back
                                                                                                         197
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
  LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



of the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, the BDA claims that the state government has given
it powers to issue these certificates.101

              Administrative (vertical) overlap is avoided


There does not appear to be instances of administrative overlap between different levels of
administration in the land administration departments studied as part of this report.

              Sharing and reporting of land right and use information


For agricultural land, information pertaining to land rights is available through a computerized
database called Bhoomi. The cost of procuring a copy of the Records of Rights, Tenancy, and Crops
(RTCs) through Bhoomi kiosks is Rs. 15 which can be considered a reasonable amount for this
information.

No such information database exists for the land rights in non-agricultural land in rural and urban
areas.

Further, it has been observed that there is little communication among the offices dealing with land
records, land use, land acquisition and registration despite the fact that they all fall within the office
of the Deputy Commissioner. Thus the information on land use in both rural and urban areas is not
readily accessible as the information is not maintained in a uniform way.

              Overlaps of rights (based on tenure typology) are minimal and do not cause
              friction or dispute


The existing structure of land rights allow for the existence of overlapping of rights in so far as they
pertain to common land and natural resources, in which case they are resolved by orders passed by
local authorities. Multiple rights exist over the same plot of land to an individual or an aggregate of
individuals, insofar as certain resources in the land are deemed to vest with the state government,
while others continue to remain with the occupant of the land. This has been illustrated previously
through the right to trees under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, whereby by virtue of Section 74 and
75, the right to trees will vest in the occupant of a property, except when these trees are reserved by




101
      http://ibnlive.in.com/news/bbmp-bda-lock-horns-over-occupancy-certificates/183100-60-119.html
                                                                                                      198
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



the Government or a Survey Officer, or are standing on Government property. Further, multiple rights
over land and sub-soil resources can legally coexist. The legal regime which operate in this sphere does
not create preferential right of those who have surface rights, thus creating a regime where multiple
rights operate over the same plot of land.

Overlap of rights also occurs as a result of land being recorded both under the forest as well as the
revenue department records. For instance, it has been reported that in Kodagu district forest lands to
be mutated in favour of the Forest Department, as a result of the Supreme Court order in T.N.
Godavarman Thirumulpad vs Union of India and others, remain in an ambiguous situation, as in the
case of those mutated in the records of the Forest Department, are not removed from the records of
the Revenue Department. This creates ambiguity in the rights of both the departments’ vis-à-vis such
land. Reports mention that amid this tug-of-war and swapping of rights between the Revenue and
Forest Departments, some encroachers legitimise their holdings allegedly by managing to tamper with
RTC and other documents.

As far as complaint and redressal is concerned, the Land Revenue Act lays out the procedure to be
followed in the case of dispute usually involving the District Commissioner and Tehsildar.

           Ambiguity in institutional mandates (based on institutional map) does not
           cause problems


There is often an overlap in the institutional mandate of the Revenue and Forest Departments due to
the difficulty in classification of the regions according the actual physical status of the land in question.
We believe that it is not possible to comment on whether there are problems caused due to the
ambiguities in institutional mandates in the absence of actual data from the agencies in question and
a more thorough interaction with the various actors that interface with the land governance system
on a day-to-day basis.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

       In Karnataka, common lands and forests are spread across diverse administrative categories,
        with unique local taxonomies, and controlled by various arms of the state, including the Forest
        Department, Revenue Department and, to some extent, the local Gram Panchayats. The
        variance in the actual physical status of the lands does not allow a neat division of
        responsibilities between the Forest Department and the Revenue Department based on the

                                                                                                       199
                                                                                KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                      2014



             type of land in question. These complexities are only exaggerated by the absence of any rigor
             in the estimates of the conditions of lands disaggregated by their types.
            One single department should take care of all land records related functions which would
             reduce the dependency on multiple institutions and agencies as computerized property
             records will be real-time records obtainable from a single window, thereby, saving the citizen
             time and effort in obtaining property records.
            Keeping in view the observations made by the Second Administrative Reform Commission as
             well as our analysis of the situation in Karnataka, we recommend divesting the functions
             pertaining to land administration from the Deputy Commissioner to a separate entity at the
             district level, so that undivided attention can be given to land issues. It has been noted that
             the inability of higher officials of the state administration to monitor the work of frontline
             bureaucrats is because of their heavy burden of work, which leaves them with little time and
             energy to focus on rural affairs.

Indicator 2: Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process: policies are formulated
through a legitimate decision-making process that draws on inputs from all concerned. The legal
framework is non-discriminatory and institutions to enforce property rights are equally accessible
to all


 LGI              Dimension Description              Score   Score Description


                  Land policies and regulations              A comprehensive land policy exists or can be inferred by the existing
                  are developed in a participatory           legislation. Land policy decisions that affect sections of the
 2       1                                           B
                  manner involving all relevant              community are based on consultation with those affected but
                  stakeholders                               feedback is usually not sought or not used in making decisions.

                  Land policies address equity
                                                             Land policies incorporate equity objectives that are regularly and
                  and poverty reduction goals;
 2       2                                           B       meaningfully monitored but their impact on equity issues is not
                  progress towards these is
                                                             compared to that of other policy instruments.
                  publicly monitored

                  Land policies address ecological
                                                             Land policies incorporate some ecology and environmental
                  and environmental goals;
 2       3                                           C       sustainability objectives but these are not regularly and meaningfully
                  progress towards these is
                                                             monitored.
                  publicly monitored

                  The implementation of land
                                                             The implementation of land policy is costed, though not necessarily
                  policy is costed, matched with
 2       4                                           B       based on a comparison of expected benefits and costs. There is an
                  benefits and adequately
                                                             adequate budget, resources and institutional capacity.
                  resourced




                                                                                                                        200
                                                                            KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                  2014




             There is regular and public                Formal land institutions report on land policy implementation but in a
 2    5      reporting indicating progress in     C     way that does not allow meaningful tracking of progress across
             policy implementation                      different areas or in a sporadic way.


             Land policies help to improve
                                                        Policy is in place to improve access to and productive use of assets
             land use by low-income groups
 2    6                                           B     by poor and marginalized groups, is applied in practice, but is not
             and those who experienced
                                                        effective
             injustice


             Land policies proactively and
                                                        Policy is in place to prevent settlement in high risks areas but which
 2    7      effectively reduce future disaster   C
                                                        is not enforced.
             risk




Analysis

           Are land policies and regulations developed in a participatory manner?


In the urban region, the Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) is the planning authority for
Bangalore Metropolitan Area and it comes up with the Comprehensive Development Plan for the
region. It has been reported that with the exception of the Revised Master Plan (RMP) 2015, it had
sought public comments on every prior draft of the RMP. It is indicative of good practice by the BDA
that it has initiated the process of revising the master plan.

The policy for the formulation of rural land use arises from the procedure laid out in the Karnataka
Town & Country Planning Act, 1961 (KT&CP Act). When the planning authority begins carrying out a
survey to prepare the Outline Development Plans, Section 9, KT&CP Act, mandates them to declare
their intention to prepare such a plan, showing the boundary of the area proposed to be included in
it and a two month window exists within which a member of the public may communicate a suggestion
regarding its use, which may or may not be accepted by the planning authority. Once the State
Government returns the Master Plan to the planning authority, the authority is expected to invite
public comments for a period of 60 days, after which they may once again resubmit a plan for approval
under Section 13. The final plan is then permanently displayed in the offices of the Planning Authority.
Similarly, under Section 14A of the KT&CP Act, a proposal for change of land use from outline
development plan requires a similar process of public consultation.

It has however been contended that often the application of this procedure in practice is significantly
different from what is stated in the provisions. For instance, a report claims that during the process

                                                                                                                    201
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



of acquisition of land by the BDA and the KIADB for the Information Technology Corridor in Bangalore,
there were no consultations with the local communities and its representative bodies including the
Gram Panchayat in any process. This includes the choice of area for the IT Corridor and the preparation
of the report itself. There was also no participation elicited from the community with regard to the
lands being acquired / notified for various companies. It would be possible to judge the efficacy of the
procedure mentioned above in the presence of actual data from the relevant agencies regarding the
comments received from the public to evaluate whether the ideas sought to be conveyed found
expression in the final plan.

           Land policies and equity and poverty reduction goals


As captured at several junctures in this report land Policies address equity and poverty reduction goals
in several ways, be it through regularization of unauthorized occupation of land in rural and urban
areas, construction of housing under state and centrally sponsored schemes, improvement of slums,
provisioning of homestead lands, easing access to land records which in turn help faster access to
loans and other aid.

Monitoring the implementation of the policy has been included into the policy documents of each of
these initiatives which includes third party monitoring including NGOs, activists and residents. Further,
the Right to Information Act allows for information regarding details of these policies to be made
available to the public.

On the third aspect, data determining the correlation between policies and human development
indices is hard to find, and thus nothing conclusive can be said about this parameter. However,
improvement in the lives of people in general terms as a result of implementation of these policies is
spoken about in government documents such as the reports from the Planning Commission.

           Land policies and ecological and environmental goals


The Karnataka Land Revenue Act, clearly establishes the policy around laying out of ‘Green Belts’
around cities/towns in order to ensure that the urban population in Karnataka is adequately served
by infrastructural facilities and does not unnecessarily run the risk of environmental hazards. The Act
further prevents unauthorized development or construction in green belt areas. Section 95 (3B) of the



                                                                                                   202
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
  LGAF-INDIA
                2014



Act also specifically prohibits the Deputy Commissioner from granting permission for conversion of
land in the green belt for any other purpose.

However, at present various residential layouts are formed in the green belt. Reports point to certain
loopholes within the existing land and tax policies, which are exploited in order to go ahead with such
constructions. Reports also mention that the relevant authorities do not take adequate action against
such misuse of green belts leading to a proliferation of such practices.102

Other Acts such as the Forest Rights Act recognize “critical wildlife habitat” as such areas of National
Parks and Sanctuaries where it has been specifically and clearly established, case by case, on the basis
of objective environmental criteria, that such areas are required to be kept as inviolate for the
purposes of wildlife conservation as may be determined and notified by the Central Government in
the Ministry of Environment and Forest.

The state of Karnataka was one of the first states to issue a Government Order in 1993 for the
implementation of the programme for the protection and management of degraded forests, in
pursuance of National Forest Policy, 1988, which for the first time highlighted the urgent need to
protect and preserve forests for their own sake with the necessary involvement of village
communities in the regeneration of degraded forest lands.

The Bangalore Development Authority Act calls for the constitution of an Urban Art Commission
charged with the responsibility of advising the government on restoration and conservation of urban
design and of the environment in the development areas.

The Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 aims at providing regulation of planned growth
of land use and development with a view to ensuring desirable standards of environmental health and
hygiene and prevents the regularization of development in areas covered by the Coastal Zone
Regulations of the Ministry of Environment and Forest.

Determining the impact of these policies would require a lot of data which is unavailable at the
moment.




102
  http://www.manupatrafast.com/articles/PopOpenArticle.aspx?ID=e5fe7675-d431-4839-a619-
f5340f5877e1&txtsearch=Subject:%20Property
                                                                                                  203
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



          Is implementation of land policy costed, matched with benefits and adequately
          resourced?


There is often a budget prepared, based upon which funds are allocated to a particular governmental
agency by either the state or central government. However, it is not clear whether the land policies
that are currently being implemented have undergone a rigorous process of cost-benefit analysis.

The Karnataka Revenue Act makes mention of the process of costing and the officers involved for the
implementation of various policies under it. For instance, for the preparation or revision of maps or
plan required for in connection with any record or register, the Act states that any Revenue Officer of
a rank not lower than that of an Assistant Commissioner or of a Survey Officer may assess the cost of
the preparation or revision of such map or plan and all contingent expenses including the cost of
clerical labour and supervision, and such costs shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear or
land revenue. Similarly, in the case of revenue demand through sale of property, the Act prescribes
the form and contents of a notice of demand, the costs recoverable for such notice and the officers
by whom such notices shall be issued. The Act makes specific the instances when costs have to be
borne by parties interested in benefitting from the land policies of the government. For instance, in
the case of construction of a water course through a neighbour’s property, the Act mentions that in
the event of removal or discontinuance of water course the person taking the water shall fill in and
restore the land to its original condition at his own cost. Other instances in the Act include in the case
of sale of forfeited property, the cost of the removal of any encroachment under this section shall be
recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.

In the case of urban development schemes, the Bangalore Development Act clearly specifies that the
Authority in charge of implementing such schemes must complete plans and estimate of the cost of
executing the scheme. Further, the BDA Act states if the estimated cost of executing the scheme as
altered exceeds, by a greater sum than five per cent the estimated cost of executing the scheme as
sanctioned, the Authority shall not, without the previous sanction of the Government, proceed to
execute the scheme as altered. The Act also clearly states the existence of a Development Fund and
the items to be credited to such fund, which include the rents, profits, and sale proceeds of all lands,
buildings and other property vested or vesting in or acquired by the Authority under this Act.

The Karnataka Slum Areas Act specifies that the Slum Board in determining whether at a reasonable
expense the slum area or part thereof can be improved or the building rendered fit for human

                                                                                                    204
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



habitation, regard shall be had to the estimated cost of the works of improvement of the slum area or
part thereof or of the works necessary to render the building fit for human habitation and the
estimated value that the slum area or part thereof or the building will have when such works are
completed.

The Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act has a specific section detailing what constitutes the
cost of a Town planning scheme by the Planning Authority. This includes all sums payable by the
Planning Authority under the provisions of this Act, which are not specifically excluded from the costs
of the scheme, as well as all sums spent or estimated to be spent by the Planning Authority in the
making and in the execution of the scheme, all sums payable as compensation for land reserved or
designated for any public purpose or purpose of the Planning Authority and all legal expenses incurred
by the Planning Authority in the execution of the scheme.

          Is there regular and public reporting indicating progress in policy
          implementation?


Progress in the implementation of major central policies is usually publically available. For instance,
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Government of India, provides a status report on implementation of the
Forest Rights Act, 2006 which includes a status update on Karnataka. This report is freely accessible to
the public via the Ministry’s website. Similarly for urban housing policies described in this report such
as Indira Awaas Yojana status reports are published by the Ministry of Rural Development which
includes specific information on Karnataka. For Slum housing policies like Rajiv Awaas Yojana, the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation publishes regular status reports. Various agencies
and ministries release annual reports which allow for the public to gain awareness of the measures
taken by them. However public reporting of policies and programmes implemented by the state
government are hard to find.




          Land policies and land use by vulnerable groups


Karnataka’s land governance policy since the 1970s has been geared toward the abolition of the
system of tenancy so that persons from a socioeconomically weaker background can have greater
access to landholding. Further, amendments in the land revenue legislation have been aimed at
regularizing the unauthorized encroachment and farming upon by individuals who are from a
                                                                                                   205
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
  LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



disadvantaged background in the economic sense. The Karnataka Land Grant Rules 1969 are also
designed to benefit individuals from the backward castes and classes. The policy stated therein
stipulates eligibility based upon existing income and current state of land-holding by an individual.

However, as mentioned in this report, cases of concealed tenancy continue to exist in the state. It has
also been reported that big landlords also retain vast lands under their ownership by dividing their
family into a number of ‘units’ for technical purposes and also by fraud (benami) transactions of landed
property. Overall, the concealed tenancy rates in Karnataka have been estimated to be between two
to eight percent103 of holdings as opposed to the national estimated average of 15 to 25 percent
(Deshpande, 2003).

In the case of securing rights of Forest dwellers, while the Forest Rights Act goes a long way in
establishing the procedure and extent of rights, the implementation of these policies in securing life
and livelihoods of poor tribal forest dwellers has been reported to be varied. For instance, tribal
leaders in the State have alleged that tribal people were not given access to collect minor forest
produce, rights over water bodies to allow fishing and cultivation, though the Act gave them the right
to do so.

Similarly in the case of implementation of housing policies in urban areas, particularly polices related
to slum improvements, it has been observed that while new policies such as RAY attempt for the first
time to guarantee tenure to slum dwellers, it has been observed that on the ground, the goal of tenure
security is lost to the goal of containing beneficiaries even as biometric identification does not prevent
ineligible beneficiaries from being included, while adding another step to the already long project cycle
implemented by ULBs (Kamath, 2012).

            Do land policies proactively and effectively reduce future disaster risk?


Given the fact that Karnataka has amongst the highest proportion of drought prone areas (79%) and
nearly the lowest extent of replenishable ground water resources (154.2 M ha M/Yr), the state has
launched the Karnataka National Watershed Development Project for Rainfed Areas in 1992104, the




103
    Development in Karnataka (2007), Planning Commission Government of India, Academic Foundation New
Delhi
104
    http://watershed.kar.nic.in/Impofws.htm
                                                                                                    206
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



objective of which was to ensure the shift from treating entire watersheds at once, to treating sub-
watersheds with active farmer partnership and the building capacity.

However, there is no integrated approach to the identification of areas which are risk-prone, and there
are no coordinated attempts to discourage human settlement in those areas. While Karnataka’s land
policies are designed keeping ecological sustainability in mind, there is no program in place to ensure
effective management of areas which are disaster prone.




                                                                                                 207
                                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
                   2014




5.1 Policy Matrix
KARANATAKA POLICY MATRIX

Issues                                   recommendations                                Responsible       Monitoring
                                                                                        agency            indicator
1. Rural land records are not all        1.1 Identify & implement on a priority         Revenue dept.     % of records
updated regularly, may lack spatial          basis,     cost-effective   ways      of                     verified     and
reference and are presumptive                verification & updating textual                              updated
                                             records based on ground reality                              % of records
Rural land records are available in a    1.2 Prepare guidelines and processes to                          identified     on
digitized format allowing for easy           have a cadastre for property records                         maps
and low-cost access, also on-line        1.3 Develop and implement mechanism                              % of area mapped
(Bhoomi since 2000). However,                for continued updating of Bhoomi                             with land holder
manual/paper        records     were         textual and spatial records, also to                         identified
digitized without verification and           overcome need for special drives/                            % of area mapped
only 75% (or 12 million records) are         mission modes. Develop a                                     with land holder
mapped.                                      comprehensive program to                                     identified having
To update all existing records in the        accomplish this in a specified and                           documentation of
data base and develop a robust land          realistic time frame.                                        tenure (gender
information system covering all          1.4 Assess the resource requirements for                         disaggregated)
aspects of land governance GoK will          record maintenance, verification and
launch upgraded version of Bhoomi.           resurvey, and requirements for
                                             sustainability; Make all land records
Informal or undocumented tenancy             related services available at the
is frequent although the Karnataka           village level.
Land Reforms Act-1974 has banned         1.5 Simplify procedures for correction of
tenancy. Informal tenants have no            Record of Tenancy Rights and
security of tenure nor can they              Cultivation (RTC)
access agricultural credit or various    1.6 Develop procedure for creating
schemes of the government                    ownership records for gramthana
                                             (village habitation) land on the lines
                                             of urban property ownership
                                             documents and amending the
                                             Karnataka Land Revenue Act to
                                             enable panchayats to manage them
2. Urban land records are lacking        2.1 Establish and complete a common            Revenue           % of area mapped
for most properties and there is             spatial data infrastructure focusing                         with land holder
much fraud around transactions.              on maintenance and continuous              Department,       identified having
Many constructions are in violation          updating of textual and spatial urban      Urban             documentation of
with urban regulations;                      records, while using existing              Development       tenure (gender
No cadastre is maintained for urban          information as much as possible            Department        disaggregated)
properties and tax receipts (khata       2.2 Develop and implement mechanism
registers) issued by local bodies are        for expanding (UPOR), set priorities       Urban     Local
therefore used as property records.          and consider phasing to speed up           Bodies
Fraudulent,       duplicate       and        urban tenure security and develop a
overlapping land titles in urban             comprehensive program to
areas lead to conflicts and litigation       complete all cities in Karnataka in a
in private land and grabbing of              specified and realistic time frame
public land.                             2.3 Define workflows and responsibilities
Bangalore completed for two-third            for urban land management, records
of the 1.6 million properties                maintenance, building permits and
verification and validation of geo           monitoring/enforcement, re-
referenced coordinates and in                engineer where possible
progress for remaining properties.
                                                                                                                      208
                                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara               2.4 Review laws and systems in place for
Palike (BBMP) enables citizens to             formalization of unauthorised
locate their property on Google map           constructions, ensure compliance
using the Property ID; 2.28 million           with plan regulations and building
(18%) non-agricultural properties             by-laws and re-engineer where
are identifiable                              possible
In four cities individual property
records are created since 2011
(Urban Property Ownership Records
- UPOR), using a PPP model to create
an accurate record of both spatial
and textual ownership data and
provide speedy services to urban
residents. Out of 682387 properties
in these 4 cities, 13% draft property
cards are ready and 5% final. In the
2nd phase UPOR project will expand
to Bangalore
Building regulations are not
respected, while unauthorized
constructions may be regularised
(Sect.76-FF of KTCP Act)
3     Registration of transactions is     3.1 Review and pursue integration of         The              Ratio of textual to
      sometimes marred by errors              RORs,      registration    transfers,    Department of    spatial records
      and fraud                               encumbrances and pending court           Survey,          Ratio            of
Both urrban and rural transactions            cases for agricultural lands and         Settlement       Registered      vs.
are registered at the office of the           enable for urban lands by expanding      and      Land    mutated
sub-registrar       (except       lease       UPOR to end duplication of records,      Records          transactions
transactions).      A     well-defined        reduce fraud, and to evolve a robust
procedure exists to achieve                   land information system.                 The
synchronization between various           3.2 Develop legal and institutional          Department of
types of registers (ROR in Bhoomi             context for e-governance with            Stamps     and
with the land registration database           citizens having opportunity to apply     Registration
in KAVERI) and departments to                 for registration and uploading of
ensure the integrity of agricultural          documents through web based              Urban    Local
land records. But, there is a gap of          application.                             Bodies
about 15-20 years between textual          .
and spatial data synchronization,
which is now addressed via pre-
mutation sketch by a licensed
surveyor      as      a    mandatory
requirement for registration or
partition of land (Integrated
Mutation Podi). Integration of
Bhoomi with banks and cooperative
institutions for efficient verification
of records and determining liabilities
on the land has been set up. All
public restriction (15% of all ROR)
and encumbrance created on RoRs
are printed and can be viewed
online. There is no provision for
updating liabilities on ROR for loans
obtained from private financers.
Measures are afoot to link Bhoomi
data base with courts so that the
encumbrances would also reflect
any pending court cases with regard

                                                                                                                      209
                                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



to the land parcel in question. Urban
Property     Ownership       Records
(UPOR) have provision for recording
encumbrances on the property
records.

4. Strengthen effectiveness of           4.1 Review efficiency and effectiveness         .Revenue         % of area mapped
public land redistribution for               of policies on land distribution and        Department       with land holder
eligible poor and the actual                 balance between demands of equity,                           identified having
possession for granted public land           ecology and growth;                                          documentation of
Karnataka state has policies to          4.2 Identify      available      land     for                    tenure (gender
promote equity in land holdings and          redistribution as well as the number                         disaggregated)
distribution (land grants to                 of land- or homeless who could                               % land less ness/
marginalized community, joint                benefit from land distribution.                              homestead less
registration of land in the names of     4.3 More systematic distribution of land
both husband and wife etc.) but              among the landless and houseless
implementation of most of these              people, while preventing
policy measures can be improved.             unauthorized occupation of the
Poor      people    were      granted        government land
government land without proper           4.4 Develop effective steps to ensure
titles and adequate recording or             effective possession and use of land
mapping is not available for rural           that has been redistributed to
settlement land or gramthana                 eligible marginal groups
lands, with tax receipts constituting    4.5 Monitoring of compliance with
the sole documentary evidence of             conditions of land grant allocation
ownership.                                   and confiscation of granted land
There are restrictions on the sale of        which has not been utilized for the
granted land, particularly for SC/STs,       purpose specified at the time of
who need to obtain permission,               grant.
which is time consuming and may          4.6 Review restrictions on the right to
lead     to   various     kinds     of       alienate land granted to SC/STs S
malpractices.                            4.7 Government may buy back land from
                                             SC/STs willing to sell their land so that
                                             the government may distribute such
                                             land among the landless SC/ST
                                             families.
5. legal and administrative                  5.1 Review effectiveness of existing        Revenue          Share of RORs
opportunities to enhance women’s                   policies       and         explore    Department       held by women
access to land are not used                        opportunities for amendments                           Share of records
sufficiently                                       to enhance women’s access to                           issued to women
Women constitute over 18 per cent                  land                                                   (under    various
of total RORs in the state. Data to          5.2 Introducing ‘gender’ parameter                           land distribution
determine what proportion of                       to help tracking of progress with                      schemes)-share
women owners is not recorded is                    respect to women’s land rights.                        of women holding
not available.                               5.3 Ensure that Urban Property                               land)
Amendments        to     the  JFPM                 Ownership Records identify
programme in 1996 sought to                        women property owners as a
introduce gender equity by                         separate category
providing      co-membership     of
spouses      to    Village   Forest
Committees
6. Lack of clarity in assignment of      6.1 Comprehensive            identification,    Forest           % of land mapped
institutional responsibility for             reclassification, survey and boundary       department       identified       as
forest land prevents assigning               demarcation of forests, common              Revenue          CPR/public land +
ownership                                    land, pastures and other non-forest         department.      management
There is a lack of clarity on legal          common pool resources)                      Panchayati Raj   responsibilities
recognition of forests. Common land      6.2 Identify and codify the rights of           Department       clearly identified
is not properly identified and               various indigenous and non-                                  (CPR or not)

                                                                                                                        210
                                                                                   KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



responsibility for protection is not          indigenous groups to the forest and      for Gramthana
clearly assigned (forest laws or              non-forest commons; clarify rights of    land
revenue laws). There is mismatch              mining minor minerals and sand
between land records and the              6.3 Clarify policy for their protection,
reality on the ground. Rights of              management and use. Define
community         over      non-forest        responsibilities   and     workflows
common resources and fishing                  involved in forest /CPR land
ponds are not clearly defined, nor            management and assignment of
are codified.                                 ownership rights, clarify overlapping
Much common land is encroached,               jurisdictions between the forest and
which sometimes even regularized.             revenue departments and re-
The worst hit are permanent                   engineer where possible; synchronize
pastures, which are not protected             records maintenance between Forest
under the Forest Conservation                 Department        and        Revenue
Act, 1980 The 2013 Status report              Department.
implementation Forest Rights Act-         6.4 Extend coverage of Joint Forest
2006 shows that community rights              Planning Management program,
constitute only 2% of total                   review low number of approved
applications (i.e. 3,080 community            community claims and increase
claims as opposed to 1,65,638                 awareness on formalizing group
individual claims) and only 90 such           rights under the Forest Rights Act,
titles have been granted under FRA.           2006
Joint      Forest       Planning     &
Management (JFPM) established
5,200 VFCs covering around
3,40,000 ha of degraded forests.
But, JFPM excludes forests with
larger canopy cover, assessed
wastelands and other forest lands
under the control of the Revenue
Department, and forested lands
under “individual access” systems
7.      Urban development and             7.1 Review existing urban planning           Urban           % of urban land
expansion is unplanned and                    practice of para-state planning          Development     with      claimant
reactive;       informal        tenure        authorities, increase involvement of     Department      identified/
regularization improves equity but            elected      local government and        Urban           documented
can undermine planning and                    streamline        urban     planning,    Development     evidence
promote encroachment.                         implementation                           Authorities
Urban development is unplanned in         7.2 Review and assess the resource           Bangalore
practice. Although a planning                 requirements for town planning;          Metropolitan
machinery is in place, the                    urban development and design             Regional
stipulations are routinely flouted. In        strategy     to    address   capacity    Development
smaller towns there is no land use            constraints;                             Authority
planning at all. 48 cities have city      7.3 Establish common jurisdiction and        Urban Local
survey plans, but these were                  geographical coverage for all govt.      Bodies
developed in the 1970s and are not            and parastatal agencies dealing with
geo-referenced.                               urban planning and service delivery
National schemes like the Rajiv               and improve coordination
Awas Yojna (RAY) lay down                 7.4 Simplification of rules governing the
guidelines for providing security of          permission            of         land
tenure to slum dwellers, but                  conversion/change in use and narrow
implementation by urban local                 the discretion of government officials
bodies in is ineffective. The process         in authenticating such changes.
of notification based on duration of      7.5 Develop and maintain databases that
occupancy and size of settlements is          allow for routine and effective
not clearly defined, ad hoc, and              monitoring of land use restrictions
giving rise to political manipulations.       enforcement and protection of the
                                              greenbelt

                                                                                                                    211
                                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



Informal urban settlements on             7.6 Systematic assessment of housing
government land were regularized              stock with tenure types and develop
in 1970, 1997 and 1999 for bona fide          workable plan for providing low-cost
landless        persons.        Similar       housing
amendments            are         being   7.7 Review policy of regularization of
contemplated once again, but which            unauthorized construction and urban
can be abused easily for land                 development, including use e-
grabbing,      while     post     facto       SWATHU, and re-engineer where
regularization undermines urban               possible
planning. The High Court of
Karnataka (Writ Petition NO:
12278/2007) has ordered to stop
registration of illegal properties and
use      e-SWATHU        (an     online
monitoring system to prevent illegal
occupation and registration)
8. Public lands not properly                  8.1 Identify, survey and prepare           Revenue          Share of land in
protected nor managed effectively                 records for the remaining public       Department       different
and land use planning is weak;                    lands, and establish unified           Panchayati Raj   categories
Transfer of public land to private                system for land possessed by           Department       mapped       with
investors does not always serve                   different State / Central              for Gramthana    ownership      and
growth and contribute to inequity                 Government Departments and             land             use rights clearly
and conflict                                      Public Sector Corporations.            Karnataka        assigned
In Karnataka, according to the                    Create web portal to make this         Public   Land    No. disputes filed
records 23 per cent total area is                 information available to the           Corporation      over          land
public lands (115 lakh acres) of                  public.                                                 acquisition
which 4110425 acres is used as                8.2 Develop State Land Use and             Town     and
commons. These data do not reflect                zoning policy for rural and urban      Country
reality on the ground as the                      land. Identify viable land for         Planning
diversion of public and common                    distribution to poor and               Department
land is not properly documented or                industrial areas. Create a digital
records are not updated following                 repository of spatial data with
transfer of public land to private                geo referential co-ordinates for
purposes.      Encroachments        are           all agricultural lands so that land
estimated at 10% and difficult to                 parcels can be identified and
recover in the absence of a clear                 located easily both on satellite
policy and appropriate records (of                imagery and physically and land
1302241       acres     detected     as           use changes tracked
encroachments, 8% is recovered in             8.3 Develop clear policy for public
2014 and 57% held up in various                   lands management and their
court cases)                                      disposal, strengthen Karnataka
Rural Land Use planning is virtually              Public Land Corporation and
absent and there is no institutional              obtain Presidential clearance for
capacity     to     implement       the           the Karnataka Land Grabbing
provisions of the Karnataka Town                  (Prohibition) Bill 2011.Protect
and Country Planning Act in rural                 remaining public land and assign
areas There is ad hoc diversion of                responsibilities                 for
common land for housing and                       implementation and monitoring
commercial purposes, a lack of                    in view of future public
scientific basis for deciding the land            requirement of government
requirement for industries. Justified             land and ecological and
restrictions on rural land use and                economic        importance        of
conversion are weakly enforced and                common land resources.
there is no proper mechanism to               8.4 Review        and       streamline
monitor compliance conditions                     responsibilities and procedures
imposed on land conversion and                    for public lands and assess
other rules and regulations.                      resource requirements for every
                                                  department having public land

                                                                                                                       212
                                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



Karnataka       Industrial      Areas               and legal responsibility for
Development Board (KIADB) is the                    safeguarding public property,
agency which acquires and transfers                 improve coordination.
land for private purpose. The                  8.5 Ensure that KIADB consults with
disposal of public land for                         the     jurisdictional    planning
investment has often become                         authorities, and strict checks on
controversial as sometimes land is                  de-notification of land identified
allocated in violation of rules                     for acquisition
(around acquisition, compensations,            8.6 Establish policy and legal
transfer) and increasingly sold, while              framework to recover and
mechanisms to monitor compliance                    restore      of      Govt     lands
of conditions imposed for the use                   fraudulently settled with private
and alienation of such land are weak                persons. Use fencing to ensure
.                                                   that any encroachment on them
                                                    is publicly visible.
                                               8.7 Develop clear guidelines for
                                                    compensation         to    prevent
                                                    discretion
                                               8.8 Develop mechanism to monitor
                                                    whether land acquired and
                                                    transferred is actually used for
                                                    the destined use. Regular
                                                    publication of transfers and
                                                    lease/rent payment, which also
                                                    allows follow-up Consider third
                                                    party monitoring to ensure
                                                    compliance        of    contractual
                                                    obligations by investor and
                                                    grievance mechanisms
9. Improve tax collection and            9.1 Identify and publicize revenue               The              % Property tax
adjust land valuation procedures         potential vs. actual collection for all major    Department of    collection/
to reflect real values                   cities;                                          Stamps     and   potential      by
Urban tax collection is around 70-       9.2 Review area-specific valuation of            Registration     municipalities
80% while in rural areas it is around    properties and alternatives of property-
20 to 25 per cent. For local bodies      specific valuation for efficiency and better
property tax has become major            compliance; develop automated tools and          Local Bodies
source of income.                        use GIS techniques for scientifically
A well-established process for           determining property valuation.
property valuation exists. Various       9.3 Review cost to government of
sources are used to get the market       exemption of taxes for agricultural and
value of the property and fixing         non-agricultural lands, such as to various
guidance value. A Capital Value          institutions
Based property taxation system           9.4 Review and streamline procedures for
combined with GIS - Property Tax         tax      collection       assess     resource
Information System and MIS of all        requirements to further improve the
properties is introduced and             administrative capacity;
computerized for efficient tax
management; This also improves
transparency in property tax levy
and collection. The Karnataka
Valuation      and     e-Registration
Programme (Kaveri) started In 2002.
Despite reduction in rate of stamp
duty on conveyance from 10% to 8%
and Registration fee from 2% to 1%,
there is an overall increase in tax
revenue as the Kaveri system
calculated the valuation of property

                                                                                                                       213
                                                                                       KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
                    2014



automatically,     eradicating    the
discretionary     power     of    the
Registering officer. Tax exemption is
subjective     and     not   publicly
displayed for scrutiny. GoK has not
studied the costs of collection of
taxes making it difficult to
determine the efficiency of the
system.
10. Enhance effectiveness of               10.1 Develop            scheme            for   The Karnataka   For        various
dispute resolution mechanisms and               categorization/recording of disputes       High Court      courts/ instances
develop monitoring capacity                     for all courts/instances so as to allow                    & categories of
Land disputes form a high                       identification                        of   Law             disputes
proportion of cases before the                  legislative/regulatory     bottlenecks,    Department      -    Level of
courts and are also seen to clog the            type of land dispute cases that are                             pending land
formal legal system as they                     increasing; review efficacy of the Lok                          related
generally are not disposed of                   Adalat system;                                                  disputes
quickly. Land acquisition cases filed      10.2 Include separate category for land-                        -    No. of cases
in the last decade have increased               related cases in the data base of                               treated;
substantially compared to revenue               pending court cases for monitoring.                        -    Length
disputes and have a higher disposal        10.3 Review causes for slow disposal and
rate. A large number of cases remain            streamline procedures and identify
pending at the Tahsildar level. The             steps towards speedy disposal of
state is mandated (since 1987) to               cases, including special tribunals
clear the backlog in courts through        10.4 Review       and    assess    resource
Lok Adalats                                     requirements          to       increase
                                                effectiveness and efficiency of
                                                dispute resolution system
                                           10.5 Expedite presidential clearance for
                                                Karnataka Land Grabbing (Prohibition
                                                Bill) 2011, which provides for setting
                                                up of special courts to try land
                                                grabbing cases.
11. Revision of Legislative and            10.1 Consider creating a single land code
institutional      framework         to         which covers all aspects of land
eliminate outdated and ineffective              administration
sections, and update specific              10.2 Consider establishment of separate
sections; and improve institutional             land administration department
coordination,       efficiency      and         responsible for managing all kinds of
effectiveness                                   non-forest lands – both rural an
Karnataka has a strong legal and                urban.
institutional framework but there is       10.3 Review restrictions on purchasing
a multiplicity of laws and lack of a            and owning agricultural land and
single land code which covers all               eliminate those that do not serve any
aspects of land administration.                 useful purpose and improve
Rights over private agricultural land           enforcement of others that continue
are subject to restrictions under               to be justified
various provisions of the Karnataka        10.4 Review Transfer of Properties Act
Land Reforms Act (concealed                     1882 to put in place provisions for
tenancy, restrictions on purchase of            submitting ownership document by
agriculture      land      by      non-         the seller before allowing registration
agriculturists,     land       ceilings,   10.5 Review, rationalize and streamline
procedure individualisation of                  the administrative structure for land
rights, restrictions on leasing,                administration; reduce discretions at
regularization           unauthorised           all levels and inventory of resource
occupation poor, use of non-                    requirements         and      resource
documentary evidence, adverse                   availability.
possession) but some of these

                                                                                                                        214
                                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
                   2014



provisions may have to be reviewed        10.6 Put in place decision support tools,
as agriculture and land markets have           using monitoring data from land
changed.                                       information systems and other
There is horizontal institutional              required data to automate the
overlap as land management is                  generation of reports to inform
shared by at least four departments            decision making
and a number of agencies. Capacity        10.7 Improve capacity             in land
at all levels of land administration is        governance”      of      the    State
lacking. Land bureaucracy lacks                Administrative Training Institutes
proper training and motivation,                (ATI) and availability of high quality
while vacancies are not filled                 trainers
regularly. The revenue department
is burdened also with a wide range
of general administration functions
and this has affected the efficiency
of land administration.Shortage of
land surveyors resulted in spatial
data remaining not updated over a
long period of time




                                                                                                         215
                                                                     KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014




5.2. Best Practices
          BHOOMI


Bhoomi, a land record management system implemented by Government of Karnataka with National
Informatics Centre as technical partner is a good practice in the arena of land records management.
Under this project, the revenue department, beginning in 2002, has computerized 20 million textual
records (RTCs) of 6.7 million farmers in the state. Previously, farmers were solely dependent on Village
Accountant (Village Level functionary of Revenue Department in Karnataka) to get a copy of the record
of Rights, Tenancy and Cultivation and Crop Inspection (RTC). There were delays and harassment as
bribes had to be paid. With the introduction of Bhoomi manual records have been invalidated through
amendment to Karnataka Land Revenue Rules 1964. Any changes to record of rights now happens
through online mutation application under Bhoomi. On approval of mutation by Revenue Inspector
on this online application, transfer of entries from registers of mutation are transferred automatically
to record of rights there by updating the Record of Rights instantaneously. Official cost of mutation
for per survey number is Rs 35 only which is very nominal and definitely less than 0.5% of property
value.


Further, copies of textual records under Bhoomi are easily available through 203 taluk kiosks and
about 1000 rural tele centres called Atalji Jana Snehi kendras (AJSK). Record of Rights are available
for Rs. 10.00 and all other land related documents such as mutation extract, status report on mutation,
khatha extract, Record of Rights form -5, Record of Rights form-6, Scanned Tippan, Scanned served
notice, scanned mutation register extract etc., are available for Rs. 15.00 each.This has removed
uncertainty that existed in manual system for access to records and has also reduced time and cost
for farmers. Bhoomi has generated about 2250 million in the form of user charges since 2000. As a
result, Karnataka is one of the few states in the India where the land records registry is financially
sustainable through the fees collected. Fees collected are used for purchase of infrastructural
equipment such as computers, as well as to meet certain other operational costs. Even technical
manpower at state and district level which is outsourced from private firms is funded using fees
collected under this project.



                                                                                                  216
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



As part of Bhoomi, the Online mutation application handles all type of mutation so that no manual
intervention in updating land records database is needed. Workflow based user-friendly software has
been designed and developed by National Informatics Centre, Bangalore has bio-metric
authentication to take care of non-repudiation and scanning interface to scan important documents
as evidence for electronic transaction. PKI (Public Key Infrastructure) enabled BHOOMI database and
application with integration of digital signatures is in place to adhere to IT Act 2000. On an average
BHOOMI software handles more than 0.1 million mutation a month. About 9,000 Village Accountants,
800 Revenue Inspectors, 203 Sheristedars, 1000 Operators-cum-Village Accountants, 203 Tahasildars
and 52 Assistant Commissioners work on the system based on clear-cut roles and privileges given to
them



Further BHOOMI has implemented all the provisions of section 129 of Karnataka Land Revenue Act
1964 wherein revenue officer after making entry in mutation register, post up a complete copy of the
entry (form-12 as generated by BHOOMI) in a conspicuous place in the chavadi (village community
Centre) and shall give issue intimation (form-21 as generated by BHOOMI) to all persons appearing
from the Record of Rights or Register of Mutations to be interested in the mutation, and to any other
person whom he has reason to believe to be interested therein. BHOOMI provides for raising
objection as facilitated in the act and if objection is raised, case will be taken into dispute register for
hearing the affected parties before taking final call. On approval of mutation by Revenue Inspector on
BHOOMI, transfer of entries from registers of mutation are transferred automatically to record of
rights thereby updating the Record of Rights instantaneously thus eliminating inconsistencies.

Significant achievement of Bhoomi is in the electronic integration with stakeholders like survey
department, registration department, land acquiring bodies and Banks and financial institutions. The
implementation of such integrations have resulted in reducing / removing human discretion and
streamlined the various land records administration activities making Records of Right current with
respect to various activities happing in the external environment pertaining land records. Some
examples of such good practices initiated by the Government in Karnataka are below:

Integration of Bhoomi with the Land Survey - this process has resulted in the creation of software
called Mojani, which facilitates the creation of pre-mutation sketch by licensed private surveyors.
MOJANI uses the BHOOMI database at the backend and is fully integrated with it for creation of any


                                                                                                      217
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



sketch. This integration has been reported to not only help the Government and citizens but also help
in employment of rural youths numbering about 3500.

Integration of Bhoomi with Kaveri – this integration has resulted in bridging the gap in the availability
of accurate information at the time of registration with respect to agricultural land. The KAVERI system
of the Stamps and Registration department now electronically talks to the BHOOMI system and
ensures that the seller is indeed owner of the property as per the BHOOMI database. Soon after the
transaction is over the extent in BHOOMI database of the seller gets decreased ensuring that he
cannot sell more than what he owns or that he cannot sell the same piece of land to others.
Immediately after the transaction is over in Sub-registrar office a mutation transaction is started in
BHOOMI system automatically as all the required data for starting of such transaction is available due
to electronic linkages between the two systems. Citizens are also sent an SMS automatically as their
transactions pass various phases/stages in the mutation process in BHOOMI system.

Integration with Banks and Co-operative Institutions – the integration between Bhoomi and bank
and co-operative institutions has led to a reduction in the time taken to service requests for changes
to the RTCs resulting from either pledge or release of lands in the process of acquiring farm credit.
Through this integration a facility for banks and co-operative institutions to raise requests to the
Revenue Department for pledge or release over the internet has been put in place. The request
contains all the parameters to initiate the transaction in BHOOMI automatically. Banks are also
benefitted because they can access the land records database for confirming ownership, extents
owned by the farmer, other liabilities that farmer has and also monitor the status of requests raised
by them. Analyses also shows that the BHOOMI project has eliminated the bribe with respect to
getting RECORD OF RIGHTS documents and reduced transport and opportunity costs to a large extent.

          Urban Property Ownership Records


The Revenue Department has taken up the task of creating Urban property ownership records (UPOR)
in 4 cities namely Mysore, Hubli-Dharwar, Bellary and Shimoga. UPOR aims to capture all the rights
associated with properties in urban areas through the use of modern spatial technology such as Global
Positioning Systems (GPS). In addition, the project employs Total Station (TS) for ground based Survey
and use of ICT (Information and Communication Technology) for data management, MIS Reports, and
GIS tools for Mapping of data.


                                                                                                   218
                                                                        KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
    LGAF-INDIA
                 2014



This allows for eradication of conflicting claims and contestations on the transaction of land. The
project is being implemented through a public-private partnership model where the private partners
are responsible for first time spatial data creation, creation of IT infrastructure and delivery of services.
However, the Revenue department continues to discharge its core responsibility including title
enquiry of the properties and approve any change to the property Record (Mutation). In addition,
different types of existing urban properties related data available with various government agencies
such as urban local bodies and urban development authorities are being used as reference data in the
project. The project is the process of being extended to other cities in Karnataka.


Some of the key benefits of UPOR are:
    Accurate spatial and updated ownership data of all properties.
    Secured ownership documents.
    Confidence in transactions in the mind of property owners.
    Speedy land related services.
    Reduced property disputes due to fair handling of ownership records.
    UPOR project also facilitates for searching using property number or name. There are very few
     local bodies where computerization is not taken up and in these places manual search using
     khatha number or name is possible.



           e-SWATHU


In 2013, the rural development department and the Panchayat Raj department in Karnataka put in
place an e-Governance solution called e-swathu (swathu means property in Kannada language) to
monitor the activities of the Gram Panchayat with respect to the maintenance, updating and issue of
property records under their jurisdiction for registration and other legal purposes. e-Swathu covers
30,000 villages of Karnataka and includes the process to update records as a result of transactions
such as sale, inheritance, partition, gift, will, land acquisition, etc. In addition, issuance of copies of
property records is done through e-Swathu


The approach followed to create property records in this project is incremental in nature. Property
records are created after verifying the legality of property creation. There exists a facility to record
encumbrances and there also exist legal provisions for the same through e-SWATHU. The software
                                                                                          219
                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



also allows for recording government restrictions against each property such as those arising from the
prohibition of transfer of certain lands Act and other non-alienation conditions. Non-agricultural
properties are managed by local bodies and e-swathu covers a major portion of these records as well.
However there is no cadastre for properties created using e-swathu. E-Swathu allows for electronic
exchange with registration department and local town planning authorities.



          Pre-Mutation Sketch


Observing that there is a huge delay in updating the textual and spatial records of a land parcel that
has undergone mutation, the Revenue Department implemented an Integrated Mutation Process
(IMP), in which textual and spatial records are updated simultaneously along with the physical
mutation of the land parcel. To capture the spatial record, Karnataka has made an amendment to the
Karnataka Land Revenue Act making pre-mutation sketch by licensed surveyors a mandatory
requirement for registration or partition of land involving fragmentation. The Bhoomi software has
been enhanced to capture the details of pre-mutation sketch. Once this sketch is captured in the
system, it is used to carry out the change in the textual records in Bhoomi without having to visit the
field site again. Further, no registration of a property is done unless a sub-division plan (pre-mutation
sketch) is submitted implying that spatial and textual records are synchronized.



          Land Grabbing (Prohibition) Bill


While there are a number of Central and State-level Acts – such as the Karnataka Land Revenue Act,
1964; the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1986; the Forest Conservation Act, 1980; and
the Wakf Act, 1993 – to check encroachment of public land, the glaring non-compliance witnessed in
Karnataka suggests that these laws have been ineffective.

Around 23 per cent (over 115 lakh acres) of the total geographical area in Karnataka is publicly owned,
according to the data available with the Land Records, Survey and Settlement Department. Public Land
management in Karnataka is in a state of disarray prompting the state to initiate a number of
corrective measures such as setting up of the Karnataka Public Land Corporation and the passing of
the Karnataka Land Grabbing (Prohibition) Bill 2011. The Bill awaiting Presidential assent, provides for
measures to curb organized attempts to grab lands belonging to the Government, Wakf or Hindu

                                                                                                   220
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
 LGAF-INDIA
                2014



religious institutions and charitable endowments, local authorities or other statutory or non-statutory
bodies owned, controlled or managed by the Government. The Government may also institute speedy
enquiry into alleged land grabbing and trial of cases, by notification and constituting a special court
These measures were initiated in response to the recommendations made by a high-level committee
headed by former Additional Chief Secretary V. Balasubramanian, which investigated the cases of
public land encroachment in the state.




                                                                                                 221
                                                                   KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014




6. Conclusions
 In the preceding sections, this report has presented in detail the status of land governance in
 Karnataka. The report is prepared by applying the World Bank’s Land Governance Assessment
 Framework (LGAF).The study has examined the state’s land governance in nine focus areas.
 Overall conclusions emerging from this study show that while Karnataka has a strong policy and
 institutional framework for land governance which seeks to recognize and protect land rights and
 to use land resources for the larger socio-economic development, there are significant areas of
 concern which need policy attention. The study also documents a number of good practices and
 the recent initiatives by the government to address some of these issues.

 This study shows that multiplicity of laws with a lack of legal clarity on several crucial issues; an
 overburdened land administration infrastructure; mismatch between textual and spatial records
 and a poor land information system have affected the effectiveness of land governance in the
 State. As a result, despite the state’s pioneering efforts of digitizing land records management and
 land registration system, fraudulent duplicate and overlapping land titles continue to dog the
 system, especially in urban areas, leading to conflicts and litigation in private land and unabated
 grabbing of public land. Land use planning is a matter of serious concern both in rural and urban
 areas. In urban areas, while there is planning machinery in place although the plan stipulations
 are routinely flouted, in smaller towns and rural areas, there is virtually no land use planning in
 practice. There is no clear policy to guide the use of land for the state’s overall development by
 striking a balance between the competing claims of economic development, equity and
 environmental concerns. Indiscriminate diversion of common land for housing and commercial
 purposes and a highly discretionary system of allocation of land for private investment are too
 glaring to miss. The absence of a centralized land information system to assist in decision making
 and in monitoring compliance of regulations is another deficiency in the land governance system.

 The State has taken up several progressive reforms in the land sector but they address the
 problems in isolation rather than providing an integrated solution to the myriad inter-related
 problems of the land governance. In this context, the study highlights three broad priority areas
 which would pave the way for implementing several other policy recommendations emerging
 from this exercise. These three priority areas are:



                                                                                                222
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
               2014



          Lack of Capacity seems to be the single-most important area of concern. Unless proper
           capacity is built into the system, no effective and sustained reform is possible. One of the
           major steps that can be taken in this regard is to separate out the land administration and
           general administration function on the lines of West Bengal land administration
           department. It will also be helpful to bring all non-forest-land-related responsibilities
           which are now spread over several departments and agencies.
          The comprehensive re-survey which has been taken up on a pilot basis should be scaled
           up and finished as early as possible. Without re-building the entire land information
           system based on a fresh survey, the existing anomalies in the land records cannot be
           plugged effectively.
          Finally, this study shows that land use planning in both urban and rural areas is in a state
           of crisis and urgent attention needs to be paid to this problem before it assumes totally
           unmanageable proportions.


To conclude, while the existing programs need scaling up, this study strongly recommends for an
integrated approach to solving the problems of land governance starting with a comprehensive
survey of land using modern technological tools and eventually moving towards an absolute titling
system in the place for current presumptive titling.




                                                                                                 223
                                                                KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014




References
 

    Ahuja, Manoj, and A. P. Singh. "Evaluation of computerization of land records in Karnataka: A
     study from Gulbarga district." Economic and Political Weekly(2006): 69-77

    Anderson, Michael. "Access to justice and legal process: making legal institutions responsive
     to poor people in LDCs." In WDR 2000 Conference, pp. 16-17. 1999

    Bearak, Barry. “In India, the Wheels of Justice Hardly Move.” New York Times, June 1, 2000.

     http://www.nytimes.com/2000/06/01/world/in-india-the-wheels-of-justice-hardly-
     move.html

    Brown, Jennifer, Kripa Ananthpur, and Renee Giovarelli. "Women's Access and Rights to
     Land in Karnataka." (2002)

    Cohn, Bernard S. "Some notes on law and change in North India." Economic Development
     and Cultural Change 8, no. 1 (1959): 79-93

    Dale, Peter, and John McLaughlin. "Land administration." OUP Catalogue(2000)

    Damle, C. B. "Land reforms legislation in Karnataka: myth of success."Economic and Political
     Weekly (1989): 1896-1906

    Deshpande, RS. “Current land policy issues in India.” Land Reform (Special Addition), 2003,
     fao.org. http://www.fao.org/docrep/006/y5026e/y5026e0b.htm

    Deshpande, S. V., and Vijay KN Torgal. "Land Reforms in Karnataka: Impact on
     Beneficiaries." Economic and Political Weekly (2003): 4647-4649

    Dreze and Reetika Khera. “Lok Adalat or Joke Adalat?” The Hindu, February 22, 2009.

     http://www.hindu.com/mag/2009/02/22/stories/2009022250190500.htm




                                                                                             224
                                                                    KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014



    Eisenberg, Theodore, Sital Kalantry, and Nick Robinson. "Litigation as a measure of well-
     being." DePaul L. Rev. 62 (2012): 247

    Galanter, Marc, and Jayanth K. Krishnan. "Bread for the Poor: Access to Justice and the
     Rights of the Needy in India." HAStIngS lJ 55 (2003i): 789
    Galanter, Marc, and Jayanth K. Krishnan. "Debased Informalism: Lok Adalats and Legal Rights
     in Modem India." Beyond common knowledge: empirical approaches to the rule of
     law (2003ii): 96
    Galanter, Marc. "Part I Courts, Institutions, and Access to Justice:" To the Listed Field...": The
     Myth of Litigious India." Jindal Global L. Rev. 1 (2009): 65-251
    Gopalakrishnan, Shankar. 2012. Undemocratic and Arbitrary: Control, Regulation and
     Expropriation of India’s Forest and Common Lands. New Delhi: SPWD. Washington, DC: Rights
     and Resources Initiative
    Guruswamy, Menaka, and Aditya Singh. "Village courts in India: unconstitutional forums with
     unjust outcomes." Journal of Asian Public Policy3, no. 3 (2010): 281-293
    Kamath, Lalitha. "New Policy Paradigms and Actual Practices in Slum Housing." Review of
     Urban Affairs, Economic and Political Weekly 47, no. 47 (2012)
    Karnataka Manufacturing ‘Task Force. “Report to the Government of Karnataka” 2013
    Kolavalli, Shashi. "Joint forest management: superior property rights?" Economic and Political
     Weekly (1995): 1933-1938
    Kumar, Rohit. Pendency of Cases in Indian Courts. No. id: 4322. 2011, PRS Legislative Research
     available                                                                                       at
     http://www.prsindia.org/administrator/uploads/general/1310014291~~Vital%20Stats%20-
     %20Pendency%20of%20Cases%20in%20Indian%20Courts%2004Jul11%20v5%20-
     %20Revised.pdf

    Lele, Sharachchandra, Seema Purushothaman, and Sham Kashyap. "Village Commons,
     Livelihoods and Governance: An Assessment of Karnataka’s Experience." In Livelihood
     Strategies in Southern India, pp. 135-156. Springer India, 2013

    Lélé, Sharachchandra. "Why, who, and how of jointness in joint forest management:
     Theoretical considerations and empirical insights from the Western Ghats of Karnataka."



                                                                                                  225
                                                                 KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
             2014



     In International Workshop on Shared Resource Management in South Asia, Institute of Rural
     Management Anand (IRMA), Anand, India (17-19 February). 1998
    Lele, Sharachchandra. “Linking ecology, economics, and institutions of village-level forest use
     in the Karnataka Western Ghats”. Sahyadri e-news: Issue XXI, 2001.
     http://www.ces.iisc.ernet.in/biodiversity/sahyadri_enews/newsletter/issue21/index.htm

    Lele, Sharachchandra. “Of forests, forestry programmes and people”. August 1, 2014.
     http://indiatogether.org/environment/articles/jfmkar.htm

    Mendelsohn, Oliver. "The pathology of the Indian legal system." Modern Asian Studies 15,
     no. 04 (1981): 823-863
    Moog, Robert S. "Conflict and compromise: the politics of Lok Adalats in Varanasi
     District." Law and Society Review (1991): 545-569

    Ohdedar, Birsha. "Land Acquisition for Tourism: A review of state practices, laws and
     policies." (2012).
     http://www.environmentportal.in/files/file/Land%20Acquisition%20for%20Tourism.pdf
    Rao, R. J and ors., Joint Forest Planning and Management in Karnataka: Present Status and
     Future Prospects, 17(3) Wasteland News14-27, 2002

    Ramesh, BS. “Bangalore tops in pending court cases.” The Hindu (Bangalore Edition), May
     24, 2008. http://www.hindu.com/2008/11/24/stories/2008112455770100.htm

    Ramnath, Madhu. "Surviving the forest rights act: Between Scylla and Charybdis." Economic
     and Political Weekly (2008): 37-42

    Saldanha, C. J. "Karnataka State of Environment Report 1985-86." (1986)




                                                                                              226
                                                                                      KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
           LGAF-INDIA
                            2014




              Karnataka State, INDIA - Land Governance Assessment Framework
                                                                                                                           Score
Pan-LGI-Dim                                                  Topic                                               A     B       C     D
PANEL 1: Land Rights Recognition
LGI 1: Recognition of a continuum of rights
1 1      1 Individuals' rural land tenure rights are (i) legally recognized and (ii) protected in practice.      (i)   (ii)
1 1      2 Customary tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in practice.
1 1      3 Indigenous rights to land and forest are (i) legally recognized and (ii) protected in practice.             (i)    (ii)
1 1      4 Urban land tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in practice.
LGI 2: Respect for and enforcement of rights
1 2      1 Accessible opportunities for tenure individualization exist.
1 2      2 Individual land in rural areas is recorded and mapped.
1 2      3 Individual land in urban areas is formally (i) recorded and (ii) mapped.                                            (i)   (ii)
1 2      4 The number of illegal land sales is low.
1 2      5 The number of illegal lease transactions is low.
1 2      6 Women's property rights in lands as accrued by relevant laws are recorded.
1 2      7 Women’s property rights to land are equal to those by men in law and in practice.
PANEL 2: Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations
LGI 1: Rights to Forest and Common Lands
2 1      1 Clear identification and assignment of use for (i) forests (ii) common lands                                (i)           (ii)
2 1      2 Rural group rights are formally recognized and can be enforced.
              Users' rights to key natural resources on land (incl. fisheries) are legally recognized and
2 1      3
              protected in practice.
2 1      4 Multiple rights over common land and natural resources on these lands can legally coexist.
2 1      5 Multiple rights over the same plot of land and its resources (e.g. trees) can legally coexist.
              Multiple rights over land and mining/other sub-soil resources located on the same plot can
2 1      6
              legally coexist.
2 1      7 Accessible opportunities exist for mapping and recording of group rights.
2 1      8 Boundary demarcation of communal land.
LGI 2: Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
2 2      1 Restrictions regarding rural land use are justified and enforced.
2 2      2 Restrictions on rural land transferability effectively serve public policy objectives.
              Rural land use plans are elaborated/changed via public process and resulting burdens are
2 2      3
              shared.
2 2      4 Rural lands, the use of which is changed, are swiftly transferred to the destined use.
2 2      5 Rezoning of rural land use follows a public process that safeguards existing rights.
              For protected rural land use (forest, pastures, wetlands, national parks, etc.) plans correspond
2 2      6
              to actual use.
PANEL 3: Urban Land Use, Planning, and Development
LGI 1: Restrictions on Rights
3 1      1 Restrictions on urban land ownership/transfer effectively serve public policy objectives.
              Restrictions on urban land use (disaster risk) effectively serve public policy
3 1      2
              objectives.
LGI 2: Transparency of Land Use Restrictions
              Process of urban expansion/infrastructure development process is transparent and respects
3 2      1
              existing rights.
              Changes in urban land use plans are based on a clear public process and input by all
3 2      2
              stakeholders.
3 2      3 Changes in assigned urban land use are swiftly followed by actual land use change.
LGI 3: Efficiency in the Urban Land Use Planning Process

                                                                                                                       227
                                                                                   KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
             LGAF-INDIA
                           2014



               Policy to ensure delivery of low-cost housing and services exists and is progressively
3   3    1
               implemented.
3 3      2 Land use planning effectively guides urban spatial expansion in the largest city.
3 3      3 Land use planning effectively guides urban development in the four next largest cities.
3 3      4 Planning processes are able to cope with urban growth.
LGI 4: Speed and Predictability of Enforcement of Restricted Land Uses
3 4      1 Provisions for residential building permits are appropriate, affordable and complied with.
3 4      2 A building permit for a residential dwelling can be obtained quickly and at a low cost.
LGI 5: Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
3 5      1 Formalization of urban residential housing is feasible and affordable.
               In cities with informal tenure, a viable strategy exists for tenure security, infrastructure, and
3 5      2
               housing.
3 5      3 A condominium regime allows effective management and recording of urban property.
PANEL 4: Public Land Management
LGI 1: Identification of Public Land and Clear Management
               Criteria for public land ownership are clearly defined and assigned to the right level of
4 1      1
               government.
4 1      2 There is a complete recording of public land.
4 1      3 Information on public land is publicly accessible.
4 1      4 The management responsibility for different types of public land is unambiguously assigned.
               Responsible public institutions have sufficient resources for their land management
4 1      5
               responsibilities.
4 1      6 All essential information on public land allocations to private interests is publicly accessible.
LGI 2: Justification and Time-Efficiency of Acquisition Processes
4 2      1 There is minimal transfer of acquired land to private interests.
4 2      2 Acquired land is transferred to destined use in a timely manner.
4 2      3 The threat of land acquisition does not lead to pre-emptive action by private parties.
LGI 3: Transparency and Fairness of Acquisition Procedures
4 3      1 Compensation is provided for the acquisition of all rights regardless of their recording status.
4 3      2 Land use change resulting in selective loss of rights there is compensated for.
4 3      3 Acquired owners are compensated promptly.
4 3      4 There are independent and accessible avenues for appeal against acquisition.
4 3      5 Timely decisions are made regarding complaints about acquisition.
PANEL 5: Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investors
LGI 1: Transfer of Public Land to Private Use Follows a Clear, Competitive Process and Payments are Collected
5 1      1 Public land transactions are conducted in an open transparent manner.
5 1      2 Payments for public leases are collected.
5 1      3 Public land is transacted at market prices unless guided by equity objectives.
5 1      4 The public captures benefits arising from changes in permitted land use.
               Policy to improve equity in asset access and use by the poor exists, is implemented effectively
5 1      5
               and monitored.
LGI 2: Private Investment Strategy
               Land to be made available to investors is identified transparently and publicly, in agreement
5 2      1
               with right holders.
               Investments are selected based on economic, socio-cultural and environmental impacts in an
5 2      2
               open process.
5 2      3 Public institutions transferring land to investors are clearly identified and regularly audited.
               Public bodies transferring land to investors share information and coordinate to minimize and
5 2      4
               resolve overlaps (incl. sub-soil).
               Compliance with contractual obligations is regularly monitored and remedial action taken if
5 2      5
               needed.


                                                                                                                   228
                                                                                                  KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
                    LGAF-INDIA
                                   2014



              Safeguards effectively reduce the risk of negative effects from large scale land-related
5       2       6
              investments.
              The scope for resettlement is clearly circumscribed and procedures exist to deal with it in line
5 2      7
              with best practice.
LGI 3: Policy Implementation is Effective, Consistent and Transparent
5 3      1 Investors provide sufficient information to allow rigorous evaluation of proposed investments.
5 3      2 Approval of investment plans follows a clear process with reasonable timelines.
              Right holders and investors negotiate freely and directly with full access to relevant
5 3      3
              information.
5 3      4 Contractual provisions regarding benefit sharing are publicly disclosed.
LGI 4: Contracts Involving Public Land are Public and Accessible
5 4      1 Information on spatial extent and duration of approved concessions is publicly available.


                 Compliance with safeguards on concessions is monitored and enforced effectively and
    5       4        2
                 consistently.
    5    4   3 Avenues to deal with non-compliance exist and obtain timely and fair decisions.
    PANEL 6: Public Provision of Land Information: Registry and Cadastre
    LGI 1: Mechanisms for Recognition of Rights
                 Land possession by the poor can be formalized in line with local norms in an efficient
    6    1   1
                 and transparent process.
    6    1   2 Non-documentary evidence is effectively used to help establish rights.
    6    1   3 Long-term unchallenged possession is formally recognized.
                 First-time recording of rights on demand includes proper safeguards and access is not
    6    1   4                                                                                                           (i)    (ii)
                 restricted by high fees. (i) agricultural (ii) non-agricultural
    LGI 2: Completeness of the Land Registry
    6    2   1 Total cost of recording a property transfer is low.
    6    2   2 Information held in records is linked to maps that reflect current reality.
                                                                                                                         (i)
    6       2        3   All relevant private encumbrances are recorded. (i) agricultural (ii) non-agricultural
                                                                                                                         (ii)
                         All relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded.                                 (i)   (i)
    6       2        4
                         agricultural (ii) non-agricultural                                                              (ii)
                         There is a timely response to requests for                   accessing    registry   records.
    6       2        5                                                                                                   (i)    (ii)
                         (i) agricultural (ii) non-agricultural
                                                                                                                         (i)
    6       2        6   The registry is searchable. (i) agricultural (ii) non-agricultural
                                                                                                                         (ii)
    6    2    7 Land information records are easily accessed.
    LGI 3: Reliability of Registry Information
                   Information in public registries is synchronized to ensure integrity of rights and reduce             (i)
    6    3    1
                   transaction cost. (i) agricultural (ii) non-agricultural                                              (ii)
                   Registry information is up-to-date and reflects ground reality.                        (i)
    6    3    2                                                                                                                 (i)     (ii)
                   agricultural (ii) non-agricultural
    LGI 4: Cost-effectiveness and Sustainability of Land Administration Services
    6    4    1 The registry is financially sustainable through fee collection to finance its operations.
                   Investment in land administration is sufficient to cope with demand for high quality
    6    4    2                                                                                                          (i)            (ii)
                   services. (i) agricultural (ii) non-agricultural
    LGI 5: Fees are Determined Transparently
                   Fees have a (i) clear rationale, (ii) their schedule is public, and all payments are
    6    5    1                                                                                                          (ii)   (i)
                   accounted for.
    6    5    2 Informal payments are discouraged.
    6    5    3 Service standards are published and regularly monitored.
    PANEL 7: Land Valuation and Taxation

                                                                                                                                  229
                                                                                 KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
        LGAF-INDIA
                        2014



LGI 1: Transparency of Valuations
7    1    1 There is a clear process of property valuation.
7    1    2 Valuation rolls are publicly accessible.
LGI 2: Collection Efficiency
7    2    1 Exemptions from property taxes payment are justified and transparent.
7    2    2 All property holders liable to pay property tax are listed on the tax roll.
7    2    3 Assessed property taxes are collected. (i) rural (ii) urban                                         (ii)   (i)
7    2    4 Receipts from property tax exceed the cost of collection. (i) rural (ii) urban               (ii)                (i)
PANEL 8: Dispute Resolution
LGI 1: Assignment of Responsibility
8    1    1 There is clear assignment of responsibility for conflict resolution.
8    1    2 Conflict resolution mechanisms are accessible to the public.
               Mutually accepted agreements reached through informal dispute resolution systems are
8    1    3
               encouraged.
8    1    4 There is an accessible, affordable and timely process for appealing disputed rulings.
LGI 2: The Share of Land Affected by Pending Conflicts is Low and Decreasing
8    2    1 Land disputes constitute a small proportion of cases in the formal legal system.
8    2    2 Conflicts in the formal system are resolved in a timely manner.
8    2    3 There are few long-standing (> 5 years) land conflicts.


PANEL 9: Institutional Arrangements and Policies
LGI 1: Clarity of Mandates and Practice
               Land policy formulation, implementation and arbitration are separated to avoid conflict
9    1    1
               of interest.
               Responsibilities of the ministries and agencies dealing with land do not overlap
9    1    2
               (horizontal overlap).
9    1    3 Administrative (vertical) overlap is avoided.
               Land right and use information is shared by public bodies; key parts are regularly
9    1    4
               reported on and publicly accessible.
               Overlaps of rights (based on tenure typology) are minimal and do not cause friction or
9    1    5
               dispute.
               Ambiguity in institutional mandates (based on institutional map) does not cause
9    1    6
               problems.
LGI 2: Equity and Non-discrimination in the Decision-making Process
               Land policies and regulations are developed in a participatory manner involving all
9    2    1
               relevant stakeholders.
               Land policies address equity and poverty reduction goals; progress towards these is
9    2    2
               publicly monitored.
               Land policies address ecological and environmental goals; progress towards these is
9    2    3
               publicly monitored.
               The implementation of land policy is costed, matched with benefits and adequately
9    2    4
               resourced.
9    2    5 There is regular and public reporting indicating progress in policy implementation.
               Land policies help to improve land use by low-income groups and those who
9    2    6
               experienced injustice.
9    2    7 Land policies proactively and effectively reduce future disaster risk.




                                                                                                                  230
                                                                                         KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
                   2014




Annexure
Key State and National Acts by Panel
    Land Tenure Recognition                   Rights to Forest and Common                  Urban Land Use, Planning and
                                                            Land                                     Development
  Karnataka Land Reforms Act,                Indian Forest Act, 1927                     Karnataka Town and Country
   1961                                       Karnataka Forest Act, 1963                   Planning Act, 1961
  Karnataka Land Revenue Act,                Karnataka Forest Rules, 1969                Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964
   1964                                       Karnataka Forest Manual, 1976               Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964
  Karnataka Land Grant Rules,                Forest Conservation Act, 1980               Karnataka Municipal Corporations
   1969                                       Forest Conservation Rules, 1981              Act, 1976
  Forest Rights Act, 2006                    Karnataka Tree Preservation Act,            Bangalore Development Authority
  Karnataka Municipal                         1976                                         Act, 1976
   Corporations Act, 1976                     Karnataka Tree Preservation                 Karnataka Urban Development
  The Bangalore Development                   Rules, 1977                                  Authorities Act, 1987
   Authority Act, 1976                        Forest Rights Act, 2006                     Karnataka      Regularization    of
  Karnataka Slum Areas                       Forest Rights Rules, 2008                    Unauthorized Construction in
   (Improvement and Clearance)                Karnataka Land Revenue Act,                  Urban Areas, 1991
   Act 1974                                    1964
  Hindu Succession Act, 1956                 Karnataka Land Reforms Act,
                                               1961
                                              Karnataka Land Grant Rules, 1969
                                              Karnataka Town & Country
                                               Planning Act, 1961



     Public Land Management            Transfer of Public Land for Private Use       Public Provision of Land Information:
                                                                                              Registry & Cadastre

     Karnataka Land Revenue Act,          Land Acquisition Act, 1894                   Indian Transfer of Property Act 1882
      1964                                 Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961             The Karnataka Land Reform Act 1961
     Karnataka Forest Act, 1963           Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964             Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964
     Forest Conservation Act, 1980        Karnataka Town and Country Planning          Karnataka Guarantee of Services to
     Karnataka Panchayat Raj Act,          Act, 1961                                     Citizens Act 2011
      1993                                 Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964
     Karnataka Industrial Areas           Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act,
      Development Act, 1966                 1970
     Karnataka Land (Restriction on       Bangalore Development Authority Act,
      Transfer) Act, 1991                   1976
     Land Acquisition Act, 1894           Bangalore City Planning Area, Zonal
                                            Regulation       (Amendment        and
                                            Validation) Act, 1976
                                           Bangalore      Metropolitan    Region
                                            Development Act, 1985
                                           Industrial Areas Development Act,
                                            1960
                                           Regularization     of    Unauthorized
                                            Constructions in Urban areas Act,
                                            1991




                                                                                                                          231
                                                                                KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
                 2014




   Land Valuation & Taxation               Dispute Resolution                   Institutional Arrangements &
                                                                                           Policies

  Indian Stamp Act 1899            The Karnataka Land Revenue Act,        As mentioned in the Panel Context
  Indian Land Registration Act,     1964
   1908                             The Karnataka Land Reforms Act,
  Karnataka Stamp Act 1957          1961
  Karnataka Land Revenue Act       Land Acquisition Act, 1894
   1964                             Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008
                                    Karnataka Civil Courts Act, 1964
                                    Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987




                State Coordinator, Expert Investigators and Panel Members



       State Coordinator                                           Narayana A
                                        Associate Professor, School of Policy and Governance, Azim Premji
                                                               University, Bagalore

Panel Name                            Expert Investigator                        Panel Members
                                                                                 Abhijin Shetty, Tahsildar, Land Records
                                                                                 and Survey Department
                                      Sudhir Krishnaswamy                        Rajendra Prasad, Assistant Commissioner,
Land Tenure Recognition               Professor of Law, Azim Premji              Bhoomi Monitoring Cell
                                      University                                 Mohammad Jinna, Land Rights/forest
                                                                                 rights Activist

                            Seema Purushothaman                                  H.S. Gopalakrishne Gowda, retired deputy
                            Environmental Economist and                          commissioner
Rights to Forest and Common Professor, Azim Premji University                    S. Gurumurthy, retired tahsildar
Land                        Badrinarayana      Seetharaman,                      Mohammad Jinna, land rights/forest rights
                            Lawyer                                               activist


                                                                                 B.V. Karee Gowda, Special Deputy
                                                                                 Commissioner, Revenue Department
Urban Land Use, Planning and H.S. Sudhira, Urban Planning                        Venkateshaiah,      former       Municipal
Development                  Expert and Consultant, Gubbi Labs                   Commissioner
                                                                                 Mathew Idiculla, Research Fellow (Urban
                                                                                 Governance)
                                                                                 C. Krishnappa, former Inspector General of
                                      K.P. Suresh                                Stamps and Registration
Public Land Management
                                      Consultant – Land Rights Activist          G. Narayanaswamy, former Revenue
                                                                                 Secretary
                                                                                 B.V. Karee Gowda, Special Deputy
                            I.M. Vittala Murthy, former                          Commissioner
Transfer of Public Land for                                                      N. Vinay Madhav, journalist and forest
                            Commissioner, Survey, Settlement
Private Use                                                                      rights activist
                            and Land Records                                     N. Palaksha, Real Estate Consultant


                                                                                                                      232
                                                                   KARNATAKA STATE REPORT -
LGAF-INDIA
              2014



                                 Mallikarjuna Patil                K.V.. Rudresh, Deputy Director, Urban
Public Provision of Land                                           Land Survey, Department of Survey,
                                 Consultant, Karnataka Land
Information: Registry & Cadastre                                   Settlement and Land Records
                                 Records Computersiation Project   H.L. Prabhakhar, Assistant Inspector
                                                                   General of Stamps and Registration
                                 Mallikarjun Patil, Consultant,    Arakere Jayaram, former Resident Editor,
Land Valuation & Taxation        Karnataka      Land     Records   the Hindu,Bangalore
                                                                   Rajendra Prasad, Assistant Commissioner,
                                 Computerisation Project           Bhoomi Monitoring Cell

                                                                   Suresh Babu, advocate (land laws)
                                                                   Venkatesh Prasad, advocate
                                 Dolashree Mysoor
Dispute Resolution                                                 N.       Venkateshaiah,        Assistant
                                 Advocate and Legal Researcher     Commissioner, Karnataka Industrial Area
                                                                   Development Board
                             Nafis Hasan                           G. Narayanaswamy, former Revenue
                             Governance Research Fellow,           Secretary
                             Azim Premji University                Abhijin Shetty, Tahsildar, Survey
Institutional Arrangements &                                       Settlement and Land Records Department
                             I.M. Vittala Murthy, former
Policies                                                           N. Bhaskara, former Deputy Tahsildar
                             Commissioner, Survey, Settlement      N.A.M. Ismail, journalist
                             and Land Records                      S. Ramesh, Panchayat Development
                                                                   Officer




                                                                                                      233
