	

                                             	
                                             	
                                             	
                                             	
                                             	
                                             	
                             Guidance	Note	
                                             	
                                             	
                                             	
	Supporting	Payment	Sector	Development:	
    B2B	corporate	payments	requirements		
             in	the	traditional	retail	sector	
            Guidelines	for	conducting	a	local	market	assessment	
    	
    	
    	
	
	
                                   April	2016	
	
	              	




                                                             1	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
This	 consultative	 paper	 and	 the	 research	 contributing	 to	 it	 are	 part	 of	 a	 broader	 program	
funded	by	the	Swiss	State	Secretariat	for	Economic	Affairs	(SECO).	It	has	been	conducted	in	
collaboration	with	the	Mandiri	Institute	and	the	World	Economic	Forum.		
	
The	 authors	 recognise	 important	 contributions	 to	 this	 research	 paper	 from	 experienced	
industry	 experts	 including	 in	 particular	 Fred	 Bär,	 Tom	 Buschman,	 Andrew	 Davis,	 Antonio	
DiLorenzo,	Nader	Elkhweet,	Thomas	Lammer,	Harish	Natarajan,	Edy	Prawiro,	Brad	Pragnell,	
Paul	Reynolds	and	Ghada	Teima	
	
	
	                                 	

                                                                                                    2	
	
	
Foreword	
	
Access	to	and	usage	of	payment	services	are	important	objectives	within	private	and	
public	 sector	 efforts	 to	 enhance	 financial	 inclusion.	 Electronic	 payments	 (often	 now	
referred	 to	 also	 as	 “digital	 payments”)	 can,	 at	 scale,	 provide	 a	 cost	 effective	 means	 to	
facilitate	economic	activity	of	all	kinds	in	the	economy.	Electronic	payments	can	also	provide	
for	 more	 efficient	 and	 cost	 effective	 access	 to	 other	 financial	 services	 including	 loans,	
savings	 and	 insurance.	 These	 are	 essential	 for	 businesses	 and	 households	 to	 manage	 their	
finances,	 invest	 and	 save	 in	 ways	 that	 contribute	 to	 welfare	 and	 overall	 economic	
development.	
	
Retailers	and	their	suppliers	can	play	an	important	role	in	expanding	use	of	electronic	
payments	 and	 inciting	 further	 adoption	 thereof	 by	 consumers.	 Retailers	 sit	 at	 the	
crossroads	of	much	of	the	economy	that	reaches	the	consumers	not	served	by	banking	and	
formal	payment	services.	Through	the	payments	that	they	make	and	receive,	many	of	which	
are	 in	 cash,	 they	 account	 for	 a	 significant	 portion	 of	 retail	 payment	 volumes	 in	 developing	
markets.		
	
Despite	 innovations	 in	 retail	 and	 B2B	 payment	 services,	 uptake	 by	 traditional	
retailers	 remains	 limited.	 Payment	 services	 may	 need	 to	 be	 better	 adapted	 to	 the	
circumstances	and	business	operations	of	traditional	retailers	and	their	suppliers	as	well	as	
consumers.	 Often	 in	 payment	 systems,	 network	 inter-operability	 (or	 lack	 thereof)	 can	 also	
play	an	important	role	in	enhancing	value		(or	undermining)	to	end-users.		
	
This	 report	 has	 been	 prepared	 to	inform	 policy	 makers	 and	 service	 providers	 about	
traditional	 retailers’	 and	 their	 suppliers’	 business	 payment	 and	 related	 financial	
services	needs	and	the	implications	thereof	on	payments	systems	strategy.		The	paper	
shares	insights	into	the	particular	needs,	constraints	and	motivations	of	traditional	retailers	
and	their	suppliers.	It	sets	out	a	framework	of	key	business	requirements	and	an	analysis	of	
their	 implications	 for	 payment	 systems	 strategy	 and	 collaboration	 between	 private	 sector	
providers.		
	
The	 research	 behind	 this	 paper	 has	 contributed	 to	 and	 complements	 related	 research	
undertaken	 by	 the	 World	 Bank	 Group	 and	 the	 World	 Economic	 Forum,	 notably	 a	 global	
sizing	 and	 a	 recent	 2016	 publication	 entitled	 “Innovation	 in	 Electronic	 Payment	 Adoption:	
The	case	of	small	retailers”.	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	                                 	




                                                                                                      3	
	
	
	   	




        4	
	
 	
Contents	
 Foreword	....................................................................................................................................	3	
 Glossary	......................................................................................................................................	6	
 Executive	Summary	................................................................................................................	9	
 I.	 Introduction	.....................................................................................................................	11	
    Overview	............................................................................................................................................	12	
    Policy	Context	...................................................................................................................................	14	
      Economic	Development	..............................................................................................................................	14	
      Financial	Sector	Development	.................................................................................................................	15	
 II.	 An	Approach	to	Market	Sizing	..................................................................................	18	
    Market	structure	.............................................................................................................................	18	
    Estimating	payment	value	and	volume	...................................................................................	19	
 III.	 Traditional	retailers	...................................................................................................	24	
    Retailer	Profiles	from	Indonesia	...............................................................................................	26	
    Purchasing	Operations	..................................................................................................................	28	
 IV.	 B2B	payments	and	supply	chain	integration	                                        ......................................................	31	
   Business	Operations	and	Requirements	.................................................................................	31	
      Business	Process	Steps	...............................................................................................................................	32	
   Sub	processes	between	sellers	&	buyers	and	their	impact	on	payments	....................	33	
      Payment	Process	Steps	...............................................................................................................................	34	
      Post	payment	processes	and	functions	...............................................................................................	38	
   Automation	between	buyer	and	seller	....................................................................................	39	
 V.	 Payment	Service	Requirements	...............................................................................	42	
    Business	Requirements	................................................................................................................	42	
    Operational	implications	..............................................................................................................	49	
 VI.	 Implications	for	Payment	Systems	Development	.............................................	59	
 Annex	A:	Information	Flow	Analysis	of	the	End-to-End	Process	...........................	62	
 References	and	further	reading	.......................................................................................	68	
              	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
                                                                                                                                                           5	
 	
	
	


Glossary	
	
Authentication:	 	the	methods	used	to	verify	the	origin	of	a	message	or	to	verify	the	identity	
of	a	participant	connected	to	a	system	and	to	confirm	that	a	message	has	not	been	modified	
or	replaced	in	transit.	
Authorisation:	 the	consent	given	by	a	participant	(or	a	third	party	acting	on	behalf	of	that	
participant)	in	order	to	transfer	funds	or	securities.	
Beneficiary:	 a	recipient	of	funds	(payee).	Depending	on	the	context,	a	beneficiary	can	be	a	
direct	 participant	 in	 a	 payment	 system	 and/or	 a	 final	 recipient.	 In	 the	 case	 of	 retailer	
payments	to	suppliers,	may	designate	also	the	supplier.	
Bilateral	 net	 settlement	 system:	 	a	settlement	system	in	which	participants’	bilateral	net	
settlement	 positions	 are	 settled	 between	 every	 bilateral	 combination	 of	 participants.	 See	
also	net	credit	(or	debit)	position.		
Clearing:	 the	 process	 of	 transmitting,	 reconciling	 and,	 in	 some	 cases,	 confirming	 payment	
orders	or	security	transfer	instructions	prior	to	settlement,	possibly	including	the	netting	of	
instructions	 and	 the	 establishment	 of	 final	 positions	 for	 settlement.	 Sometimes	 the	 term	 is	
used	(imprecisely)	to	include	settlement.	
Credit	 transfer:	 	a	payment	order	or	possibly	a	sequence	of	payment	orders	made	for	the	
purpose	 of	 placing	 funds	 at	 the	 disposal	 of	 the	 beneficiary.	 Both	 the	 payment	 instructions	
and	the	funds	described	therein	move	from	the	bank	of	the	payer/originator	to	the	bank	of	
the	 beneficiary,	 possibly	 via	 several	 other	 banks	 as	 intermediaries	 and/or	 more	 than	 one	
credit	transfer	system.	
Four-party	 Scheme:	 	 a	 card	 scheme	 involving	 separate	 issuers	 and	 acquirers	 of	 payment	
instruments	and	transactions	and	which	clear	payment	obligations	between	each	other		
Interoperability:	 	 a	 situation	 in	 which	 payment	 instruments	 belonging	 to	 a	 given	 scheme	
may	be	used	in	other	countries	and	in	systems	installed	by	other	schemes.	Interoperability	
requires	 technical	 compatibility	 between	 systems,	 but	 can	 only	 take	 effect	 where	
commercial	agreements	have	been	concluded	between	the	schemes	concerned.	
KYC:	 Know	 your	 client	 rules	 and	 procedures	 that	 must	 be	 followed	 by	 banks	 and	 other	
payment	service	providers	to	establish	and	verify	the	identity	of	the	client	on	whose	behalf	
they	hold	funds	or	execute	payment	instructions.	
Large-value	funds	transfer	system	(wholesale	funds	transfer	system):	 	a	funds	transfer	
system	 through	 which	 large-value	 and	 high	 priority	 funds	 transfers	 are	 made	 between	
participants	in	the	system	for	their	own	account	or	on	behalf	of	their	customers.	Although,	
as	a	rule,	no	minimum	value	is	set	for	the	payments	they	carry,	the	average	size	of	payments	
passed	through	such	systems	is	usually	relatively	large.	Large-value	funds	transfer	systems	
are	sometimes	known	as	wholesale	funds	transfer	systems.	
Large-value	 payment:	 payments,	 generally	 of	 very	 large	 amounts,	 which	 are	 mainly	
exchanged	 between	 banks	 or	 between	 participants	 in	 the	 financial	 markets	 and	 usually	
require	urgent	and	timely	settlement.	
Non-Bank:	 	 any	 entity	 involved	 in	 the	 provision	 of	 retail	 payment	 services	 whose	 main	
business	is	not	related	to	taking	deposits	from	the	public	and	using	these	deposits	to	make	
loans.	
Payee:	The	recipient	of	a	payment,	also	the	beneficiary	of	a	transfer	or	payment	of	funds.	
Payer:	 the	 party	 paying	 a	 bill	 or	 debt.	 Generally	 but	 not	 always	 this	 is	 the	 buyer,	 but	
payment	can	also	be	made	by	a	third	party	on	a	buyer’s	behalf.	See	also	Creditor.	

                                                                                                    6	
	
	
Point-of-sale	(POS)	terminal:	 a	device	allowing	the	use	of	payment	instruments,	including	
but	not	limited	to	cards,	at	a	physical	(not	virtual)	point	of	sale.		
Processing:	 the	performance	of	all	of	the	actions	required	in	accordance	with	the	rules	of	a	
system	for	the	handling	of	a	transfer	order	from	the	point	of	acceptance	by	the	system	to	the	
point	 of	 discharge	 from	 the	 system.	 Processing	 may	 include	 clearing,	 sorting,	 netting,	
matching	and/or	settlement.	
Real-time	gross	settlement	(RTGS)	system:	 a	settlement	system	in	which	processing	and	
settlement	take	place	on	a	transaction-by-transaction	basis	in	real	time.	
Reconciliation:	 a	 procedure	 to	 verify	 that	 two	 sets	 of	 records	 issued	 by	 two	 different	
entities	match.	
Retail	 funds	 transfer	 system:	 a	 funds	 transfer	 system	 which	 typically	 handles	 a	 large	
volume	 of	 payments	 of	 relatively	 low	 value	 in	 forms	 such	 as	 cheques,	 credit	 transfers	 and	
direct	debits	ATM	and	POS	transactions	
Retail	 payment:	 this	term	describes	payments	that	are	not	directly	related	to	or	the	result	
of	 financial	 market	 or	 interbank	 transactions;	 generally	 the	 payer	 and	 payee	 are	 both	
consumers,	businesses	and/or	government	entities	but	not	financial	institutions.	The	parties	
to	the	transaction	are	both	participants	in	the	payment	system	processing	the	transaction.		
Settlement:	 an	 act	 that	 discharges	 obligations	 in	 respect	 of	 funds	 or	 securities	 transfers	
between	two	or	more	parties.		
Straight-through	 processing	 (STP):	 the	 capture	 of	 trade	 details	 directly	 from	 front-end	
trading	 systems	 and	 complete	 automated	 processing	 of	 confirmations	 and	 settlement	
instructions	without	the	need	for	rekeying	or	reformatting	data.	
Three-party	card	scheme:	 a	card	scheme	involving	the	following	stakeholders:	1)	the	card	
scheme	 itself,	 which	 acts	 as	 issuer	 and	 acquirer;	 2)	 the	 cardholder;	 and	 3)	 the	 accepting	
party.	This	contrasts	with	a	four-party	card	scheme,	where	the	issuer	and	the	acquirer	are	
separate	entities	and	are	separate	from	the	card	scheme	itself.	
Value	 date:	 the	date	on	which	it	is	agreed	to	place	a	payment	or	transfer	at	the	disposal	of	
the	receiving	user.	The	value	date	is	also	used	as	a	point	of	reference	for	the	calculation	of	
interest	on	the	funds	held	on	an	account.	
	                                 	




                                                                                                    7	
	
	
Acronyms	
	
Acronym	    Definition	
AML	        Anti-Money	Laundering	
B2B	        Business	to	Business	
ERP	        Enterprise	Resource	Planning	
KYC	        Know	Your	Client	
MNO	        Mobile	Network	Operator	
PAFI	       Payment	Aspects	of	Financial	Inclusion	
POS	        Point	of	Sale	
SME	        Small	and	Medium	Enterprises	
	           	
	                    	




                                                      8	
	
	
Executive	Summary	
	
1. Grocery	 shops,	 supermarkets	 and	 other	 retailers	 are	 central	 actors	 in	 the	
   landscape	 of	 retail	 payments	 and	 important	 stakeholders	 in	 financial	 inclusion	
   efforts	 in	 developing	 and	 emerging	 markets.	 Combining	 the	 payments	 they	 make	 to	
   suppliers	and	those	they	receive	from	consumers,	retailers	account	for	a	large	portion	of	
   non-institutional1	payment	volumes	in	a	domestic	economy.	Yet	most	of	these	payments	
   are	still	conducted	in	cash2.	
 	
2. Retailers’	and	wholesalers’	payments	to	their	suppliers	(B2B)	provide	a	pragmatic	
   way	 to	 use	 economic	 incentives	 to	 expand	 adoption	 of	electronic	 payments.	In	the	
   consumer	 to	 retailer	 transaction	 (C2B),	 both	 actors	 must	 be	 persuaded	 to	 adopt	 or	
   acquire	 efficient	 payment	 instruments	 and	 then	 subsequently	 persuaded	 to	 use	 them.	
   Whereby	 many	 higher	 income	 consumers	 and	 modern	 sector	 retailers	 may	 already	 use	
   electronic	payments,	lower	income	consumers	and	traditional	retailers	are	less	likely	to	
   be	equipped	with	electronic	payment	instruments	and	acquiring	solutions.	But	in	the	case	
   of	 B2B	 payments,	 many	 suppliers,	 e.g.	 distributors	 of	 packaged	 goods,	 are	 already	
   entrenched	users	of	electronic	payments	and	banking.	Hence	only	one	party	–	the	retailer	
   –	needs	to	be	assisted	in	the	transition	away	from	cash3.		
   	
3. While	 many	 small	 and	 traditional	 retailers	 remain	 un-	 or	 under-served	 by	 bank,	
   their	suppliers	are	more	often	banked	and	are	interested	in	reducing	their	reliance	
   on	 cash.	These	incentives	need	to	be	leveraged	to	support	change.	Organized	consumer	
   goods	producers	and	distributors	often	consider	cash	collections	and	manual	processes	a	
   burden	and	hence	have	some	incentives	to	help	retailers	adopt	electronic	payments	and	
   banking.	This	is	an	important	opportunity	to	use	market	incentives	to	promote	expansion	
   of	 electronic	 payments,	 especially	 where	 low	 penetration	 and	 merchant	 fees	 act	 as	
   disincentives	for	retailers	to	accept	electronic	payments	from	consumers.	
 	
4. Traditional	 retailers	 and	 their	 suppliers	 also	 have	 specific	 non-payment	 business	
   needs	and	preferences	that	condition	their	demand	for	electronic	payments.	These	
   other	 business	 requirements	 are	 interdependent	 with	 payment	 and	 credit	 processes.	 If	
   they	 are	 not	 well	 met	 by	 or	 integrated	 with	 payment	 services,	 they	 can	 undermine	 the	
   efficacy	of	new	electronic	payments	services.	But	to	date,	these	needs	have	not	been	well	
   targeted	or	supported	by	new	consumer	oriented	mobile	money	solutions.	More	recently	
   some	MNO	service	providers	have	begun	to	expand	into	this	market	segment,	but	despite	
   a	 wave	 of	 innovations,	 many	 of	 these	 needs	 of	 traditional	 retailers	 and	 their	 suppliers	
   remain	inadequately	addressed.	
 	
5. To	 facilitate	 extension	 of	 payment	 services	 to	 this	 part	 of	 the	 market	 and	 encourage	
   adoption,	key	requirements	that	need	to	be	addressed	include:	
 	
   a. Digital	 payment	 solutions	 must	 be	 as	 easy	 to	 use	 as	 cash.	Retailers	that	receive	
        much	 of	 their	 income	 in	 cash	 need	 to	 be	 presented	 with	 payment	 solutions	 that	
        address	 disincentives	 to	 adopting	 electronic	 payments.	 Retailers	 are	 reluctant	 to	
        have	to	make	frequent	trips	to	a	bank	branch	to	deposit	funds;	retailers	can	feel	they	
        have	less	control	and	visibility	over	sales	and	outgoing	expenses	if	they	move	away	
        from	cash	but	are	not	provided	with	or	are	not	comfortable	using	electronic	tools	for	
        monitoring	 accounts;	 order	 and	 invoicing	 processes	 using	 paper	 receipts	 and	

																																																								
1	This	excludes	potentially	high	volume	financial	market	transactions	for	instance	between	financial	

intermediaries,	in	securities,	derivatives	and	FX,	etc.	
2	see	also	World	Bank	and	WEF	market	sizing	assessment	by	Euromonitor	

	
2	see	also	World	Bank	and	WEF	market	sizing	assessment	by	Euromonitor	
4	Refer	also	to	World	Bank	cost	of	retail	payments	methodology:	
	
https://consultations.worldbank.org/data/hub/files/a_practical_guide_for_measuring_retail_payment_costs_con
                                                                                                        9	
	
	
         records	 may	 also	 be	 replaced	 with	 digital	 solutions	 that	 are	 less	 user	 friendly	 or	
         reliable	for	retailers.	
    	
    b.   Payments	networks	should	be	inter-operable.	 Payment	services	are	less	likely	to	
         be	 used	 by	 retailers	 if	 they	 can	 only	 be	 used	 for	 paying	 some	 suppliers.	 There	 are	
         additional	 disincentives	 to	 their	 use	 if	 competing	 suppliers	 require	 use	 of	 different	
         banks	 or	 payment	 accounts.	 From	 a	 supplier’s	 perspective,	 it	 should	 be	 possible	 to	
         receive	payments	from	a	range	of,	if	not	all,	possible	accounts	and	institutions.	These	
         need	to	meet	requirements	of	interoperability	at	each	stage	of	the	process,	including	
         payment	confirmation	and	account	reconciliations.	
         	
    c.   Other	 non-payment	 benefits	 need	 to	 be	 available	 for	 for	 suppliers	 and	
         retailers.	 The	 simple	 benefits	 of	 non-cash	 payments	 alone	 are	 not	 enough	 to	
         overcome	 the	 inertia	 of	 cash.	 To	 accelerate	 the	 transition	 to	 deferred	 payment	 or	
         credit	terms	can	be	instrumental	in	providing	incentives	for	retailers	to	adopt	non-
         cash	payments	while	also	relieving	some	of	the	burden	of	having	to	deposit	cash	to	a	
         bank.	 Distributors	 can	 also	 be	 encouraged	 support	 change	 if	 digital	 payment	
         solutions	 also	 contribute	 to	 their	 sales	 or	 market	 development	 objectives,	 for	
         instance	by	enhancing	control	over	sales	incentive	programs.	
 	
6. Service	 providers	 should	 take	 account	 of	 these	 inter-related	 requirements	 that	
   need	to	be	met	to	expand	payments	and	finance	to	small	retailers.	Progress	has	been	
   made	 in	 many	 markets	 where	 either	 vertical	 integration	 or	 limited	 competition	 in	
   payment	services	have	enabled	principals,	i.e.	anchor	distributors,	to	impose	a	choice	of	
   payment	 and	 banking	 solutions.	 But	 in	 more	 fragmented	 markets	 or	 those	 with	 less	
   developed	 payments	 infrastructure,	 coordination	 issues	 have	 led	 to	 a	 number	 of	 failed	
   projects	in	this	corporate	banking	space.	This	paper	attempts	to	provide	an	overview	of	
   the	requirement	of	each	respective	party	and	to	highlight	the	key	inter-dependencies	that	
   service	 providers	 and	 users	 should	 be	 aware	 of	 when	 developing	 new	 business	
   initiatives.	
 	
7. Policy	makers	should	help	ensure	that	payments	infrastructure	can	support	access	
   to	 finance	 and	 integration	 of	 non-payment	 services	 required	 by	 retail	 supply	
   chains.	 	 A	 more	 open	 and	 inter-operable	 framework	 for	 banking	 and	 payments	 could	
   include	 facilitating	 access	 by	 or	 membership	 of	 non-banks	 to	 payments	 infrastructure,	
   encouraging	 development	 by	 infrastructure	 providers	 of	 new	 payment	 functionality,	
   development	 and	 publication	 of	 open	 APIs,	 and	 easing	 of	 restrictions	 for	 entry	 and	
   innovation	by	payment	or	merchant	service	providers.	Policy	makers	should	also	assess	
   whether	 new	 service	 adoption	 or	 commercialisation	 is	 unduly	 constrained	 by	 anti-
   competitive	 behaviour	 or	 impediments	 to	 inter-operability.	 Regulators	 should	 also	 be	
   careful	 that	 through	 promotion	 of	 common	 standards	 or	 steps	 to	 inter-operability	 they	
   do	 not	 stifle	 innovation	 and	 flexibility	 in	 the	 growing	 array	 of	 financial	 technology	
   services	 that	 are	 also	 serving	 businesses	 in	 the	 distribution	 and	 retail	 sector.	 A	 balance	
   can	best	be	met	through	enhanced	engagement	with	services	providers	and	users	of	the	
   payments	systems.	
 	
	                                  	




                                                                                                       10	
	
	
I.      Introduction		
	
The	purpose	of	this	study	is	to	inform	policy	makers	and	industry	participants	in	their	
respective	 efforts	 to	 expand	 usage	 of	 digital	 payment	 and	 financial	 services	 in	 the	
traditional	 retail	 sector.	 It	 provides	 indications	 of	 the	 size	 and	 structure	 of	 this	 market,	
using	 examples	 from	 an	 assessment	 in	 Indonesia.	 It	 also	 provides	 methodological	 support	
for	conducting	similar	analysis	in	other	markets.		The	second	objective	is	to	provide	insights	
into	 the	 behaviour,	 needs	 and	 challenges	 of	 traditional	 retailers	 and	 explain	 the	
requirements	 that	 they	 place	 on	 B2B	 payments	 services	 and	 infrastructure.	 	 It	 provides	 	 a	
framework	for	this	analysis	of	the	end-to-end	requirements	of	supply	chain	payments.	The	
analysis	 highlights	 areas	 of	 payments	 systems	 that	 would	 benefit	 from	 industry	
coordination.	 	 The	 working	 paper	 concludes	 with	 discussion	 points	 for	 stakeholders	 from	
government	and	banks	and	other	payment	service	providers.	
	
	
The	rest	of	this	paper	is	organized	as	follows.	
	
The	 introductory	 section	 provides	 an	 overview	 of	 the	 policy	 context	 and	 market	
development	 issues.	 It	 outlines	 related	 concerns,	 motivations	 and	 initiatives	 in	 economic	
and	 financial	 sector	 development	 that	 can	 impact	 incentives	 and	 opportunities	 to	 increase	
adoption	of	electronic	payments	in	the	retail	sphere.		
	
The	following	section	provides	a	structure	for	sizing	the	B2B	payments	market.		 With	
examples	 from	 market	 sizing	 in	 Indonesia,	 it	 describes	 the	 structure	 of	 the	 retail	 and	
distribution	market	and	how	impacts	the	volumes	and	instruments	used	for	B2B	payments	
in	 traditional	 retail.	 It	 outlines	 a	 simple	 methodology	 for	 estimating	 volume	 and	 value	 of	
payment	flows	in	this	part	of	the	economy.		
	
Chapter	III	provides	snapshot	profiles	of	traditional	retailers	in	Indonesia	and	highlight	their	
needs,	constraints	and	business	behaviour	that	impacts	payment	service	adoption.	
	
The	subsequent	sections	of	the	document	explain	how	payments	fit	into	the	broader	context	
of	Supply	Chain	Integration	along	the	purchase-to-pay	processes	of	seller	and	buyers.		
	
The	 penultimate	 section	 provides	 an	 analytical	 view	 of	 payment	 service	 requirements	
that	 need	 to	 be	 addressed	 in	 order	 to	 facilitate	 adoption	 and	 usage	 by	 traditional	 retailers	
and	their	suppliers.		
	
The	paper	summarises	 implications	for	Payment	Systems	Policy	to	inform	policy	makers	
and	 industry	 debate	 about	 how	 to	 improve	 payment	 services	 for	 this	 segment	 of	 the	
economy.	Particular	attention	is	focused	on	areas	that	may	require	enhanced	coordination	at	
the	industry	level	or	with	policy	makers.	
	
	
  	
    	
         	
         	
	                                  	




                                                                                                       11	
	
	
Overview	
	
Payments	 are	 important,	 even	 essential,	 services	 for	 households	 and	 firms.	 In	 a	
modern	economy,	electronic	or	digital	payment	services	also	form	an	essential	backbone	of	
the	 financial	 sector	 -	 a	 part	 of	 the	 infrastructure	 required	 to	 conduct	 business,	 fulfil	 the	
functions	of	government,	and	through	which	to	provide	other	financial	and	related	services.	
	
Many	 retailers,	 as	 well	 as	 other	 small	 businesses,	 still	 conduct	 transactions	
predominantly	in	cash.	 Evidence	from	surveys	in	a	range	of	middle	income	and	developing	
markets	indicates	that	many	retailers,	including	those	with	a	bank	account,	pay	most	of	their	
suppliers	 and	 receive	 most	 income	 in	 cash.	 	 In	 markets	 across	 Africa	 and	 South	 Asia	 in	
particular,	only	about	30%	(by	value)	of	all	retailers’	payments	to	their	suppliers	are	made	
electronically	 (see	 exhibit	 1)	 This	 puts	 much	 of	 their	 savings	 and	 information	 about	 their	
creditworthiness	 outside	 the	 banking	 system.	 This	 in	 turn	 limits	 their	 access	 to	 interest	
earning	and	new	sources	of	working	and	investment	capital.			
	
							Exhibit	1:	Retailer	to	Supplier	Payments:	annual	value	and	%	electronic		
                                                                                                                 	
    Micro,	Small	and	Medium	Retailers	                                                                                                         	
    B2B*	Payments	–	Value:	Cash	vs.	Electronic	

                                                                                                                                  Europe	&	Central	Asia	
                Global	                                                                                                       Total:	$1.2	trillion	
    Total:	$13.3	trillion	                                                                                                    Electronic:	$0.69	trillion	(59%)	
    Electronic:	$7.1	trillion	(53%)	                     High-income	OECD	
                                                   Total:	$4.4	trillion	
                                                   Electronic:	$3.5	trillion	(81%)	

                                                                                                                                    East	Asia	&	Paciﬁc	
                                                                      Middle	East	&	North	Africa	                             Total:	$3.8	trillion	
                                                                    Total:	$0.52	trillion	                                    Electronic:	$1.5	trillion	(40%)	
                                                                    Electronic:	$0.20	trillion	(40%)	



                                                                                                                         South	Asia	
                                                                                                              Total:	$1.5	trillion	
                                                                                                              Electronic:	$0.4	trillion	(26%)	
    La5n	America	&	the	Caribbean	
    Total:	$1.4	trillion	
    Electronic:	$0.61	trillion	(45%)	


                                                                           Sub-Saharan	Africa	
                                                                     Total:	$0.61	trillion	
                                                                     Electronic:	$0.19	trillion	(31%)	

     *	B2B	payments	include	only	those	payments	by	retailers	to	their	immediate	suppliers,	and	does	not	include	other	B2B	payments	up	the	distribuPon	channel.			

Source:	Euromonitor,	IFC	
	
Although	cash	does	not	create	overt	nominal	costs	on	retailers,	its	pervasive	use	along	
the	 supply	 chain	 imposes	 system-wide	 costs	 and	 can	 undermine	 efficiency	 of	
businesses	in	the	real	sector.		Beyond	lost	interest	earnings,	the	costs	of	physical	logistics	
and	 operational	 costs	 of	 cash	 collection,	 invoicing,	 reconciliations	 can	 weigh	 on	 retailers.	
Manual	operations	can	open	the	door	to	error	and	fraud	and	undermine	potential	efficiency	
gains	from	better	information	management	and	planning	along	the	supply	chain4.		
	

																																																								
4	Refer	also	to	World	Bank	cost	of	retail	payments	methodology:	

https://consultations.worldbank.org/data/hub/files/a_practical_guide_for_measuring_retail_payment_costs_con
sultation_draft_final.pdf			

                                                                                                                                                                    12	
	
	
New	payment	services	are	being	brought	to	market	that	target	un-	and	under-served	
segments	 of	 the	 economy.	 	 Most	 have	 first	 gained	 traction	 in	 niche	 areas.	 These	 include	
services	launched	by	non-banks,	mobile	operators	and	technology	companies	to	address	the	
needs	 of	 the	 unbanked,	 for	 bill	 payments,	 remittances	 and	 a	 growing	 array	 of	 e-commerce	
and	digital	services	such	as	games	or	media.	Meanwhile,	banks	and	established	actors	such	
as	 card	 networks	 and	 operators	 of	 inter-bank	 systems	 have	 also	 continued	 to	 evolve	 their	
payment	 service	 offering	 with	 intent	 to	 expand	 penetration	 and	 usage	 in	 lower	 income	
segments	and	areas	of	business	dominated	by	cash.	
	
Traditional	 retailers	 -	 under	 pressure	 from	 the	 modern	 sector5	–	 would	 be	 better	
placed	 to	 compete	 if	 they	 could	 benefit	 from	 better	 access	 to	 credit	 and	 efficiency	
gains	 from	 supply	 chain	 integration.	 Digital	 solutions	 for	 procurement,	 stock	
management,	accounting	and	general	business	management	can	create	efficiency	gains	that,	
in	a	competitive	market,	can	pass	on	savings	to	consumers.	As	larger	suppliers	automate	and	
integrate	their	supply	chain	operations,	retailers	outside	this	trend	may	find	it	more	difficult	
to	benefit	from	credit	or	discounts	or	from	competition	between	alternative	suppliers.	Being	
equipped	to	participate	in	new	“digital”	business	practices	is	important	for	them	to	be	able	
to	 compete	 with	 modern	 retailers	 that	 have	 greater	 economies	 of	 scale	 in	 the	 deployment	
and	usage	of	technology.	
	
Exhibit	2:	modern	vs.	traditional	retail	market	share	(by	value	of	sales),	selected	markets	2013	
	
	                      China#
	
                     Mexico#
	
	             South#Africa#
	                       Brazil#
	                  Thailand#
	               Venezuela#
	
                 Argen;na#
	
	                 Colombia#
	               Philippines#
	                Indonesia#
	                       India#
	
	                                 0%#              20%#     40%#        60%#   80%#    100%#
	                                             Tradi;onal#     Modern#
	
             Source:	Euromonitor	
	
	
	
	
	
	                                                     	




																																																								
5	the	modern	sector	refers	in	this	context	to	organized	generally	larger	scale	retail	companies,	chains	or	

franchises	that	operate	many	outlets	and	support	them	with	a	scalable	centralized	infrastructure	for	purchasing,	
logistics	and	distribution	as	well	as	branding.	Typical	examples	of	minimart	modern	sector	retailers	in	Indonesia	
include	Indomaret,	Circle	K,	7-Eleven	and	Alfamart.	

                                                                                                               13	
	
	
Policy	Context		
Economic	Development	
	
Retail	sector	development	and	access	by	retailers	to	financial	services	raise	important	
policy	 issues,	 including	 not	 just	 finance,	 but	 also	 employment,	 competition,	 tax	 and	
competitiveness.	 Expanding	 financial	 services	 to	 this	 sector	 can	 help	 government	
contribute	to	achieving	non-financial	sector	policy	objectives.	Equally,	to	efficiently	expand	
financial	 services	 access	 to	 this	 sector,	 governments	 should	 make	 use	 of	 policy	 initiatives	
and	instruments	in	other	areas	beyond	the	financial	sector	to	address	relevant	constraints.	
In	particular	the	following	points	and	areas	of	policy	should	be	considered:		
	
The	retail	sector,	especially	food	grocery,	plays	an	important	role	in	the	welfare	and	
development	 of	 lower	 income	 economies.	 As	 the	 conduit	 through	 which	 consumption	
goods	are	supplied	to	households,	the	sector	and	its	efficiency	has	an	impact	on	the	overall	
cost	 of	 essential	 goods	 on	 which	 lower	 income	 persons	 spend	 a	 large	 portion	 of	 their	
income.		
	
Lower	 income	 households	 spend	 a	 greater	 proportion	 of	 their	 income	 on	
consumption	 and	 via	 traditional	 retailers	 (see	 exhibit	 3).	 Efficiency	 and	 pricing	 in	 this	
part	 of	 the	 market	 therefore	 has	 a	 disproportionate	 impact	 on	 poorer	 households.	
Expenditure	 on	 foodstuffs	 and	 consumers	 goods	 represents	 an	 important	 share	 of	 low-
income	 households’	 income.	 So	 changes	 in	 the	 efficiency	 of	 this	 sector	 can	 have	 important	
welfare	effects.	
	
             Exhibit	3:	GDP	per	capita	vs.	food	expenditure	per	capita,	cross-country	comparison	
                                                                                                            (each	marker	indicates	a	country)	
	
								                                                                                         Comparing)HH)Expenditure)on)Food)(%$of$GDP$pc)$with)GDP)pc)
	                                                                   70%#

	
	
                                                                    60%#
	
             Consuumer)Expeniture)on)Food)as)%)of)GDP)per)capita)




	
	                                                                   50%#
	
	
	                                                                   40%#

	
	                                                                   30%#
	
	
       			                                                          20%#



                                                                    10%#



                                                                     0%#
                                                                           #+####   #10,000##   #20,000##     #30,000##   #40,000##         #50,000##    #60,000##   #70,000##   #80,000##   #90,000##
                                                                                                                           GDP)pc)in)current)USD)
                                                                                                                          2011)(or$nearest$available))

       Sources:	World	Bank	and	Euromonitor	
   	
Traditional	 retailers	 are	 also	 an	 important	 source	 of	 employment.	 Many	 traditional	
retailers	are	small,	owner	operated	businesses	that	generate	an	important	source	of	income	
for	 lower	 socio-economic	 and	 rural	 population	 segments	 of	 society.	 Many	 small	 shops	 are	
opened	on	the	ground	floor	of	the	place	of	residence	of	a	family	and	are	run	by	women	of	the	
household,	allowing	them	to	also	take	care	of	other	domestic	responsibilities,	while	running	
their	business.	
	

                                                                                                                                                                                                   14	
	
	
Modernisation	of	the	retail	sector	and	the	rise	of	organized	chains	present	a	challenge	
to	 traditional	 retailers.	Policy	makers	are	concerned	about	the	role	of	the	retail	sector	in	
employment	and	on	local	foodstuff	producers	and	the	effects	on	it	of	modernization	in	the	
retail	and	distribution	industry.	
	
The	 retail	 sector	 plays	 a	 key	 role	 in	 expanding	 usage	 of	 electronic	 payments	 by	
consumers.	 Retailers	generate	a	big	portion	of	overall	consumer	payments	in	any	economy.	
They	are	hence	a	focal	point	for	efforts	by	banks,	retail	payment	schemes	and	governments	
to	 reach	 important	 financial	 sector	 and	 inclusion	 targets.	 Low	 usage	 of	 cards	 and	 payment	
accounts	 for	 retail	 consumption	 has	 made	 acceptance	 by	 retailers	 in	 emerging	 markets	 a	
focus	for	industry’s	and	policy	makers’	efforts	to	expand	the	payments	sector.		
	
Retailers	and	their	suppliers	also	feature	prominently	in	attempts	to	broaden	the	tax	
base	and	streamline	and	simplify	operations	of	reporting,	collections	and	tax	credits.	
Some	 countries,	 particularly	 in	 Latin	 America,	 have	 introduced	 e-invoicing	 obligations	 to	
reinforce	 the	 tax	 base.	 The	 obligation	 to	 capture	 invoices	 electronically	 has	 pushed	
distributors	 and	 in	 some	 cases	 also	 retailers	 to	 digitize	 more	 of	 their	 processing,	 thereby	
increasing	 potential	 benefits	 from	 automating	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 process	 to	 include	 electronic	
payments.	
	
In	 conjunction	 with	 tax	 issues,	 many	 countries	 are	 putting	 in	 place	 electronic	
invoicing	 and	 procurement	 systems.	 The	 aim	 thereof	 is	 generally	 not	 just	 to	 “digitize”	
these	 processes	 but	 also	 to	 help	 improve	 and	 simplify	 business	 operations,	 enhance	
transparency	of	government	procurement	and	the	ability	for	SMEs	to	participate	in	tenders	
and	gain	access	to	new	markets.		
	

Financial	Sector	Development			
       	
Traditional	 retailers	 in	 emerging	 markets	 sit	 at	 the	 crossroads	 of	 financial	 sector	
development.	 The	 sector	 can	 play	 an	 important	 role	 in	 policies	 aiming	 to	 increase	 the	
access	 for	 the	 poor	 and	 under-served	 to	 better	 payments	 services,	 benefits	 of	 the	 digital	
economy 6 	and	 finance	 for	 SMEs.	 With	 relevance	 to	 payments	 system	 strategy	 and	
development,	several	specific	policy	issues7	and	market	developments	are	pertinent	in	most	
markets	 and	 should	 be	 taken	 into	 consideration	 when	 reviewing	 plans	 to	 promote	 B2B	
payments:	
     	
   §    Central	payment	switch	and	ACH	infrastructure	development	
        B2B	payments	in	this	segment	bridge	the	gap	between	banked	corporates	and	small	
        firms	often	poorly	(or	not)	served	by	financial	institutions.	Renewal	or	expansion	of	
        payments	infrastructure	can	be	designed	in	a	way	to	accommodate	better	the	access	
        and	 utilisation	 challenges	 of	 this	 segment	 of	 the	 economy.	 A	 growing	 number	 of	
        countries	are	upgrading	Automated	Clearing	House	(ACH)	infrastructure	to	support	
        faster	retail	payments	and	enhance	access	to	and	management	of	associated	of	non-
        payment	data.		
   	
   §    ISO20022	payment	standards	
        Global	 payments	 systems	 are	 migrating	 to	 ISO20022	 standards.	 These	 payment	
        message	structures	support	automation	and	integration	for	business	processes	that	
        are	 also	 important	 for	 the	 retail	 and	 distribution	 sector.	 While	 distributors	 may	

																																																								
6	Small	business	may	also	face	challenges	to	benefit	from	the	shift	to	offer	government	and	business	services	as	

well	as	marketing	and	sale	opportunities	to	internet	based	platforms;	for	example	they	may	not	be	able	to	afford	
a	computer	or	regular	access	to	broadband;	they	may	lack	skills	to	market	their	service	or	collect	payment	via	
internet	channels.	
7	Refer	also	to	policy	issues	the	consultation	on	Payment	Aspects	of	Financial	Inclusion	(PAFI).		


                                                                                                              15	
	
	
        already	 have	 systems	 and	 operations	 that	 integrate	 with	 these	 standards,	 many	 of	
        the	 smaller	 retailers	 that	 they	 supply	 do	 not	 use	 related	 banking	 or	 enterprise	
        management	 solutions.	 Hence	 they	 have	 little	 incentive,	 nor	 the	 capacity,	 to	 use	
        ISO20022	 messages	 to	 support	 automation	 of	 their	 accounting	 and	 operations.	
        Together,	 market	 participants	 need	 to	 set	 out	 plans	 to	 help	 make	 these	 ERP	 and	
        payment	related	services	easier	and	more	attractive	for	small	businesses	to	adopt.	
        	
    §   Promotion	of	financial	technology	and	non-bank	innovation	
        The	growing	role	of	so-called	fintech	services	has	inspired	many	countries	to	set	up	
        policies,	 industry	 bodies	 and	 funding	 sources	 to	 support	 the	 application	 of	 new	
        technology	 and	 business	 models	 to	 support	 financial	 sector	 innovation	 and	
        development	 in	 their	 economy.	 New	 financial	 technology	 companies	 can	 help	 to	
        provider	 services	 that	 that	 better	 adapt	 and	 connect	 underlying	 payments	 and	
        banking	services	to	meet	needs	of	specific	users	such	as	small	retailers.	There	can	be	
        mutual	 benefits	 from	 facilitating	 or	 even	 directing	 new	 companies’	 attention	 to	
        improving	 services	 to	 serve	 the	 B2B	 payments	 and	 financial	 services	 needs	 of	 the	
        retail	sector.		
        	
    §   Expansion	of	networks	to	include	agents	and	retailers	
        Mobile	money,	bill	payment	and	agent	banking	models	often	target	small	retailers	to	
        act	as	agents	for	new	payment	networks.	There	can	be	important	synergies	between	
        these	efforts	and	addressing	the	B2B	payment	needs	of	retailers	and	their	suppliers.		
      	
    SME	Finance		
      	
    Many	 governments	 have	 policies	 to	 support	 access	 to	 finance	 for	 small	 and	
    medium	 sized	 enterprises	 (SMEs).	 These	firms	tend	to	account	for	a	large	portion	of	
    employment	and	output.	But	their	capacity,	scale	and	level	of	formality	make	them	often	
    more	costly	and	less	attractive	clients	for	banks	to	serve.	Hence	governments	may	have	
    policies	 that	 help	 to	 promote	 their	 access	 to	 financial	 services,	 for	 instance	 through	
    lending	targets,	interest	rate	controls,	lending	subsidies	or	capacity	building	projects.		
        	
    Banks	 and	 non-bank	 financial	 institutions	 have	 an	 array	 of	 service	 models	 that	
    aim	 to	 support	 distribution	 chain	 finance.	 	 Distributors	 themselves	 often	 provide	
    deferred	 payment	 terms	 to	 retailers.	 In	 other	 instances,	 banks	 provide	 inventory	 or	
    working	capital	facilities	to	larger	wholesalers	or	retail	chains.	For	high	value	goods	such	
    as	motorcycle	parts	or	electronics,	consumers	may	be	provided	with	short	term	lending	
    products,	 either	 direct	 by	 the	 seller	 or	 intermediated	 by	 the	 seller	 and	 financed	 by	 a	
    consumer	credit	organisation.		
	
	
	
	                                 	




                                                                                                     16	
	
	
Box	1:	The	context	of	B2B	payments	


Payment aspects of financial inclusion (PAFI)




                                                                                                    	
	
The	 World	 Bank	 and	 the	 BIS	 have,	 with	 other	 parties,	 developed	 guidance	 on	 the	
“Payment	Aspects	of	Financial	Inclusion	(PAFI).	In	this	report,	emphasis	is	place	on	the	
role	that	large-volume	recurrent	payment	streams	can	play	–	if	properly	addressed	–	to	
build	scale	and	reach	of	the	financial	ecosystem	and	enhance	inclusion.	Small	retailers’	
Business–to-Business	 payments	 are	 one	 specific	 and	 kind	 of	 such	 large-volume,	
recurrent	transactions.	 They	are	especially	relevant	in	developing	and	merging	markets	
where	 traditional	 retail	 is	 often	 a	 large	 part	 of	 the	 overall	 retail	 economy.	 The	 PAFI	
report	 provides	 broad	 guidance	 to	 policy	 makers	 and	 industry	 leaders	 on	 financial	
inclusion	 aspects	 of	 payments,	 such	 as	 infrastructure,	 services	 and	 regulation.	 This	
current	document	on	B2B	payments	is	a	complement	to	the	PAFI	report.	It	draws	upon	
the	 broader	 PAFI	 framework	 and	 provides	 more	 detailed,	 operational	 and	 targeted	
guidance	 on	 the	 foundations	 required	 to	 support	 B2B	 payments:	 (i)	 infrastructure	 (ii)	
regulatory	and	(iii)	private	sector	commitment.	It	also	identifies	the	requirements	that	
need	to	be	fulfilled	by	product	design,	access	points	and	awareness	in	order	to	leverage	
the	potential	of	B2B	payments		as	a	catalytic	large	volume	transaction	stream.	
	
	
	                                 	




                                                                                                        17	
	
	
II.        An	Approach	to	Market	Sizing		
This	 section	 outlines	 a	 simplified	 methodology8	for	 estimating	 the	 size	 of	 payment	
flows	in	the	traditional	retail	sector.	For	illustrative	purposes	It	also	provides	estimates	of	
different	measures	of	the	importance	and	size	of	the	traditional	retail	segment	in	Indonesia.	
	
Overall	 the	 size	 of	 B2B	 transaction	 is	 important	 and	 exceeds	 many	 of	 the	 other	
payment	 flows	 that	 originate	 from	 or	 reach	 lower	 income	 parts	 of	 society.	As	per	the	
table	below,	retailers’	payments	to	their	immediate	suppliers	can	equate	to	as	much	as	25	or	
30%	of	GDP,	while	remittance	inflows	in	contrast,	albeit	important,	tend	to	be	more	in	the	
realms	of	5%	of	GDP.	The	overall	size	of	the	B2B	market	is	even	larger,	as	many	retailers	buy	
from	 wholesalers	 or	 other	 intermediaries	 who	 in	 turn	 purchase	 from	 a	 chain	 of	 other	
distributors.	This	tends	to	multiply	the	overall	number	of	transactions	by	a	factor	of	2	to	4	
depending	on	the	number	of	distribution	layers	in	the	market.	
	
Exhibit	4:	Estimated	value	of	B2B	grocery	payments	to	immediate	suppliers	compared	to	
remittances	
    35%#

                                                                                       Remi@ances#as#%#of#GDP#

                                                                                       Grocery#Supplier#payments#as#%#of#GDP#
    30%#




    25%#




    20%#




    15%#




    10%#




     5%#




     0%#
              Kenya#            Vietnam#           Morocco#   Indonesia#   Pakistan#       Turkey#                    Colombia#



Sources:	Euromonitor	and	World	Bank	

Market	structure	
The	 traditional	 retail	 sector	 tends	 to	 account	 for	 a	 large	 part	 of	 emerging	 and	
developing	market	economies.	 This	section	provides	an	overview	of	the	size	and	structure	
of	 this	 market	 segment,	 based	 in	 particular	 on	 primary	 and	 secondary	 empirical	 research	
into	selected	markets.			         	         	      	       												Exhibit	5:	Distribution	structures	
	                                                                               Consumer	Product	Producer	
Distribution	in	the	retail	sector	usually	passes	through	
a	 series	 of	 channels	 including	 direct	 key	 accounts,	                Key	
                                                                           A/C	
                                                                                    Key	
                                                                                    A/C	
                                                                                           D	     D	    W	 W	
distributors	 and	 wholesalers.	 	 Key	 account	 clients	 may	
be	 large	 retail	 chains	 or	 hotels	 to	 which	 product	 is	 sold	                             W	     W	 W	
directly	 and	 then	 further	 distributed	 with	 their	 own	
networks.	 Larger	 distributors	 are	 used	 to	 reach	 another	                                            W	

portion	 of	 the	 market	 for	 retail.	 They	 tend	 to	 be	 well	 Hotel	 Rest	 R	 R	 R	 R	                 R	
organised,	 with	 a	 high	 proportion	 of	 them	 using	 formal	
banking	and	payments	services.	Many	of	them	would	have	                           Consumer	Expenditure	
																																																								                                     D	   Distributor	   W	   Wholesaler	   R	   Retailer	
                                                                                                                                                     Key	
                                                                                                                                                            Key	account	client	
8	This	follows	a	bottom-up	approach	to	market	sizing	which	complements	                                                                              A/C	



	the	approach	used	in	the	Euromonitor	study	for	global	market	sizing.	

                                                                                                                                                                             18	
	
	
some	 form	 or	 credit	 terms	 offered	 to	 them	 by	 the	 supplier	 or	 a	 bank.	 Wholesalers	 usually	
make	 up	 for	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 direct	 customers	 of	 consumer	 goods	 companies.	 they	 	 are	 less	
likely	to	use	banking	services	or	have	access	to	credit	from	suppliers;	they	are	more	likely	to	
pay	in	cash.		
	

Estimating	payment	value	and	volume	
Data	on	consumer	expenditure	provides	a	first	level	estimate	of	B2B	payment	flows.	
Most	countries	have	statistics	on	consumer	expenditure,	broken	down	by	category	of	goods	
and	 services	 consumed	 at	 varying	 levels	 of	 aggregation.	 Private	 sector	 research	 firms	 also	
provide	estimates	of	retail	expenditure	across	different	categories	of	goods,	although	these	
may	under-estimate	or	exclude	informal	(i.e.	unregistered)	retailers.	
	
Estimates	of	B2B	payment	values	also	need	to	consider	the	level	of	margins	retained	
by	 each	 layer	 of	 distribution.	 Retailers	 purchase	 Total	sales	value	per	product	category	=	
supplies	at	a	wholesale	price,	which	represents	their	 	
margin.	 If	 using	 consumer	 expenditure	 as	 a	 starting	 §     Value	of	good	sold	by	Producer	by	category	
                                                              	
point	 for	 market	 sizing,	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 first	 +			Wholesaler	margins	
estimate	 the	 level	 of	 these	 margins	 and	 then	 deduct	 	+			Retailer	margins	
them	 from	 each	 payment	 leg.	 Otherwise	 payment	 	
value	 is	 over-estimated.	 Information	 on	 retail	 and	 =			Total	value	of	retail	sales	per	category		
wholesale	 margins	 can	 also	 be	 useful	 to	 assess	 how	 payment	 or	 credit	 fees	 would	 impact	
profitability.	 	 Estimates	 of	 margins	 can	 often	 be	 obtained	 from	 private	 sector	 market	
experts.	 Some	 countries	 conduct	 input/output	 analysis	 that	 can	 provide	 estimates	 of	
margins,	as	is	the	case	in	Indonesia	(see	box	2).		
	
Value	 and	 volume	 of	 payments	 depends	 hence	 on	 the	 number	 of	 legs	 in	 the	
distribution	 chain.	 Some	 retailers	 may	 buy	 direct	 from	 a	 distributor	 supplied	 by	 the	
consumer	 goods	 company,	 generating	 one	 transaction	 from	 distributor	 to	 retailer.	 Other,	
particularly	smaller	retailers	may	buy	from	wholesalers	who	in	turn	purchase	from	another	
wholesaler	 that	 is	 supplied	 by	 the	 Consumer	 goods	 company.	 This	 generates	 2	 payment	
flows	from	a	given	distributor	to	the	end	retailer.	Similarly,	getting	product	to	some	smaller	
or	remote	retailers	may	involve	3	or	4	steps.	In	this	manner,	the	number	of	distribution	legs	
determine	 the	 volume	 of	 B2B	 payments	 processed	 in	 the	 overall	 market.	 Hence	 sizing	 the	
market	for	these	payments	requires	some	estimation	of	this	structure.	
	
Exhibit	6:	Schematic	chart	of	consumer	goods	and	retail	distribution	market	structure	
                                                                        Schematic	Chart	of	Consumer	Goods	and	Retail	Distribution	Market	Structure	

                                    	               	              	                                                                	                                                                      Grocery	                                                                 	
                              Motor	vehicles		 ConstrucKon		   Household			                                                     Household			                           	          	                          	                            	                                   Fresh	Produce	
                                &	Parts	           Consumer	Durables	
                                                Materials	      Durables	                                                      Non-Durables	                        Tobacco	   Beverages	                   Dairy	                     Foodstuﬀs	
                                    Motorcycle	spare	parts	
Goods	Categories	




                                                                                                      Apparel	&	Footware	




                                                                                                                                                                                     NARTD		(inc	Water)	




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fruit	&	Vegetable	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Electronics	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Packaged	Food	
                                                                                                                                                   Personal	Care	




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ConfecKonary	
                                                                        White	Goods	




                                                                                                                                     Home	Care		




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Meat	&	Fish	
                                                                                       Electronics	
                                                              Cement	




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Grains	
                                                                                                                            Fuels	




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Milk	




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Flow	of	goods	




                                                                                                                                             Distributors	
Retailers	and	Distributors	




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wholesalers	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Flow	of	funds	




                                    Specialised	Retailers	                                                                                 Food	and	non-food	Grocery	Retailers	
                                              	                                                                Hyper	/	              Mini-Markets	
                                                                                                                                                                	
                                                                                                                                                     Small	Retailers	 Micro	                                                                                                           Restaurants	
                                                                                                               Super-	                                                                                                                                    Retailers	
                                                                                                               markets	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19	
	
	
To	estimate	the	value	of	sales,	the	retailer	and	wholesaler	margins	must	be	deducted	
from	 the	 value	 at	 the	 point	 of	 sale.	 Industry	 expertise	 or	 data	 from	 input/output	 tables	
can	 be	 used	 to	 estimate	 the	 average	 margins	 across	 different	 product	 groups	 and	 retail	
structures	 within	 the	 market.	 Gross	 figures	 reported	 by	 statistical	 authorities	 for	 value	 of	
retail	 sales	 will	 generally	 include	 value	 added	 tax	 (VAT).	 For	 retailers	 for	 which	 this	 is	
applicable,	it	should	be	deducted	from	the	total	value	of	sales	to	estimate	payment	values	to	
distributors.	 However	 it	 should	 be	 noted	 that	 there	 are	 variations	 depending	 on	 the	 tax	
regime	in	the	way	in	which	VAT	is	charged	and	collected.	
	
Volume	and	value	estimates	require	information	about	the	number	of	retailers	in	the	
market,	 segmented	 by	 size	 or	 business	 model.	This	kind	of	data	is	often	available	from	
market	research	firms	as	well	as	enterprise	surveys	conducted	by	government	agencies.	But	
care	 must	 be	 taken	 using	 these	 sources	 as	 many	 such	 surveys	 either	 look	 only	 at	 formal	
sector	firms	and	hence	exclude	-	or	may	underestimate	the	number	of	-	informal	enterprises	
in	the	retail	sector.	Interviews	with	a	balanced	selection	of	consumer	goods	companies	can	
also	 help	 to	 provide	 a	 quick	 overview	 of	 the	 total	 number	 of	 retailers.	 Depending	 on	 the	
country,	 there	 may	 also	 be	 reliable	 information	 available	 from	 industry	 associations	 or	
chamber	 of	 commerce	 organisations.	 However,	 small	 and	 traditional	 retailers	 may	 not	 be	
within	their	membership.	
	
Lastly,	it	is	 essential	 to	 estimate	the	 number	 of	 suppliers	that	retailers	have	 and	the	
frequencies	with	which	they	purchase	supplies	from	each	of	them.	Overall	expenditure	
needs	to	be	divided	by	the	number	of	retailers	and	supplier	relationships	they	have	in	order	
to	 estimate	 how	 many	 actual	 payments	 are	 being	 made	 on	 a	 regular	 basis.	 This	 requires	
some	 survey-based	 work	 to	 estimate	 the	 number	 of	 suppliers	 and	 average	 purchase	
frequency	and	size.		
	
Combining	 estimates	 on	 overall	 expenditure,	 number	 of	 retailers	 and	 purchase	
frequencies	 with	 data	 on	 market	 structure	 allows	 an	 estimate	 to	 be	 made	 of	 gross	
payment	 values	 and	 volumes	 in	 the	 retail	 market.	 Further	 input	 from	 interviews	 with	
retailers	and	distributors	can	then	be	used	to	estimate	the	portion	of	these	payments	being	
made	in	cash	instead	of	through	electronic	payment	instruments	or	other	non-cash	means.	
	                                  	




                                                                                                     20	
	
	
	
Box	2:	Extracts	from	retailer	survey	in	Indonesia	
	
Retailers	 source	 suppliers	 of	 different	 kinds	 at	 different	 frequencies.	 These	 charts	
summarise	the	frequency	with	which	retailers	within	the	sample	purchase	specific	product	
types,	expressed	as	a	%	of	the	overall	sample	base.	
	
Chart	1:	frequency	of	stock	purchases	by	food	category	
Source:	IFC	&	e-Mitra,	2014	

                                             Indonesia	Tradi,onal	Retailers	Survey		
                                          Frequency	of	stock	purchases	by	product	type	
                                                       (percentage	or	respondents)	

    60%	



    50%	



    40%	



    30%	



    20%	



    10%	



     0%	
           2	–	3	+mes	a	week	   Once	a	week	          Every	2	weeks	            Every	month	           Once	in	2	months	    >		Once	in	2	month	

                                     Ready	to	drink	beverages	          instant	beverages	          Mineral	water	


	

                                               Indonesia	Tradi,onal	Retailer	Survey	
                                           Frequency	of	stock	purchases	by	product	type	
                                                        (percentage	or	respondents)	

    50%	

    45%	

    40%	

    35%	

    30%	

    25%	

    20%	

    15%	

    10%	

     5%	

     0%	
           2	–	3	*mes	a	week	   Once	a	week	           Every	2	weeks	            Every	month	           Once	in	2	months	   >		Once	in	2	month	

                                        Rice	       Toiletries	         household	care	         medicine	/	drugs	

	
	
	                                           	




                                                                                                                                                  21	
	
	
	
	
Box	3:	Examples	of	consumer	expenditure	data	analysis,	Indonesia	
The	 Indonesian	 statistical	 agency	 estimates	 spending	 per	 expenditure	 category	 for	
households	 of	 different	 levels	 of	 income.	 Lower	 income	 households	 spend	 proportionately	
more	on	basics	such	as	food.		
		Chart	2:	household	expenditure,	by	expenditure	category	and	income	segment		
	
                                                               Alloca&on(of(Income(per(segment(and(products(
                                                                               Indonesia(2012(
          100%#

           90%#

           80%#

           70%#                                                                                                                                                                                    ParMes#and#ceremonies#

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Taxes#and#insurances#
           60%#
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Durable#goods#
           50%#                                                                                                                                                                                    Clothing,#footwear,#headgear#

           40%#                                                                                                                                                                                    Health#cost#

                                                                                                                                                                                                   EducaMon#cost#
           30%#
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Goods#and#services#
           20%#                                                                                                                                                                                    Housing#and#household#facility#

           10%#                                                                                                                                                                                    Food#

            0%#
                  Less#than#100# 1004#150#   1504#200#    2004#300#        3004#500#                  5004#850#      7504#1,000#      1,000#and#                           Per#capita#
                                                                                                                                         over#                                avg.#
                                      Income#Segment#in#Thousand#Rupiah#per#month#per#capita#expenditure#by#Households#(2012)#



Using	input/output	tables,	estimates	of	wholesaler	and	retailer	margins	can	be	obtained	per	
expenditure	category.	These	figures	can	help	to	better	understand	the	structure	of	the	
distribution	sector	and	the	competitive	environment.	
                                                                                               	
    Chart	4:	Indonesian	consumer	expenditure,	retail	and	wholesale	margins,	by	product	category	
	
Wholesale	       and	     retail	                                                                                                 Composi.on&of&Final&Expenditure&on&selected&goods&
                                                                                                                                     (based$on$2005$Input$Output$data,$in$USD$equivalent)$

margins:	      BPS	    statistics	                                    Alcoholic!Beverages!
                                                                         Processed!meat!

provide	one	indication	of	how	                                             Processed!tea!
                                                                         Canning!of!fruits!
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Wholesale!Margin!

                                                                                                                                                                                                              Retail!Margin!

the	 final	 expenditure	 by	                                                 Chocolate!&!
                                                                             Wheat!Flour!                                                                                                                     Private!Expenditure!


consumers	 is	 shared	 out	 by	
                                                                                     Soap!
                                                                               CosmeRcs!
                                                                            non"Alcoholic!

the	main	stages	of	production	                                           Bakery!Products!
                                                                            Milled!Coﬀee!


and	 distribution.	 Overall,	                                                       Sugar!
                                                                                 Noodles!
                                                                      Soya!bean!products!

wholesale	 and	 retail	 margins	                                       Drugs!&!Medicine!
                                                                              Other!food!


in	 packaged	 consumer	 goods	                                                      Dairy!
                                                                       animal!and!veg!oil!


range	from	about	8%	to	16%.	
                                                                              Vegetables!
                                                                                      Fish!
                                                                                  Poultry!

These	 figures	 help	 estimate	                                                     Meat!
                                                                                     Fruit!


value	 of	 purchases	 between	                                                 Cigare6es!
                                                                                      Rice!


retailers,	 wholesalers	 and	                                                                !"!!!!       !1,000!!     !2,000!!     !3,000!!      !4,000!!      !5,000!!

                                                                                                                                                    Source:	BPS	Indonesia	Input/Output	data	2005	
                                                                                                                                                          Million&USD&
                                                                                                                                                                               !6,000!!      !7,000!!      !8,000!!      !9,000!!        !10,000!!

                                                                                                                                                        (at$12600$Rp$=1)$

distributors.	

By	 way	 of	 comparison,	 comparable	 studies	 in	 Australia	 find	 total	 gross	 distribution	 and	
retail	margins	for	food	and	non-alcoholic	drinks	to	be	notably	higher,	closer	to	35	%9.	As	the	
study	notes,	margins	often	depend	on	the	competitive	structure	of	the	market.	In	Indonesia,	
lower	 gross	 margins	 may	 reflect	 the	 fragmented	 nature	 of	 the	 retail	 industry	 relative	 to	
suppliers	as	well	as	the	relatively	lower	wages	in	the	retail	sector.	
	
Table	1:	Indonesia:	number	of	grocery	and	non-grocery	retailers	
                                       2007              2008              2009              2010              2011              2012                                                                                                	
    Grocery'Retailers     '''''''2,501,964 '''''''2,540,273 '''''''2,573,589 '''''''2,596,201 '''''''2,589,430 '''''''2,582,875                                                                                                      	
                                    224,374 '''''''''''
    Non;Grocery'Retailers '''''''''''                                   236,216 '''''''''''
                                                      230,804 '''''''''''                                   245,115 '''''''''''
                                                                                          241,258 '''''''''''                 248,368
	Source:	Euromonitor	World	Retail	Data	and	Statistics	2014	
	
																																																								
9	cf	D’Arcy	et	al,	2012	


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     22	
	
	
Box	4:	Value	and	volume	estimates	for	traditional	retail	B2B	payments,	Indonesia	
	
The	Indonesian	market	has	an	estimated	2.5	million	retailers,	of	which	the	vast	majority	are	
in	 the	 traditional	 and	 informal	 space.	 Most	 of	 these	 pay	 their	 immediate	 suppliers	 in	 cash.		
Estimates	of	annual	sales	of	packaged	consumer	goods	are	about	USD	92	billion,	with	up	to	
about	 USD	 164	 billion	 in	 total	 consumer	 expenditure	 on	 food.	 Estimates	 of	 sales	 through	
tradition	 retail	 range	 from	 about	 USD	 46	 billion	 to	 about	 USD	 80	 billion	 depending	 on	 the	
scope	 of	 goods	 covered	 and	 the	 classification	 of	 traditional	 vs.	 modern	 retail.	 Using	 a	
conservative	estimate	of	$46	billion,	it	is	likely	that	overall	value	of	sales	through	the	supply	
chain	to	such	retailers	totalled	about	USD	130	billion	in	2014.	
	                              Es6ma6ng	the	value	of	payment	ﬂow	from	tradi6onal	retailers	to	wholesalers	and	distributors	
	                                           Food	and	Packaged	Goods	Companies	and	Sellers	
	                                                                        12	
                                                                       US$	
	                                                                      18	B	

	
                                                                                                                                                   11	
                                                        Large	Distributors	

	                                                                                                 US$	
                                                                                                          10	
                                                                                                                                                US$	
                                                                                                  15	B	
	                                                                                                                                               15	B	
                                                                                                                 Distributors	
	
                                                                                                                                    9	
	                                                                                                                                 US$	
                                                                                                                                  23	B	
	




                                                                                                                                                                                          US$		130	B	
                                                                                                                                 Wholesalers	
	                                                                                                                                                   US$	 8	
	                                                                                                                                                   13.5	B	


	                                                                                                                                             Retailer	Wholesalers	


	                                                                                     6	                 5	            4	                     3	              2	        US$	 7	
                                                                                                                                                                        6.6	B	
	                                                                               US$	                  US$	          US$	                   US$	          US$	
                                                                                                                                                                        Whole
                                                                                                                                                                        salers	

	                                                                               6.8	B	                6.8	B	        12.5	
                                                                                                                     B	
                                                                                                                                           5	B	          3	B	            US$		 1	
                                                                                                                                                                         7	B	
	                 Hyper	markets	&	                 Mini-markets	                       Large	Retailers	                Small	Retailers	                   Micro-Retailers	
                                                                                  (avg.	revenue	>	USD	200K)	                                             (avg.	revenue	<	USD	24K)	
                                                                                                                                                                                     Σ	=		USD	
	
                                                                                                                	(USD	200K	>	avg.	revenue	>	USD	24K)		
                   Supermarkets	
                                                                                  US$	15	B	sales	                     US$	20	B	sales	                    US$	11	B	sales	               46	B	
	
Traditional	retailers	tend	to	source	goods	from	smaller	wholesalers	and	distributors,	with	a	
higher	 frequency	 of	 purchases.	 Based	 on	 overall	 markets	 statistics	 and	 the	 results	 from	
surveys	 of	 small	 retailers	 in	 Indonesia,	 it	 is	 estimated	 that	 there	 were	 over	 1.4	 billion	 per	
annum	 transactions	 made	 by	 retailers	 and	 wholesalers	 in	 the	 traditional	 retail	 market	
segment		
	
	                                                                Es*ma*ng	the	volume	of	payment	ﬂows		
                                                         from	tradi*onal	retailers	to	wholesalers	and	distributors	

	                                                    Distributors	

	
	
                                                                            Wholesalers	
	
	
	                                                                                                                   Retailer	Wholesalers	                                               Es*mated		
                                                                                                                                                                                      100	thousand	

	                                                                                                                                                                                      Wholesalers	

                                                                                                                                                                                       est.	52	M	
	                                                                                                                                                        Wholesalers	
                                                                                                                                                                                        Supplier	
                                                                                                                                                                                        purchase	

	                                                                           est.	1.4	Billion	
                                                                                                                                                                                      transacDons	
                                                                                                                                                                                       per	annum	
                                                                         TransacDons	per	annum	
	                Large	Retailers	                   Small	Retailers	                                                     Micro-Retailers	
	              (avg.	revenue	>	USD	200K)	

                      40	tsd	
                                             	(USD	200K	>	avg.	revenue	>	USD	24K)		

                                                        350	tsd	
                                                                                                                       (avg.	revenue	<	USD	24K)	

                                                                                                                            1.5	million	
	
	                                                             TRADITIONAL	RETAILERS	


	
	
	

                                                                                                                                                                                                        23	
	
	
III.         Traditional	retailers	
	
This	 chapter	 highlights	 some	 of	 the	 specific	 needs,	 behaviour	 and	 challenges	 of	
traditional	 retailers	 related	 to	 B2B	 payments.	 It	 draws	 in	 particular	 on	 surveys	 and	
market	research	conducted	in	Indonesia.			
	
There	 are	 over	 2.5	 million	 traditional	 retailers	 across	 Indonesia.	 	 The	 encompass	 a	
wide	 variety	 of	 enterprises,	 in	 terms	 of	 the	 size	 of	 the	 business,	 number	 of	 customers,	
distributors,	 and	 purchases,	 access	 to	 financial	 services	 and	 their	 overall	 attitudes.	 	 These	
differences	play	a	role	in	the	requirements	for	B2B	payments,	and	the	impact	that	access	to	
credit	 and	 electronic	 payments	 offer.	 It	 is	 therefore	 necessary	 to	 understand	 traditional	
retailers	 within	 the	 context	 of	 these	 key	 differences.	 	 While	 no	 retailer	 is	 the	 same,	
traditional	retailers	can	generally	be	grouped	into	the	following	four	stylized	profiles:	
	
Exhibit	7:	Retailer	and	Wholesaler	Categorisation	




                                                                                                      	
	

Wholesalers	&	Large	Retailers	
	
Wholesalers	and	Large	retailers	represent	businesses	with	annual	turnovers	typically	
greater	 than	 IDR	 3	 Billion10.		While	their	customers	differ	(Wholesalers	sell	to	traditional	
retail	 businesses)	 both	 wholesalers	 and	 large	 retailers	 stock	 a	 variety	 of	 products,	 deal	 as	
many	as	12	suppliers,	and	serve	a	large	client	base.		To	handle	the	business	they	may	employ	
up	to	5	people.		Purchase	orders	can	be	in	the	range	of	IDR	8	million.	
	
Some	 of	 these	 retailers	 and	 wholesaler	 can	 be	 quite	 sophisticated.	 They	 may	 have	
multiple	 bank	 accounts,	 take	 bank	 loans,	 offer	 some	 form	 of	 digital	 payment	 to	 their	
customers,	and	may	pay	their	suppliers	electronically	via	card	based	transfers	initiated	via	
ATM.	While	they	may	not	make	use	of	technology	for	their	business,	there	is	a	precedent	of	
use	of	technology	such	as	SMS	or	mobile	banking	for	their	personal	expenses.	These	retailers	
tend	to	be	more	open	to	the	use	of	technology	in	their	business	if	it	can	be	provided	at	a	fair	
price,	has	clear	benefits	and	is	easy	to	use.			
	
At	 the	 other	 extreme	 are	 Wholesalers	 and	 Large	 retailers	 that	 operate	 entirely	
manually	 and	 informally.		These	retailers	do	not	have	bank	accounts,	do	not	make	use	of	
bank	 loans	 or	 supplier	 credit,	 and	 conduct	 100%	 of	 their	 business	 manually	 and	 in	 cash.		
This	 is	 despite	 the	 complexity	 and	 size	 of	 their	 business	 and	 purchases.	 	 Their	 attitudes	
towards	 credit	 and	 financial	 services	 is	 that	 of	 a	 burden;	 they	 show	 no	 interest	 in	 taking	
																																																								
10	approximately	US	$	


                                                                                                      24	
	
	
advantage	 of	 bank	 loans	 or	 supplier	 credit	 and	 oftentimes	 do	 not	 wish	 to	 expand	 their	
business	any	further.	
Traditional	Retailers	tend	to	be	family	run	operations	that	have	been	in	business	for	
many	 years.		Ranging	from	small	shops	on	the	side	of	the	road,	to	large	wholesalers,	often	
these	businesses	were	started	with	very	little	capital	as	a	means	to	supplement	the	family’s	
income	 when	 a	 woman	 had	 children	 or	 if	 a	 family	 member	 lost	 their	 job.	 Traditional	
retailers	 do	 not	 need	 a	 formal	 education,	 significant	 capital,	 or	 access	 to	 formal	 financial	
services	to	start	their	business.	In	many	markets,	women	play	a	significant	role	as	a	business	
owner,	or	partner	with	their	husband	or	other	family	members.	
	
Most	traditional	retailers	manage	their	business	manually	and	pay	their	suppliers	in	
cash.	 	 Inventory	 management,	 stock	 taking,	 order	 placement,	 and	 simple	 business	
management	 functions	 are	 performed	 by	 the	 shop	 owner	 either	 mentally,	 or	 on	 a	 piece	 of	
paper,	 with	 interaction	 from	 their	 suppliers’	 sales	 staff.	 	 	 Payments	 are	 made	 in	 cash;	
traditional	retailers	receive	payment	from	their	customers	in	cash,	and	they	in	turn	pay	their	
suppliers	in	cash.			
	
	

Small	&	Micro	Retailers	
	
Small	 and	 micro	 retailers	 are	 defined	 as	 having	 annual	 turnovers	 of	 less	 than	 IDR	 3	
Billion11.	 	 They	 are	 usually	 family	 run	 operations	 and	 may	 employ	 one	 additional	 person	
outside	the	family	to	help	with	the	business.			Small	and	micro	retailers	purchase	weekly	or	
bi-weekly	 from	 distributors	 in	 the	 range	 of	 IDR	 100,000	 -	 500,000	 per	 order.	 	 They	 also	
frequently	 top	 up	 their	 stock	 by	 purchasing	 directly	 from	 wholesalers.	 A	 large	 portion,	
probably	more	than	1.5	million	of	the	estimated	2.5	million	retailers	fall	into	this	category.			
	
Small	and	micro	retailers	also	vary	in	their	attitude	towards	financial	services	and	the	
future	of	their	business.		Many	small	and	micro	retailers	start	out	with	limited	capital	and	
manage	to	grow	their	business	into	profitable	ventures.		These	types	of	businesses	represent	
retailers	that	take	advantage	of	supplier	credit	or	deferred	payments,	take	bank	loans,	and	
have	bank	accounts	(albeit	for	personal	use	only).		They	may	even	use	banking	services	to	
pay	 their	 suppliers,	 sell	 mobile	 phone	 credit,	 or	 transfer	 money	 to	 their	 relatives.	 	 These	
retailers	want	to	grow	their	business	but	may	not	be	aware	of	how	to	make	use	of	financial	
services	or	technology	to	do	so.	
	
There	 are	 also	 many	 retailers	 of	 this	 size	 that	 operate	 a	 small	 shop	 to	 supplement	
household	 income	 but	 do	 not	 necessarily	 have	 strong	 ambitions	 to	 expand.	 	 These	
retailers	do	not	have	any	exposure	to	the	formal	economy	or	financial	services	and	have	less	
capacity	or	incentive	to	use	greater	access	to	capital	to	expand	sales	or	outlets.	They	tend	to	
be	 very	 small	 in	 size	 and	 have	 limited	 scope	 of	 products	 and	 customers.	 These	 firms	 were	
found	to	be	less	interested	improving	access	to	finance	or	electronic	payment	services.	
	                                                     	




																																																								
                                                                             	
11	equivalent	to	about	USD	230	thousand,	at	exchanges	rates	in	September	2016.


                                                                                                      25	
	
	
Retailer	Profiles	from	Indonesia	
	
	
    Traditional	retail	can	be	an	important	                 Most	traditional	retailers	pay	suppliers	
          economic	stepping-stone	                            in	cash,	even	for	large	purchases	




                                                    	
                                                    	
                                                	




! Inventory	        Management	 &	 Ordering	                ! Inventory	       Management	 &	 Ordering	
    Process:	 Ibu	 Mari	 keeps	 track	 of	 her	               Process:	 The	 Budiman’s	 manually	 manage	
    inventory	manually.		She	orders	an	average	of	            their	 inventory	 by	 visually	 checking	 what	
    IDR	 2.4	 M	 in	 stock	 from	 4	 distributors	 who	       stock	 is	 low.	 	 Ms.	 Budiman	 performs	 stock	
    visit	 her	 shop	 to	 take	 her	 orders.	 She	 keeps	     check	 before	 each	 order	 and	 records	 a	 list	 of	
    track	 of	 stock	 by	 sight;	 if	 she	 sees	 she	 is	     the	 stock	 to	 be	 ordered.	 	 She	 discards	 the	 list	
    running	 low	 on	 a	 product	 she	 calls	 the	 sales	     once	the	distributor	has	received	the	order.			
    staff	to	visit	her	or	she	goes	to	a	wholesaler	if	        	
    she	cannot	order	from	the	distributor	in	time.			       ! Payment	 Process:	 	 All	payments	are	made	in	
	                                                             cash,	 even	 for	 their	 largest	 orders	 of	 rice,	
! Payment	Process:		 She	pays	all	her	suppliers	              which	are	IDR	14	million	every	4	days.	
    in	cash	                                                  	
	                                                           ! Management	 Functions:	 	 The	 Budiman’s	 do	
! Management	 Functions:	 Ibu	 Mari	 provides	                not	have	a	bank	account,	but	they	deposit	their	
    credit	 (deferred	 payment)	 to	 15%	 of	 her	            savings	each	week	to	their	son’s	bank	account.		
    customers.	 	 To	 manage	 cash	 flow	 she	 took	 a	       They	 use	 these	 savings	 for	 large	 orders,	 and	
    bank	loan	but	feels	it	is	a	burden	and	will	not	          are	saving	to	start	a	second	store	for	their	son.		
    consider	expanding	her	business	until	she	can	            They	 do	 not	 provide	 credit	 to	 any	 of	 their	
    pay	off	the	loan.	She	has	a	bank	account	from	            customers,	 have	 not	 taken	 a	 bank	 loan,	 and	
    her	previous	job	but	does	not	use	this	for	her	           only	 receive	 4	 day	 deferred	 payment	 terms	
    business	or	for	any	electronic	payments.		                from	their	rice	suppliers.	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	                                     	




                                                                                                                26	
	
	
Some	traditional	retailers	are	more	open	to	technology	than	others.	




                                                  	
                                            		
                                                  	




! Inventory	       Management	 &	 Ordering	              ! Inventory	      Management	 &	 Ordering	
    Process:	 Ibu	 Eni	 keeps	 track	 of	 her	               Process:	 	 Ms.	 Suna	 has	 10	 suppliers.	 	 She	
    inventory	 by	 maintaining	 a	 list	 to	 indicate	       records	sales	and	stock	movements	daily	in	a	
    what	is	running	low.		When	the	sales	person	             book,	 but	 relies	 on	 the	 sales	 person	 to	
    visits	 her	 store	 she	 will	 match	 her	 list	         recommend	 how	 much/what	 to	 order	 based	
    against	the	salesperson’s	record	of	her	past	            on	past	records.	
    orders	to	confirm	the	stock	and	quantity.		          	
    	                                                    ! Payment	Process:		 Ms.	Suna	pays	suppliers	in	
! Payment	 Process:	 	 Ibu	Eni	pays	one	of	her	              cash.	 	 After	 a	 bad	 experience	 using	 a	 debit	
    suppliers	electronically	via	ATM,	the	rest	in	           card	 -	 she	 was	 charged	 twice	 -	 she	 refuses	 to	
    cash.			                                                 use	or	offer	electronic	payments	in	her	store.	
  	                                                      	
! Management	 Functions:	 	 Ibu	 Eni	 has	 two	          ! Management	 Functions:	 Ms.	 Suna	 does	 not	
    bank	 accounts.	 She	 uses	 them	 to	 pay	 her	          have	 a	 bank	 account.	 She	 manages	 all	 her	
    suppliers	 and	 for	 mobile	 recharges.	 	 She	          business,	 including	 her	 savings,	 in	 cash.	 	 She	
    does	 not	 offer	 credit	 to	 any	 of	 her	              does	 not	 offer	 credit	 to	 customers;	 she	 does	
    customers.	 	 She	 would	 like	 to	 expand	 her	         not	 have	 a	 bank	 loan	 or	 use	 supplier	 credit.		
    business	 by	 accessing	 credit	 from	 a	 bank	          She	wants	to	expand	but	does	not	want	a	loan.	
    but	does	not	know	how	to	approach	a	bank.	
	
Many	retailers	do	not	keep	records,	pay	taxes	or	know	how	to	calculate	profits.	
	
! Inventory	     Management	 &	 Ordering	
  Process:	 Ms.	Mulo	does	not	keep	any	records	
  of	 her	 business;	 she	 buys	 stock	 from	
  wholesalers.	 	 She	 mostly	 sells	 small	 sachets	
  of	products	and	cigarettes.				
! Payment	 Process:	 	 All	 her	 payments	 are	
  made	and	received	in	cash.	
! Management	        Functions:	 Ms.	 Mulo	
  understands	 the	 margin	 of	 her	 products	 but	
  does	not	know	how	to	calculate	her	profit.		If	
  she	has	money	in	her	cash	box	at	the	end	of	
  the	day	she	thinks	that	means	she	had	made	a	profit.		She	does	not	keep	any	records.	
	
	
	
	                                    	




                                                                                                              27	
	
	
Purchasing	Operations	
                   Seller	(Distributor)	                             Buyer	(Traditional	Retailers)	
                                 Customer	/	Vendor	set-up	and	management	
                                                         ! Traditional	retailers	manage	their	suppliers	
    ! Distributors	 try	 to	 maintain	 customer	            informally.	 	 They	 rely	 on	 the	 distributors’	
      records	 of	 their	 traditional	 retailers	 in	       schedule	 to	 visit	 their	 shop	 to	 take	 orders	
      order	 to	 track	 sales,	 issue	 invoices,	           (usually	 weekly	 or	 biweekly)	 and	 are	 less	
      manage	 orders	 &	 outstanding	 payments,	            likely	to	pro-actively	plan	orders	ahead	
      and	optimize	logistics	/	delivery	                    	
    ! Many	     traditional	 retailers	 are	 not	 ! If	they	run	out	of	stock	before	the	next	visit	
      registered	entities	and	do	not	have	unique	           they	 may	 call	 or	 SMS	 the	 salesperson	 to	
      IDs;	address	details	may	be	ambiguous	                order	more	stock,	or	visit	a	wholesaler	near	
    ! Distributors	 keep	 a	 record	 of	 whether	           by	to	buy	the	necessary	products.	
      they	need	to	issue	a	tax	invoice	                     	
    ! Information	 about	 retailers	 is	 manually	                 	
      entered	 into	 systems	 by	 sales	 staff	 and	
      prone	to	errors	and	duplicate	entries.			
    ! Recently	 some	 banks	 and	 distributors	 in	
      Indonesia	 have	 approached	 retailers	 to	
      ask	 them	 to	 set	 up	 and	 store	 bank	 details	
      with	suppliers	to	support	e-payments	
    ! Some	 retailers	 and	 wholesalers	 are	
      eligible	for	deferred	payment	terms;		
                   Marketing	&	Sales	                           Inventory	Management	&	Purchasing	
                                                           ! Traditional	retailers	manually	manage	
    ! Distributors	    sell	 their	 products	 to	              their	inventory	either	by	visually	keeping	
      traditional	 retailers	 through	 sales	 staff	           track	of	quantities,	or	through	written	
      who	 physically	 visit	 the	 shops	 on	 a	 pre-          records	of	daily	sales	and	stock	
      agreed	 schedule.	 	 Incentives	 (e.g.	                  quantities.		They	use	their	experience	to	
      discounts,	 marketing	 brochures	 and	                   identify	which	products	have	a	high	
      deferred	payment	terms	are	administered	                 demand	and/or	high	margin.	
      face-to-face	by	the	sales	staff.	                  	
        	
    !   The	 sales	 staff	 keeps	 records	 of	 their	        !       The	order	process	typically	takes	place	face	
        retailer’s	 historic	 purchase	 orders;	 they	                to	face	between	the	traditional	retailer	
        use	 these,	 together	 with	 any	 incentive	                  and	their	supplier’s	sales	staff.		Even	if	
        programs,	 to	 sell	 specific	 SKUs,	 to	 take	               traditional	retailers	keep	a	record	of	their	
        orders	 from	 traditional	 retailers.	 	 Some	                stock	requirements	they	rely	on	the	sales	
        distributors	 may	 use	 a	 hand	 held	 sales	                 staff	to	help	them	decide	what	to	order	
        automation	 device,	 while	 others	 do	 this	                 based	on	historical	purchase	records.		
        manually.	 	 Upon	 their	 return	 to	 the	 office	            Once	they	have	submitted	their	order	to	
        the	 sales	 staff	 will	 submit	 the	 orders	 for	            the	sales	person	the	goods	will	generally	
        processing	and	delivery.	                                     be	delivered	the	next	day.	
    	                                                        	

    !   Some	 distributors	 also	 employ	 a	                     !    Alternatively	traditional	retailers	visit	
        canvassing	 sales	 model	 for	 very	 small	                   wholesalers	to	purchase	new	stock.	
        purchase	 orders;	 traditional	 retailers	 will	 	
        simply	 point	 and	 choose	 which	 products	
        they	wish	to	buy	on	the	spot.	                           !    Discounts	may	influence	traditional	
                                                                      retailer’s	decisions	to	buy	products.	
	                                          	




                                                                                                                      28	
	
	
        	
                                         Delivery,	Logistics	&	Invoicing	
    !       In	the	traditional	retail	sector	in	Indonesia,	the	delivery,	logistics,	invoice	presentment	
            and	 payment	 process	 is	 usually	 executed	 by	 the	 same	 person	 at	 the	 same	 time,	
            although	 some	 companies	 have	 separate	 staff	 for	 sales,	 delivery	 and	 collections.	
            	
    !       Once	the	sales	person	has	submitted	the	order,	it	is	processed	by	the	warehouse	to	load	
            the	 delivery	 truck	 with	 the	 stock	 and	 by	 the	 invoicing	 team	 to	 issue	 the	 invoices.		
            Distributors	 will	 rely	 on	 the	 data	 captured	 in	 their	 systems	 to	 issue	 the	 invoice	
            and	tax	receipt	(if	the	retailer	is	registered).	Distributors	will	typically	deliver	orders	the	
            next	day	based	on	a	geographical	route.	
            	

    !       Order	 taking	 may	 be	 automated	 via	 a	 hand	 held	 device	 and	 integrated	 to	 the	
            distributor’s	 inventory	 management	 system;	 If	 not,	 sales	 staff	 will	 not	 know	 whether	
            the	stock	they	have	sold	to	traditional	retailers	is	available	in	the	warehouse	until	they	
            return	 to	 the	 office	 and	 submit	 the	 order.	 	 Hence	 there	 can	 be	 differences	 between	
            ordered	stock	and	the	delivery;	distributors	may	propose	to	deliver	alternate	products.	
            	
    !       Delivery	trucks	are	loaded	with	the	stock	and	corresponding	invoices.		At	each	location	
            the	delivery	driver	will	deliver	the	goods	and	corresponding	invoice	to	the	retailer.	If	the	
            delivery	is	small,	the	delivery	driver	may	physically	select	the	individual	goods	from	the	
            truck	based	on	the	invoice,	and	carry	orders	to	multiple	retailers	at	one	time.	
            	
    !       At	the	time	of	delivery	the	 traditional	 retailer	 will	 inspect	 the	 goods	to	ensure	they	
            match	the	invoice	and	amount.		Any	discrepancies	such	as	incorrect	stock,	or	damaged	
            goods	 which	 result	 in	 a	 difference	 between	 the	 invoice	 amount	 and	 payment	 amount	
            will	be	physically	marked	on	the	invoice	by	the	delivery	driver.			
            	
    !       Payment	is	nearly	always	made	in	cash.	Traditional	retailers	are	expected	to	pay	cash	
            on	delivery	and	delivery	drivers	will	not	release	goods	unless	they	receive	cash	payment	
            from	the	retailer.		Some	distributors	even	offer	a	cash	discount	if	retailers	pay	up	front.		
            	
    !       Distributors	 mostly	 have	 to	 manually	 reconcile	 cash	 payments	 against	 invoices.		
            Upon	return	to	the	office	the	delivery	drivers	will	hand	over	the	cash	to	the	collections	
            and	cashier	team	who	will	reconcile	and	count	the	cash.		The	accounts	receivables	team	
            will	 then	 close	 the	 outstanding	 invoice	 in	 their	 system.	 	 For	 most	 distributors	 in	
            Indonesia	this	entire	process	is	done	manually	and	results	in	the	physical	counting	and	
            transportation	of	cash	multiple	times.			
                	
    !     For	larger	distributors,	some	banks	collect	cash	from	their	sub-distributor	partners	and	
          credit	 such	 funds	 to	 their	 banks	 account.	 For	 others	 that	 collect	 cash	 themselves,	 such	
          distributors	undertake	significant	cash	handling	and	safekeeping	functions.	
                   Credit	Management	                                           Financing	
    !   Distributors	offer	some	buyers	                 ! Traditional	 retailers	 need	 to	 manage	 their	
        interest	free	credit	or	deferred	                   cash	flow	in	order	to	be	able	to	buy	stock.			
        payment	terms.	This	may	include	some	 	
        traditional	retailers.			Distributors	must	 ! Some	 traditional	 retailers	 and	 wholesalers	
        manage	credit	limits	in	their	systems,	             provide	credit	to	their	own	customers.			
                                                        	
        however	this	is	often	informally	
        managed	between	delivery	drivers,	              ! Many	 traditional	 retailers	 do	 not	 have	
        branch	managers	and	retailers.			                   access	 to	 formal	 sector	 credit.	 If	 they	 do	
    	
    !   Distributors	employ	collections	staff	               not	 have	 sufficient	 cash,	 traditional	 retailers	
        whose	sole	job	is	to	collect	deferred	               may	 buy	 less,	 holding	 less	 stock	 and	
        payments.	                                           operating	on	shorter	replenishment	cycles.			
    	                                                    	

    !   The	cost	of	offering	credit	to	their	buyers	
        impacts	distributor’s	working	capital	           !   Some	traditional	retailers	have	the	ability	to	
        costs.		Cash	discounts	may	be	offered	to	            take	a	bank	loan,	or	deferred	payment	terms	
        retailers	that	pay	up	front	/	on	delivery.	          from	their	suppliers.		To	repay	bank	loans	
                                                             traditional	retailers	visit	the	bank	each	
                                                             month	to	reimburse	in	cash.		Others	borrow	
                                                             from	friends	and	family.	


                                                                                                                     29	
	
	
             Management	Functions	                              	
                                                    !   Formal	business	management	functions	
    §   Most	 distributors	 will	 have	 some	           such	as	accounting	and	tax	management	
        technology	 to	 manage	 their	                  are	simply	not	performed	by	traditional	
        business.		 They	 may	 range	 from	             retailers.		Most	traditional	retailers	do	not	
        sophisticated	 ERP	 and	 Treasury	              keep	track	of	their	stock,	or	their	profits.		If	
        management	 systems	 to	 basic	                 there	is	money	left	in	the	cash	box	at	the	end	
        accounting	and	simple	ERP	programs.		           of	the	day	it	signals	a	profit.	
        	                                           	
    §   Distributors	 often	 have	 multiple	        !   Most	 traditional	 retailers	 are	 not	
        banking	        relationships	       and	       registered	business	entities	and	do	not	pay	
        accounts.	Employees	need	to	reconcile	          tax.		The	impetus	for	a	traditional	retailer	to	
        across	 banks	 and	 accounts	 to	 manage	       register	their	business	is	to	be	able	to	receive	
        their	accounts	receivables.			                  a	loan;	this	is	a	prerequisite	for	a	bank.	
        	                                           	
    §   Distributors	 will	 pay	 Value	 Add	 Tax	   !   Most	 traditional	 retailers	 do	 not	 use	 a	
        on	 their	 purchases	 to	 the	                  bank	account	for	their	business.	 They	mix	
        government.		 The	management	of	this	           their	 personal	 and	 business	 finances.		
        process	 can	 be	 quite	 onerous	 for	          Generally	the	only	use	for	a	bank	account	by	
        Distributors	 when	 invoice	 amounts	           traditional	 retailers	 is	 for	 savings,	 or	 a	 bank	
        change	      (due	     to	      returned	       loan.	 	 Once	 the	 loan	 has	 been	 repaid	 they	
        goods/rejected	 items	 by	 retailers)	          often	stop	using	the	bank	account.	
        which	impacts	the	VAT	amount.	
	
	                                  	




                                                                                                                  30	
	
	
IV.       B2B	payments	and	supply	chain	integration		
	

Business	Operations	and	Requirements	
	
Overview	
	
Business	Payments	are	part	of	a	larger	end-to-end	process	involving	multiple	actors.	
When	 a	 company	 purchases	 supplies	 or	 inventory	 from	 another	 company,	 the	 payment	 is	
part	 of	 a	 broader	 set	 of	 process	 steps.	 In	 an	 increasingly	 integrated	 and	 automated	
environment,	payment	processes	and	operations	need	to	fit	into	this	end-to-end	process	that	
may	 encompass	 operations	 of	 the	 seller,	 the	 buyer	 itself,	 various	 banking	 and	 payment	
services	 providers	 as	 well	 as	 third	 party	 logistics.	 The	 purchase-to-pay	 process	 is	 also	
integrated	within	other	company	functions	that	have	an	impact	up-	or	downstream	from	the	
purchases.	 Preceding	 a	 purchase,	 such	 functions	 include	 the	 set	 up	 and	 management	 of	
client	 and	 vendor	 data,	 sales	 planning,	 inventory	 management.	 After	 a	 purchase,	 several	
other	“down-stream”	functions	are	impacted,	notably	finance	and	accounting.		
	
Exhibit	8:	Overview	of	macro-processes	and	actors	in	the	purchase-to-pay	process	
                           Seller%                                                            Buyer%
                 Customer)Set+up)                                                                 Vendor)Set+up)
           Enterprise)Data)Management))                                                    Enterprise)Data)Management))

            Marke5ng)&)Sales)Planning)                                                       Inventory)Management)


              Sales)&)Delivery)Process)                                                     Stock)Ordering)&)Purchase)



          Invoice)                                                                                               Invoice)
       Presentment)         Beneﬁciary’s%A/C%Ins4tu4on%                     Creditor’s%A/C%Ins4tu4on%          Conﬁrma5on)


       Payment)                                              Payment((
                                 Payment)Receipt)         Infrastructure(             Payment)                    Payment)
        Receipt)


      Reconcilia5on)                                                                                          Reconcilia5on)
      A/C)Receivable)                                                                                          A/C)Payable)


             Management(Func2ons(                                                             Management(Func2ons(
         Accounts)Receivable)Management)                                                         Stock)Registra5on)
             Customer)Management)                                                             Account)Management)
              Finance)&)Accoun5ng)                                                             Finance)&)Accoun5ng)


                                                                                                                               	
	
Process	 integration	 is	 important	 for	 larger	 firms	 and	 those	 making	 more	 extensive	
use	 of	 digital	 information	 technology.	Companies	organise	the	many	different	aspects	of	
the	 purchase-to-pay	 process	 in	 sub-processes.	 At	 larger	 or	 more	 organised	 firms,	 several	
different	people	and	departments	generally	manage	these	process	steps.	This	applies	to	the	
purchasing	firm	as	well	as	by	multiple	people	at	the	selling	firm.	One	reason	for	organising	
the	 process	 with	 multiple	 sub	 processes	 is	 the	 sheer	 volume	 of	 transactions,	 which	 cannot	
be	 handled	 by	 a	 single	 person.	 Another	 reason	 is	 that	 structured	 controls	 are	 much	 more	
important	 within	 the	 context	 of	 a	 company	 than	 for	 a	 private	 individual	 or	 sole	 trader’s	
operations.	 Companies	 not	 only	 need	 to	 put	 in	 place	 such	 controls	 to	 manage	 risk	 of	 error	
and	fraud	but	also	to	ensure	compliance	with	rules	and	regulations.	
	
Payments	 are	 just	 the	 culmination	 of	 this	 business	 transaction.	 As	 payments	 become	
supported	by	digital	infrastructure	and	integrated	within	the	broader	operations,	each	step	
in	the	chain	needs	to	be	supported	in	order	for	overall	business	requirements	to	be	met.	The	
sub-processes	 and	 supporting	 functions	 and	 processes	 that	 may	 generate	 or	 impact	

                                                                                                                                   31	
	
	
requirements	that	payment	services	need	to	fulfil	or	accommodate	are	outlined	in	Exhibit	9.	
This	constitutes	a	framework	for	analysis	of	the	specific	requirements	for	B2B	payments	in	
the	subsequent	sections	of	this	paper.	
	

Business	Process	Steps	
	
As	firms	and	banks	move	towards	greater	integration	and	digitisation	of	this	end-to-
end	 transaction,	 service	 requirements	 become	 more	 specific	 and	 inter-dependent.	
Hence	 it	 is	 important	 to	 understand	 at	 a	 more	 detailed	 level	 what	 sub-process	 and	
operations	are	required,	how	they	may	be	met	and	in	what	interdependencies	may	need	to	
be	addressed	by	collaboration	between	actors	including	payment	providers.	This	following	
section	 describes	 relevant	 features	 of	 the	 business	 sub-processes	 of	 seller	 and	 buyer,	 as	
outlined	in	the	exhibit	below.	
	
Exhibit	9:	sub-processes	and	supporting	functions	for	purchase-to-pay		
                                                                                            Macro	and	Sub-Processes	in	End-to-End	Payments	
                                                                             Seller	                                                                 Buyer	
                                                 Enterprise	Data	




                                                                                                                                                                         Enterprise	Data	
                                                                        Customer	set-up	                                                          Vendor	Set-up	
       Customer	Set	up	
             processes	                                                                                                                                                                                            Vendor	Set-up	
                                                                    Marke/ng	&	Sales	Planning	                                                Inventory	Management	

                                                                         Sales	Proposals	                                                          Stock	Check	

                                                                        Order	Processing	                                                        Order	Placement	

                                                                        Order	Prepara/on	
                                                                                                                                                Returns	/	Discounts	

                                                                       Delivery	&	Logis/cs	
                                                                                                                                                 Stock	Inspec/on	
    Sales	process	steps	                                                                                                                                                                                           Purchase		




                                                                                                                                                                                            Transac/on	Func/ons	
                                                                     Returns	&	Amendments	                                                                                                                         Process	Steps	
                                                                                                                                               Invoice	Conﬁrma/on	
                           Transac/on	Fuc/ons	




                                                                            Invoicing	
                                                                                                                                              Provisioning	and	Credit	

                                                                        Payment	Receipt	
                                                                                                                                                     Payment	

                                                                          Reconcilia/on	
                                                                                                                                                 Stock	registra/on	

                                                                       Accounts	Receivable		
                                                                          Management	                                                          Credit	/	Payables	Mgt	

                                                                      Manage	Credit	&	Risk	                                                   Account	Management	
       Management	                                                                                                                                                                                                   Management	
        func/ons	                                                        Cash	&	Liquidity	                                                       Cash	&	Liquidity	                                                    func/ons	
                                                                          Management	                                                             Management	
                                                                      Finance	&	Accoun/ng		                                                   Finance	&	Accoun/ng	
                                                                     Tax	Repor/ng	&	Claims	                                                        Tax	&	VAT	

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      	
	
These	 processes	 are	 inter-linked	 within	 each	 company	 and	 may	 be	 executed	 by	
multiple	 people	 with	 the	 support	 of	 one	 or	 more	 systems.	 The	 buyer	 who	 purchases	
from	another	company	needs	to	interact	with	the	various	people	and	systems	of	the	seller.	
This	applies	not	just	for	the	payment,	but	also	for	what	precedes	the	payment	and	relates	to	
the	purchase.	The	buyer	may	obtain	marketing	information	from	the	seller	about	the	seller’s	
company	and	their	products.	The	buyer	may	be	contacted	by	the	seller	to	discuss	his	needs,	
what	products	he	may	buy,	the	price,	and	the	other	terms	and	conditions	that	apply	to	his	
purchase.	In	order	to	formalise	the	purchase	for	tax	and	legal	purposes	and	for	the	purpose	
of	 having	 recourse	 on	 the	 seller,	 the	 purchaser	 registers	 himself	 with	 the	 seller	 and	 may	
formalise	an	agreement	with	the	seller.	When	the	product	is	out	of	stock	or	the	buyer	notices	
there	 is	 something	 wrong	 with	 it	 he	 may	 be	 in	 contact	 with	 the	 seller	 about	 returning	 the	
product	 and	 a	 possible	 replacement.	 When	 the	 buyer	 pays	 he	 may	 be	 in	 contact	 with	 the	
seller	about	when	to	pay,	how	to	pay,	how	to	inform	the	seller	about	the	payment	and	how	
to	be	informed	about	payments	received	by	the	seller.	
	
Most	 process	 steps	 and	 related	 exchange	 of	 information	 can	 have	 an	 impact	 on	 the	
payment	 process.	 This	of	course	includes	the	amount	that	the	seller	charges	the	buyer	for	


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    32	
	
	
the	 purchased	 goods	 and	 the	 amount	 that	 the	 buyer	 believes	 he	 needs	 to	 pay	 for	 his	
purchases.	 But	 other	 less	 obvious	 information	 elements	 information	 can	 determine	
reliability,	 ease	 of	 use	 and	 the	 extent	 to	 which	 processes	 can	 be	 automated	 or	 efficiently	
supported	by	information	technology.		
	
	
          Transaction	and	supply	chain	process	interdependencies	between	sellers	&	buyers		
                        Seller	                                                                            Buyer	
                                Customer	/	Vendor	set-up	and	management	
The	 type,	 size	 and	 location	 of	 the	 buyer	 can	 impact	 calculations	 of	 sales	 tax,	 price	
discounts	 and	 delivery	 charges.	 Inaccuracies	 and	 omissions	 in	 the	 registration	 of	 the	 buyer	
may	then	lead	to	incorrect	calculation	of	prices	and	charges.	On	certain	goods	higher	sales	taxes	
may	 be	 levied.	 Incorrect	 registration	 of	 list	 prices	 and	 sales	 tax	 will	 lead	 to	 errors	 in	 data	 that	
may	be	transferred	to	invoices	and	other	documents	used	internally	by	the	buyer	or	seller	and	
potentially	also	be	tax	authorities.	
         	
Important	 static	 data	 –	 for	 business	 and	 payment	 operations	 -	 may	 be	 recorded	 when	
“setting	 up”	 a	 customer	 or	 vendor	 file.	Information	about	bank	accounts,	preferred	payment	
methods	 and	 credit	 terms	 may	 be	 defined.	 Customer	 identification	 may	 also	 at	 this	 stage	 make	
use	of	a	company	register	or	tax	ID	or	some	other	unique	form	of	identification.	But	in	traditional	
markets	with	low	levels	of	automation,	many	of	the	inputs	may	be	missing	or	incompatible	with	
the	requirements	of	banking	systems	and	procedures.	
                        Seller																																																																												 Buyer	
               Marketing	and	sales:	                                              Inventory	management	and	purchasing:	
The	 seller	 may	 be	 able	 to	 influence	 what	 Retailers	need	to	prioritise	what	they	stock	
and	 how	 much	 the	 buyer	 purchases.	 and	at	what	price.	Their	success	as	a	business	
Distributors’	 sales	 staff	 can	 have	 incentives	 to	 depends	on	how	well	they	identify	a	product’s	
influence	 retailers’	 purchase	 of	 specific	 contribution	 tot	 their	 profitability,	 what	 the	
products	 or	 brands,	 or	 to	 test	 new	 products	 best	ways	are	to	display	these	products,	which	
and	 combinations.	 Sales	 officers	 may	 use	 products	attract	customers	to	the	store,	which	
marketing	 campaigns	 and	 discounts	 to	 products	generate	cash	flow,	when	best	to	have	
influence	buyers’	decisions	and	meet	their	own	 these	 products	 available,	 what	 is	 the	 best	
personal	 sales	 targets.	 If	 discounts	 are	 not	 frequency	to	purchase	these	products	and	with	
administered	 correctly	 and	 marketing	 what	volumes.		
campaigns	fail,	retailers	may	not	pay	what	the	                                           	
distributor	expects.	                                                     Buyers	 may	 influence	 the	 price	 levels	 and	
         	                                                                will	need	to	check	that	discounts	and	other	
Decisions	 may	 be	 based	 on	 historical	 terms	are	properly	applied.	 Retailers	will	try	
payment	 data	 and	 purchase	 patterns.		 to	influence	delivery	and	terms	and	conditions	
Sellers	may	use	this	data	to	decide	on	whether	 of	 the	 sellers	 or	 take	 advantage	 of	 discounts	
discounts	 are	 provided,	 how	 to	 managed	 and	promotions	offered	by	the	seller.		
requests	for	deferred	payments	or	credit.	
                                                     Delivery	and	logistics	
Sellers	and	buyers	may	need	to	deal	with	partial	delivery	and	/	or	multiple	deliveries	of	a	
given	 product.	A	product	may	appear	to	be	faulty	before	or	after	delivery	and	returned	by	the	
buyer	to	the	seller.	The	buyer	will	only	want	to	pay	for	what	he	has	received.	He	may	pay	for	the	
delivery	 but	 then	 request	 a	 discount	 for	 incorrect	 deliveries	 or	 returned	 products	 or	 incorrect	
charges	and	settle	the	discount	in	a	subsequent	invoice	/	payment.	
	
                                                  Invoicing	
Invoices	formalize	agreement	on	how	much	needs	to	be	paid,	for	what,	to	whom,	by	whom	
and	 when.	 Any	 document	 issued	 by	 the	 payee-company	 could	 serve	 as	 formal	 trigger	 for	
payment	 -	 such	 as	 contracts,	 orders,	 delivery	 notifications	 and	 even	 letters.	 But	 in	 practice	 in	
formal	 markets,	 the	 invoice,	 which	 is	 the	 basis	 for	 fiscal	 registration	 of	 the	 sale	 and	 purchase,	
serves	 as	 the	 payment	 trigger	 for	 payment	 and	 is	 a	 important	 feature	 of	 the	 process	 for	 larger	
consumer	goods	and	distribution	companies.		
         	
The	 invoice	 is	 formal	 confirmation	 of	 request	 for	 funds	 to	 be	 transferred.	 	 Together	with	
credit	notes	–	for	both	the	payer	(buyer)	and	the	payee	(seller)	–	an	invoice	is	the	formal	basis	for	
any	funds	transfers	between	them.	To	facilitate	the	actual	payment,	the	invoice	should	not	also	

                                                                                                                             33	
	
	
include	 the	 requested	 total	 amount	 to	 be	 paid	 by	 the	 buyer	 but	 also	 (i)	 the	 payment	 method	
acceptable	for	the	seller,	(ii)	the	agreed	/	required	payment	date	and	(iii)	the	details	the	buyer	
needs	from	the	seller	to	make	the	payment.			
          	
In	countries	where	sales	tax	is	levied	invoices	are	mandatory.	They	provide	documentation	
for	the	seller	of	his	sales	and	for	the	buyer	of	purchases.	The	invoice	is	a	formal	document	that	
represents	the	value	and	relevant	details	of	the	sale	=	purchase.12	
          	
Invoices	may	include	a	reference	number	to	facilitate	accounting	and	reconciliation.	 Given	
that	the	invoice	is	a	formal	document	for	tax	and	accounting	purposes	and	serves	as	the	basis	for	
payment	by	the	buyer,	it	is	also	used	as	a	key	control	instrument	for	both	the	corporate	seller	and	
buyer.	To	support	the	auditing	processes	of	both	firms,	it	needs	to	provide	sufficient	information	
for	 the	 identification	 of	 both	 the	 seller	 and	 the	 buyer,	 information	 about	 what	 has	 been	
purchased	 and	 by	 whom,	 references	 to	 relevant	 documents	 such	 as	 orders	 and	 contracts	 and	
information	from	the	payee	about	his	payment	address.	
          	

Last	 minute	 alterations	 often	 need	 to	 be	 made	 to	 invoices.	To	minimise	the	risk	of	issuing	
invoices	 that	 will	 not	 be	 paid,	 they	 may	 need	 to	 be	 finalised	 and	 issued	 at	 the	 moment	 the	
product	is	delivered	to	the	retailer	and	accepted	by	him.	Assuming	the	retailer	has	been	able	to	
verify	the	quantity,	quality	and	price	of	the	delivered	goods	at	the	time	of	delivery	there	will	be	
few	reasons	for	the	retailer	to	dispute	the	invoice.	Discrepancies	between	invoice	amounts	and	
actual	payment	are	more	likely	to	arise	if	invoices	that	are	issued	earlier	in	the	process.	
	
                 Credit	management	                                Cash	and	liquidity	management	
Some	 suppliers	 provide	 credit	 to	 retailers.	          Buyers	 review	 their	 funding	 and	 ensure	
This	 can	 be	 in	 simple	 form	 of	 deferred	             they	have	enough	to	pay	for	new	stock.	The	
payments,	even	just	a	few	days.	Or	it	can	be	for	          buyer	 may	 decide	 to	 pay	 partially	 or	 delay	
longer	 periods.	 Credit	 needs	 to	 be	 accounted	        payment	 when	 he	 does	 not	 have	 enough	 cash	
for	 in	 the	 invoice	 and	 payment	 amounts	 and	         available	at	the	moment	the	payment	is	due.	He	
reconciled	 with	 an	 outstanding	 balance	 that	          may	 take	 advantage	 of	 short-term	 credit	 or	
the	retailer	holds	with	its	supplier.		                    deferred	 payment	 terms	 offered	 by	 the	
           	                                               supplier.	 In	 many	 markets,	 distributors	 may	
Suppliers	may	make	discounts	and	bonuses	                  informally	 allow	 a	 retailer	 a	 grace	 period,	
conditional	 on	 the	 payment	 behaviour	 of	              agreeing	 to	 collect	 payment	 at	 the	 next	
the	 retailer.	 This	 could	 be	 done	 based	 on	          delivery	or	even	just	later	in	the	day.	
metrics	 such	 as	 whether	 the	 buyer	 pays	                      	
electronically	 at	 the	 right	 time	 to	 the	 right	
                                                   Retailers	need	facilities	and	time	to	deposit	
payment	 address,	 whether	 the	 buyer	 uses	 the	 cash	earning	to	their	bank.	 Most	earnings	of	
payment	 method	 of	 choice	 of	 the	 seller	 and	 small	 retailers	 are	 in	 cash.	 Funding	 electronic	
whether	 the	 buyer	 informs	 the	 seller	 or	     payment	accounts	requires	an	extra	step	in	the	
distributor	 the	 correct	 payment	 reference	     process	 to	 ensure	 funds	 are	 available.	 And	
when	making	the	payment.		                         retailers	 need	 to	 be	 able	 to	 verify	 quickly	 and	
                                                   easily	how	much	they	have	available.		
                                       Finance	&	accounting:	
Financial	reporting	or	taxes	can	impact	the	payment	and	in	particular	the	timing	thereof.	
Budgets,	financial	targets	and	the	calculation	of	income	tax	and	sales	tax	are	defined	per	period.	
The	desire	to	stay	within	budgets,	to	meet	certain	targets	and	the	postponement	of	paying	taxes	
can	result	in	delayed	sending	and	acceptance	of	invoices	but	also	in	delayed	payments.	
	

Payment	Process	Steps	
	
Payments	 involve	 a	 number	 of	 distinct	 steps	 that	 need	 to	 be	 performed.	 Actual	
payment	processes	and	operations	depend	on	the	infrastructure	and	services	available	in	a	
given	 market.	 Several	 steps	 and	 their	 sequencing	 also	 depend	 on	 whether	 the	 payment	 is	
																																																								
12	These	invoices	are	generally	created	by	the	seller	and	then	sent	to	the	buyer	after	the	sale	and	before	or	after	

the	payment.	In	some	tax	jurisdictions	such	as	The	UK,	The	Netherlands	and	New	Zealand,	invoices	can	also	be	
generated	by	the	buyer	and	sent	to	the	seller.	These	are	then	called	“self-billed	invoices”.	

                                                                                                                  34	
	
	
initiated	 by	 the	 seller	 (a	 pull	 payment)	 or	 by	 the	 buyer	 (a	 push	 payment).	 But	 there	 are	
general	 business	 level	 requirements	 that	 set	 the	 framework	 for	 identifying	 gaps	 and	
recommendations	 for	 national	 payment	 system	 development.	 	 The	 following	 section	
provides	an	overview	of	the	main	process	steps.			
	
The	 buyer	 can	 verify	 the	 invoice	 and	 instruct	 the	 payment	 solely	 based	 on	 the	 data	
provided	 with	 the	 invoice	 and	 the	 eventual	 complementary	 invoice	 and	 credit	 note.	
From	 a	 controls	 point	 of	 view	 the	 payment	 address	 or	 bank	 account	 to	 be	 credited	 should	
always	be	provided	by	the	payee	and	not	altered	by	anyone	in	the	organization	of	the	payer	
(buyer).		
	
The	 retailer	 may	 want	 to	 make	 partial	 payment.	 If	 the	 buyer	 does	 not	 agree	 with	 the	
requested	payment	amount	stated	in	the	invoice	and	any	there	are	no	matching	credit	notes	
received	from	the	seller	then	the	buyer	will	want	to	pay	partially	and	make	a	note	of	this	in	
his	 own	 accounts.	 Related	 to	 cash	 flow	 considerations	 and	 possibly	 contractual	
considerations,	 the	 buyer	 may	 want	 to	 pay	 one	 part	 of	 the	 invoice	 at	 a	 certain	 data	 and	
another	part	at	a	future	date.	
	
The	buyer	has	the	option	to	notify	the	seller	of	the	payment	and	inform	how	much	is	being	
paid,	 with	 what	 value	 date	 and	 which	 invoice(s)	 and	 possibly	 to	 which	 credit	 notes	 the	
payment	relates.	
	
Exhibit	10:	Payment	Process	Steps		
               Seller%
                       Macro%and%Sub0Processes%in%End0to0End%Payments%
                                                                                                                                                   Buyer%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	
                                               Enterprise)Data)




                                                                                          Macro%and%Sub0Processes%in%End0to0End%Payments%
                                                                                                                                                                       Enterprise)Data)




                                                                      Customer)set*up)
                                                                          Seller%                                                               Vendor)Set*up)
                                                                                                                                                   Buyer%
       Customer)Set)up)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vendor)Set*up)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	
             processes)
                                      Enterprise)Data)




                                                                  Marke/ng)&)Sales)Planning)
                                                                                                                                                                                 Enterprise)Data)




                                                                      Customer)set*up)                                                      Inventory)Management)
                                                                                                                                                Vendor)Set*up)
       Customer)Set)up)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vendor)Set*up)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   	
             processes)
                                                                  Marke/ng)&)Sales)Planning)                                                Inventory)Management)
                                                                       Sales)Proposals)                                                          Stock)Check)
                                                                       Sales)Proposals)
                                                                      Order)Processing)
                                                                      Order)Processing)
                                                                                                                                                 Stock)Check)
                                                                                                                                               Order)Placement)                                                                   	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  	
                                                                      Order)Prepara/on)                                                        Order)Placement)
                                                                                                                                              Returns)/)Discounts)
                                                                      Order)Prepara/on)
                                                                                                                                              Returns)/)Discounts)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               	
                                                                     Delivery)&)Logis/cs)
                                                                                                                                               Stock)Inspec/on)
    Sales)process)steps)                                             Delivery)&)Logis/cs)                                                                                                                        Purchase))
                                                                                                                                               Stock)Inspec/on)
    Sales)process)steps)                                           Returns)&)Amendments)                                                                                                                         Process)Steps)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Purchase))
                                                                   Returns)&)Amendments)                                                     Invoice)Conﬁrma/on)
                                                                                                                                             Invoice)Conﬁrma/on)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Process)Steps)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Payment)




                                                                          Invoicing)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Payment)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        	
                                                                          Invoicing)                                                        Provisioning)and)Credit)
                                                                                                                                            Provisioning)and)Credit)
                           Payment)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Payment(Steps(
                           Payment)




                                                                      Payment)Receipt)
                                                                      Payment)Receipt)                                                             Payment)
                                                                                                                                                   Payment)

                                                                        Reconcilia/on)
                                                                                                                                               Stock)registra/on)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        	
                                                                     Accounts)Receivable))
                                                                     Accounts)Receivable))
                                                                        Management)                                                          Credit)/)Payables)Mgt)                                                                         Payment(Ini+a+on(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        	
                                                                        Management)                                                          Credit)/)Payables)Mgt)

       Management)
       Management)
                                                                    Manage)Credit)&)Risk)
                                                                    Manage)Credit)&)Risk)
                                                                                                                                            Account)Management)
                                                                                                                                            Account)Management)                                                    Management)                                          	
        func/ons)                                                      Cash)&)Liquidity)                                                                                                                           Management)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    func/ons)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        	
                                                                                                                                               Cash)&)Liquidity)
         func/ons)                                                     Cash)&)Liquidity)
                                                                        Management)                                                            Cash)&)Liquidity)
                                                                                                                                                Management)                                                          func/ons)
                                                                        Management)
                                                                    Finance)&)Accoun/ng))                                                       Management)
                                                                                                                                            Finance)&)Accoun/ng)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        	
                                                                   Tax)Repor/ng)&)Claims)
                                                                    Finance)&)Accoun/ng))                                                        Tax)&)VAT)
                                                                   Tax)Repor/ng)&)Claims)
                                                                                                                                            Finance)&)Accoun/ng)
                                                                                                                                                  Tax)&)VAT)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Valida+on(&(Authen+ca+on(

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        	
	                                                                                   Authorisa+on((
If	 the	 payment	 is	                                                                 &(Control(

initiated	 by	 buyer,	 the	
payment	 service	 provider	 will	                                              Payment(Conﬁrma+ons(
inform	 the	 buyer	 of	 the	 status	 of	 the	
payment:	 has	 it	 been	 accepted	 for	
                                                                                Clearing(&(Se:lement(
processing?,	 refused?	 or	 upheld?	 After	 the	
payment	 has	 been	 accepted	 for	 processing	 and	 the	
account	is	debited,	the	buyer	(payer)	is	informed	of	the	
debit	 in	 his/her	 “account	 statement”.	 These	 statements	 can	 be	 provided	 real-time	 or,	 as	
often	 is	 the	 case,	 electronically	 in	 a	 batch	 after	 the	 clearing	 and	 settlement	 cycle	 for	 the	
relevant	 payments	 infrastructure	 has	 been	 completed.	 This	 has	 often	 been	 on	 a	 T+1	 basis,	
i.e.	the	next	day,	but	in	many	countries	is	moving	to	multiple	cycles	within	the	day	and	even	
near	real	time13.	


																																																								
13	The	introduction	of	more	frequent	and	near	real	time	clearing	and	settlement	cycles	for	retail	payments	is	

becoming	more	common.	Many	countries/economic	zones	including	Singapore,	UK,	the	European	Union,	India,	
Australia	and	Malaysia	have	or	are	planning	to	introduce	this	functionality	for	credit	transfers.	In	some	countries	

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        35	
	
 	
 	
 Alternatively,	for	a	payment	initiated	by	the	seller	(i.e.	the	distributor	or	wholesaler),	an	
 important	 step	 will	 be	 for	 the	 payment	 service	 provider	 to	 confirm	 to	 the	 seller	 that	
 payment	is	valid	and	that	they	can	under	their	contractual	terms	now	expect	to	receive	the	
 funds	due.		
	
	
! Payment	initiation	
  Payment	can	be	initiated	by	the	buyer,	the	seller,	or	a	third	party	agent,	that	facilitates	the	billing	
  operations.	Initiation	involves	setting	up	and	filling	in	key	elements	of	an	instruction	that	will	be	
  executed	by	a	bank	or	payment	service	provider.	In	the	context	of	electronic	payments,	this	will	at	
  least	need	to	include	identifying:	
        ∗ The	buyer	or	payer	
        ∗ The	payer’s	account	and	the	institution	/	account	holder	
        ∗ The	currency,	amount	and	value	date	of	the	transaction	
        ∗ The	seller	(also	known	as	the	payee	or	beneficiary)	
        ∗ The	account	and	institution	at	which	the	funds	should	be	credited	to	the	seller	
        ∗ A	reference	number	that	can	be	used	to	facilitate	reconciliation	
  	
  The	 challenge	 for	 serving	 traditional	 retailers	 (and	 other	 users	 in	 general)	 for	 B2B	 payments	 is	
  that	this	information	must	be	able	to	be	entered	into	a	payment	instruction	quickly,	reliably	and	
  easily	by	either	the	supplier’s	delivery	agent	or	the	retailer	himself	or	herself.	A	cash	transaction	
  can	be	conducted	very	quickly	without	needing	to	formalize	and	enter	all	of	the	above	details	into	
  a	device14.			
  	
  Most	 successful	 payment	 solutions	 enable	 some	 or	 all	 of	 the	 above	 data	 to	 be	 entered	
  automatically,	 drawing	 on	 pre-registered	 information	 and	 digitized	 formats	 such	 as	 bar	 or	 QR	
  codes.	Then	time	and	manual	errors	are	minimized.	Seller	and	buyer	then	only	need	to	manually	
  check	information.	
	
! Validation	&	Authentication	
  The	information	entered	(manually	or	otherwise)	needs	to	be	confirmed	as	accurate	and	correct	
  and	the	transaction	need	to	be	authenticated	by	the	buyer/payer.		
  	
  The	 validation	 of	 completeness	 and	 accuracy	 of	 the	 information	 in	 a	 payment	 instruction	 is	
  critical	 is	 the	 overall	 service	 is	 to	 be	 reliable,	 and	 support	 the	 kind	 of	 automation	 that	 sector	
  development	requires.	There	are	several	checks	that	may	be	needed	including	for	example15:	
        ∗ Is	the	account	number	valid?	Does	it	conform	with	the	number	of	digits	and	structure	of	
              the	institution?	
        ∗ Is	the	code	or	identifier	for	the	bank	or	payment	institution	valid?	
        ∗ Does	 the	 account	 number	 exist	 with	 the	 identified	 bank?	 Does	 it	 belong	 to	 the	 named	
              account	owner?	
  Even	 a	 small	 error	 in	 a	 number	 or	 formatting	 may	 result	 in	 the	 payment	 being	 rejected	 or	 to	
  require	manual	intervention,	undermining	efforts	to	automate	and	streamline	the	overall	payment	
  and	business	process.		
  	
  Many	 checks	 or	 validations	 can	 be	 automated.	 Banks	 and	 payment	 processors	 put	 in	 place	
  rules	 to	 help	 ensure	 that	 data	 entered	 into	 a	 payment	 instruction	 is	 conform	 with	 the	 format,	
  length	or	type	of	information	required.	In	some	systems,	the	identifier	or	a	bank	or	the	owner	of	a	
  bank	account	number	can	be	checked	on-line	with	a	central	register	or	institution	as	part	of	the	
  payment	validation	process.	But	in	manual	environments,	with	off-line	or	cumbersome	technology	
  processes,	many	of	these	automated	checks	cannot	be	performed,	with	subsequent	impact	on	the	
  risk	of	errors	and	the	time	and	effort	required	by	the	users.	
  	
 																																																																																																																																																																						
 such	functionality	also	exists	based	on	card	payments	infrastructure.	Where	this	type	of	infrastructure	exists,	it	
 can	be	well	adapted	to	the	needs	of	B2B	payments	concerned	by	this	report	
 14	It	should	however	be	noted	that	cash	payments	do	not	enable	retailers	to	use	deferred	payment	or	credit	

 terms;	combining	credit	facilities	with	electronic	payments	can	though	make	the	overall	transition	from	cash	to	
 electronic	payments	more	attractive	for	retailers.	
 15	A	more	extensive	list	of	checks	and	validation	is	discussed	in	the	chapter	on	requirements	


                                                                                                                                                                 36	
 	
 	
       A	payment	instruction	also	needs	to	be	authenticated.	This	means	that	checks	need	to	be	made	
       to	ensure	that	the	person	or	representative	a	company	that	is	instructing	 the	payment	is	indeed	
       authorized	to	do	so.	This	may	just	be	taken	on	trust,	for	instance	if	someone	writes	a	cheque.	But	it	
       may	also	be	addressed	by	requiring	the	payer	to	have	pass	some	level	of	security	such	as	use	of	an	
       account	number	and	PIN	code	before	being	able	to	enter	and	confirm	payment	details.	
	
! Authorisation	&	Control	
   Once	 the	 payer	 confirms	 the	 instruction,	 the	 bank	 or	 processing	 institution	 must	 control	
   and	 authorize	 the	 actual	 transfer	 of	 funds.	 Banks	 (and	 other	 payment	 service	 providers)	 are	
   trusted	by	their	clients	to	only	execute	payment	instructions	that	they	have	authorized.	So	a	first	
   step	is	to	control	instructions	to	ensure	they	are	legitimate	and	accurate.		
   	
   Additional	 controls	 may	 need	 to	 be	 made.	This	may	include	procedures	to	(i)	ensure	that	the	
   client	 has	 sufficient	 funds	 available	 for	 the	 payment	 and	(ii)	 to	 check	 that	 the	 payment	 does	 not	
   contravene	 embargo,	 (iii)	 exceed	 legal	 limits	 such	 as	 those	 imposed	 under	 e-money	 regulations,	
   (iv)	currency	restrictions	and	(v)	to	comply	with	AML	requirements.	Only	then	can	the	payment	
   instruction	be	authorized	also	by	the	account	holding	/	deposit	institution.		
	
! Payment	Confirmation	
   It	is	important	for	seller	and	buyer	to	obtain	timely	and	reliable	confirmation	of	payment.		
   This	 can	 be	 confirmation	 that	 payment	 has	 been	 made,	 that	 funds	 have	 been	 received	 by	 the	
   seller’s	 institution	 or	 simply	 that	 the	 seller	 can	 be	 sure	 of	 “good	 funds”.	 	 Although	 many	 larger	
   companies	 may	 be	 able	 to	 pay	 in	 arrears	 on	 credit,	 small	 retailers	 are	 often	 required	 to	 pay	 on	
   delivery	before	the	supplier	leaves	goods	with	them.	And	even	if	credit	is	provided	to	or	used	by	
   the	retailer	to	fulfill	the	transaction,	sellers	are	likely	to	want	to	receive	confirmation	in	some	form	
   in	order	to	conclude	the	overall	business	transaction.		
	
! Clearing	&	Settlement	
   Funds	 ultimately	 need	 to	 be	 settled	 between	 the	 institutions	 at	 which	 the	 seller	 and	 the	
   buyer	 hold	 accounts.	 How	 this	 is	 achieved	 depends	 on	 their	 respective	 payment	 services	
   providers’	 arrangements	 with	 other	 market	 players	 and	 infrastructure	 to	 enact	 clearing	 and	
   settlement.		
   	
   Additionally,	final	receipt	of	funds	by	the	seller	does	not	occur	until	the	institution	at	which	
   he/she	holds	the	transaction	account	has	credited	his/her	account.	 In	a	very	simple	scenario,	
   the	 seller	 and	 the	 buyer	 may	 hold	 accounts	 with	 the	 same	 institution.	 In	 this	 case,	 clearing	 and	
   settlement	are	simple	operations	within	a	single	payment	service	provider.	Most	often	though	in	
   markets	like	Indonesia,	there	are	many	different	banks	and	payment	providers	and	small	retailers	
   are	unlikely	to	voluntarily	hold	bank	or	transaction	accounts	with	the	same	institution	that	their	
   suppliers	use.	It	is	also	unlikely	that	all	suppliers	use	the	same	payment	service	providers.		
	
Exhibit	11:	Stylised	Payments	Service	Models	
                          Seller%                                                                       Buyer%
                Customer)Set+up)                                                                           Vendor)Set+up)
          Enterprise)Data)Management))                                                              Enterprise)Data)Management))

           Marke5ng)&)Sales)Planning)                                                                  Inventory)Management)


             Sales)&)Delivery)Process)                                                               Stock)Ordering)&)Purchase)



         Invoice)                                                                                                          Invoice)
      Presentment)         Beneﬁciary’s%A/C%Ins4tu4on%                               Creditor’s%A/C%Ins4tu4on%           Conﬁrma5on)


      Payment)                                                   Payment((
                                                                 Payment((
                                Payment)Receipt)              Infrastructure(                    Payment)                    Payment)
       Receipt)                                               Infrastructure(


     Reconcilia5on)                                                                                                      Reconcilia5on)
     A/C)Receivable)                                                                                                      A/C)Payable)


            Management(Func2ons(                                                                       Management(Func2ons(
        Accounts)Receivable)Management)                                                                   Stock)Registra5on)
            Customer)Management)                                                                       Account)Management)
             Finance)&)Accoun5ng)                                                                       Finance)&)Accoun5ng)




                                                                     ACH	Credit	Transfer	                                                                       4	Party	Card	                                3	Party	Model	
                                                   Beneﬁciary	            	Model	
                                                                           Clearing	                             Creditor	                                     Scheme	Model	                           	Bilateral	or	Closed	Loop	
                                                                           Member	

                                                          			Clearing	                                Clearing				                        Beneﬁciary	                              Creditor	
                                                           Member	                                  				Member	                           (Merchant)	                              (Payee)	                                Payments	
                                                                                                                                                                Payment	Network	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hub	


                                                             Clearing							                        				Clearing		
                                                           			Member	                                 Member	
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Creditor’s*A/C**               Beneﬁciary’s,A/C,
                                                                                                                                            Creditor’s*A/C**                       Beneﬁciary’s,A/C,
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ins/tu/on*                      Ins1tu1on,
                                                                                                                                              Ins/tu/on*                              Ins1tu1on,




                                                                               Se2lement	Bank	                                                                   Se2lement	Bank	




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           	


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               37	
 	
	
	
	
The	arrangements	for	clearing	and	settlement	influence	how	payment	is	finalized	as	
well	as	how	other	parts	of	the	process	are	fulfilled.	The	payment	infrastructure	used	may	
determine,	 for	 instance,	 how	 payment	 can	 be	 initiated	 and	 confirmed	 and	 if	 (or	 how)	
payment	references	are	captured	and	transmitted	to	facilitate	reconciliation.	
	
	
Exhibit	12:		Schematic	outline	of		differences	in	payment	steps	per	stylised	payment	service		
                                                                                                       Inter&Bank*Model*                                                                 4"Party"Model"                                                                                                            3"Party"Model"
                                                                                  Beneﬁciary)                   Clearing)
                                                                                                                Member)
                                                                                                                                          Creditor*                                                                                                                                                          "Bilateral"or"Closed"Loop"

                                                                                         )))Clearing)                             Clearing))))                      Beneﬁciary(                              Creditor(
                                                                                          Member)                               ))))Member)

                                                                                                                                                      Inter-bank	
                                                                                                                                                                    (Merchant)(
                                                                                                                                                                                          Payment"Network"
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (Payee)(                                                                                                             Payments)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hub)                           Proprietary	
                                                                                            Clearing)))))))
                                                                                          )))Member)
                                                                                                                                ))))Clearing))
                                                                                                                                  Member)             Credit		                                                                           4	Party	                                                                                                                  payment	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   service	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Creditor’s*A/C**                Beneﬁciary’s,A/C,
                                                                                                                                                                      Creditor’s*A/C**                       Beneﬁciary’s,A/C,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ins/tu/on*                       Ins1tu1on,




                                                                                                                                                      Transfers	
                                                                                                                                                                        Ins/tu/on*                              Ins1tu1on,




    Payment	Steps	                                                                                            Se0lement*Bank*                                                              Se.lement"Bank"




                                                                                   Credit	transfers	can	be	ini+ated	by	the	                                         Payment	usually	ini+ated	by	the	                                                                                               Proprietary	service	provider	sets	
                                                                                   payer;	Direct	debit	instruc+ons	can	be	                                          payee	by	entering	payment	details	                                                                                             access	criteria,	process	and	means	to	
     Payment	Ini+a+on	                                                             ini+ated	by	the	payee;	bank	provide	                                             into	a	point	of	sale	device	or	similar	                                                                                        ini+ate	transac+ons	
                                                                                   interface	                                                                       applica+on,	e.g.	on	a	smartphone	


                                                                                   Par+cipants	may	have	access	to	                                                  Process	and	standards	set	by	the	                                                                                              Can	be	set	by	the	payment	provider	as	
        Valida+on	&	                                                               central	database	of	valid	bank	                                                  network	/	scheme	operator;	                                                                                                    bespoke	process;	
       Authen+ca+on	                                                               iden+ﬁers	and	account	numbers	to	                                                All	Iden+ﬁer	codes	such	as	card	                                                                                               All	members	IDs	and	accounts	are	
                                                                                   verify	details	of	the	beneﬁciary;	                                               number	valida+on	checked	through	                                                                                              pre-registered	and	managed	by	the	
                                                                                   Security	set	by	par+cipant		                                                     scheme;	on-line	valida+on	supported	                                                                                           payment	service	provider	

                                                                                   Bank	par+cipant	manages	                                                         Controlled	by	scheme	and	issuers;		                                                                                             Process	and	controls	set	by	the	
       Authorisa+on		                                                              authorisa+on	and	any	credit	controls	                                            business	rules	set	by/for	the	payment	                                                                                          payment	service	provider;	payee	and	
        &	Control	                                                                 before	authorising	the	payment	                                                  scheme;	Requires	on-line	connec+on	                                                                                             payer	generally	interact	directly	with	
                                                                                   instruc+on		                                                                     and	se:lement	risk	guarantee	                                                                                                   the	payment	service	provider,	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    reducing	3rd	party	controls	

                                                                                   Usually	sent	immediately	to	the	payer	                                           Conﬁrma+on	provided	to	payee	and	                                                                                              Payee	and	payer	are	linked	directly	to	
         Payment	                                                                  Conﬁrma+on	to	the	payee	from	their	                                              the	payer	immediately	at	the	Point	of	                                                                                         the	same	payment	processor;	this	
       Conﬁrma+ons	                                                                bank	may	come	later;	New	“instant	                                               Sale;	can	be	supported	by	addi+onal	                                                                                           facilitates	immediate	conﬁrma+ons	
                                                                                   payment	plaOorms	enablin	gnear	real	                                             services	to	merchants	or	transac+on	
                                                                                   +me	conﬁrma+on	to	payee	                                                         no+ﬁca+ons	to	card	holders	

                                                                                   via	a	centralised	system	run	or	                                                 Net	se:lement	posi+ons	calculated	by	                                                                                          Handled	by	the	sponsoring	or	
         Clearing	&	                                                               sponsored	by	the	central	bank;	                                                  scheme	and	se:led	through	a	                                                                                                   controlling	payment	service	provider;	
         Se:lement	                                                                Timing	/	cycles	moving	from	batch	to	                                            common	designated	ins+tu+on.	                                                                                                  Limita+on	is	that	all	account	providers	
                                                                                   near	real	+me	for	retail	                                                        Credi+ng	of	beneﬁciary	/	payee	                                                                                                to	distributors	and	retailers	must	be	
                                                                                                                                                                    depends	on	account	ins+tu+on	                                                                                                  members	                                                                       	
	
The	 way	 in	 which	 B2B	 retailer	 payment	 requirements	 can	 be	 supported	 in	 Indonesia	 will	
depend	 on	 the	 infrastructure	 options	 available.	 There	 are	 in	 reality	 many	 variations	 and	
combinations	of	the	above	models.		

Post	payment	processes	and	functions	
	
Exhibit	13:	Overview	of	payment	processes	and	functions	–	
                       Seller%
                               Macro%and%Sub0Processes%in%End0to0End%Payments% focus	on	post	finance	and	account	
                                                                                Buyer%
management	
                                                            Enterprise)Data)




	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Enterprise)Data)




                                                                                      Customer)set*up)                                                  Vendor)Set*up)
           Customer)Set)up)                                                                         Macro%and%Sub0Processes%in%End0to0End%Payments%
                 processes)                                                           Seller%                                                               Buyer%                                                                                                                                           Vendor)Set*up)
                                                                               Marke/ng)&)Sales)Planning)                                           Inventory)Management)                                                                                                                                                                                         	
                                              Enterprise)Data)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Enterprise)Data)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  	
                                                                                     Customer)set*up)                                                                                                                                Vendor)Set*up)
          Customer)Set)up)
                processes)                                                             Sales)Proposals)                                                                                                                               Stock)Check)                                                            Vendor)Set*up)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  	
                                                                               Marke/ng)&)Sales)Planning)                                                                                                                        Inventory)Management)
                                                                                     Order)Processing)                                                                                                                             Order)Placement)
                                                                                      Sales)Proposals)
                                                                                    Order)Prepara/on)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Stock)Check)                                                                                                                	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Returns)/)Discounts)
                                                                                    Order)Processing)                                                                                                                               Order)Placement)                                                                                                              	
                                                                                   Delivery)&)Logis/cs)
        Sales)process)steps)
                                                                                   Order)Prepara/on)                                                                                                                                Stock)Inspec/on)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Returns)/)Discounts)                                                      Purchase))
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Process)Steps)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   	
       Sales)process)steps)
                                                                                Returns)&)Amendments)
                                                                                 Delivery)&)Logis/cs)                                                                                                                            Invoice)Conﬁrma/on)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Stock)Inspec/on)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Purchase))                                            	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Payment)




                                                                                       Invoicing)
                                                                                Returns)&)Amendments)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Provisioning)and)Credit)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Invoice)Conﬁrma/on)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Process)Steps)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   	
                                   Payment)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Payment)




                                                                                        Invoicing)
                                                                                     Payment)Receipt)                                                                                                                            Provisioning)and)Credit)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Payment)                                                                                                                   	
                               Payment)




                                                                                    Payment)Receipt)
                                                                                     Reconcilia/on)                                                                                                                                    Payment)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stock)registra/on)                                                                                                               	
                                                                                    Reconcilia/on)
                                                                                 Accounts)Receivable))
                                                                                 Accounts(Receivable((
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Stock)registra/on)                                                                                                              	
                                                                                     Management)
                                                                                    Management(
                                                                                 Accounts)Receivable))
                                                                                    Management)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Credit)/)Payables)Mgt)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Credit(/(Payables(Mgt(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Credit)/)Payables)Mgt)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	
                                                                                 Manage(Credit(&(Risk(
                                                                                 Manage)Credit)&)Risk)
          Management(
          Management)
           func=ons(
            func/ons)
          Management)
                                                                                 Manage)Credit)&)Risk)
                                                                                    Cash(&(Liquidity(
                                                                                     Cash)&)Liquidity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Account(Management(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Account)Management)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Account)Management)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cash(&(Liquidity(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Management(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Management)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  func=ons(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  func/ons)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Management)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	
                                                                                      Management(                                                                                                                                   Cash)&)Liquidity)
            func/ons)                                                                 Management)
                                                                                     Cash)&)Liquidity)                                                                                                                               Management(                                                                                 func/ons)
                                                                                 Finance(&(Accoun=ng((                                                                                                                               Management)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cash)&)Liquidity)
                                                                                      Management)
                                                                                  Finance)&)Accoun/ng))                                                                                                                          Finance(&(Accoun=ng(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Management)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Finance)&)Accoun/ng)
                                                                                Tax(Repor=ng(&(Claims(
                                                                                 Finance)&)Accoun/ng))
                                                                                 Tax)Repor/ng)&)Claims)
                                                                                Tax)Repor/ng)&)Claims)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Tax(&(VAT(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Finance)&)Accoun/ng)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Tax)&)VAT)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Tax)&)VAT)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             38	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
                         Summary	of	key	post	payment	management	functions	
                        Seller	                                             Buyer	
            Reconciliation	of	Receivables	                        Registration	of	Payments	
Sellers	 need	 to	 verify	 their	 accounts	 and	 Retailers	 may	 register	 and	 track	 stock,	
match	 receipts	 with	 expected	 payments.	 In	 purchase	 price	 and	 margins.	 Whether	
an	 on-line	 procure	 to	 pay	 process,	 the	 seller	 manually	 or	 using	 semi-automated	 processes,	
collects	 the	 relevant	 data	 and	 presents	 sales	 they	 may	 need	 to	 match	 records	 in	 an	
orders,	 delivery	 notifications	 and	 invoices	 inventory	 system	 with	 payments	 made	 to	
electronically	 and	 defines	 the	 amount	 to	 be	 suppliers,	 track	 overall	 spend	 and	 monitor	
paid.	 This	 means	 that	 the	 seller	 can	 fully	 profitability	 of	 items.	 Invoices	 may	 be	 used	 to	
reconcile	 all	 incoming	 payments	 (triggered	 by	 support	 this	 stock	 registration	 and	
the	 seller	 himself)	 with	 the	 invoices,	 reconciliation	process.	
complementary	 invoices	 and	 credit	 notes	                  	
issued	by	the	seller.	                                Internal	 control	 and	 tax	 requirements	 may	
          	                                           increase	 the	 importance	 of	 keeping	
                                                      electronic	 records.	 For	 instance,	 the	 absence	
Large	 B2B	 sellers	 such	 as	 FMCGs	 and	 of	 credit	 notes	 would	 provide	 the	 risk	 for	 the	
distributors	 process	 millions	 of	 incoming	 buyer	 of	 inadvertently	 overstating	 the	 tax	
payments	 per	 year.	 When	 they	 are	 not	 in	 declaration	of	purchases	and	hence	overstating	
control	 of	 the	 details	 of	 the	 payment	 the	VAT	credit	claimed	with	tax	authorities.		
instruction	 by	 the	 buyer	 (i.e.	 when	 purchases	          	
and	payments	are	not	made	via	the	website	of	                 	
the	seller)	then	their	degree	of	reconciliation	of	
incoming	 payments	 with	 their	 receivables	
depends	 on	 the	 structuring	 of	 these	 payments	
by	buyers	and	the	payment	infrastructure.	
	

Automation	between	buyer	and	seller	
	
Payment	 services	 are	 being	 pressed	 to	 adapt	 to	 the	 increasingly	 integrated	 and	 on-
line	 manner	 in	 which	 business	 operate.	 Most	 large	 companies	 now	 run	 “Enterprise	
Resource	 Planning	 Systems”	 (ERPs)	 to	 support	 their	 sub	 processes	 for	 selling	 and	 buying.	
Spurred	 by	 the	 rapid	 rise	 of	 information	 technology	 services,	 smaller	 companies	 and	 even	
sole	traders	are	now	conducting	some	or	all	of	their	business	with	help	of	technology.	This	
provides	 opportunities	 for	 smaller	 firms	 to	 benefit	 from	 broader	 supply	 chain	 automation.	
But	it	expands	the	set	of	requirements	that	must	be	met	by	payment	service	providers	and	
infrastructure.		
	
Large	 companies	 led	 the	 introduction	 of	 ERP	 systems	 and	 their	 gradual	
standardisation.	 In	 the	 1980s,	 the	 availability	 of	 processing	 power	 and	 electronic	
communication	links	made	large	scale,	internal	structuring	and	automation	viable	for	larger	
organisations.	 They	 initiated	 the	 development	 of	 ERP	 solutions	 by	 third	 party	 vendors.	
These	 vendors	 then	 began	 to	 deploy	 their	 solutions	 with	 other	 organisations.	 Many	
corporates	 and	 banks	 began	 through	 this	 organic	 process	 to	 adopt	 structures	 and	 to	
automate	 processes	 in	 a	 relatively	 consistent	 manner.	 This	 made	 the	 establishment	 of	
electronic	 links	 viable	 between	 companies,	 between	 banks	 and	 between	 companies	 and	
banks	for	the	exchange	of	data	on	the	processing	of	orders,	invoices	and	payments.	
	
Scale	 is	 important	 to	 reap	 the	 benefits	 from	 digital	 integration	 and	 automation.	
Companies	have	a	commercial	interest	in	reaching	as	many	suppliers	and	buyers	as	they	can	
for	 the	 exchange	 of	 orders	 and	 invoices	 and	 doing	 so	 with	 standardised	 file	 exchanges	

                                                                                                             39	
	
	
between	the	ERP	systems	of	these	firms	is	attractive.	The	harmonisation	of	and	adoption	of	
electronic	invoices	has	in	some	countries	been	accelerated	by	a	need	to	comply	with	new	tax	
or	reporting	requirements.	The	EU	the	tax	authorities	already	in	the	1990s	stipulated	in	EU-
wide	 legislation,	 which	 data	 elements	 were	 to	 be	 included	 in	 invoices	 and	 how	 invoices	
could	 be	 exchanged	 electronically.	 The	 invoice	 embedded	 data	 about	 the	 products	 and	
services	 ordered	 and	 delivered,	 which	 helped	 further	 in	 the	 structuring	 of	 the	 exchange	 of	
order	information	between	companies.	The	result	was	a	set	of	comprehensive	standards	for	
the	Electronic	Data	Interchange	(EDI)	between	companies	for	orders	and	invoices.	
	
Costs	of	EDI	have	until	recently	remained	a	barrier	to	adoption	by	smaller	companies.	
The	cost	of	integration	between	companies	via	EDI	has	in	the	past	been	high	(approximately	
USD	 50,000	 per	 connection).	 EDI	 interfaces	 were	 de	 facto	 limited	 to	 high-volume	
connections	between	a	limited	numbers	of	companies.	Smaller	companies	were	given	access	
to	the	systems	of	larger	companies	via	dedicated	terminals.	
	
But	Automation	is	now	reaching	smaller	companies	at	lower	cost.	The	evolution	of	the	
Internet	 and	 mobile	 plus	 the	 improvements	 in	 open	 standards	 for	 connecting	 diverse	
systems	has	enabled	companies	in	recent	years	to	reach	any	other	companies	electronically	
at	low	cost.	This	has	resulted	in	the	last	decade	in	an	increase	in	electronic	communication	
between	 buyers	 and	 sellers	 with	 the	 Internet	 as	 the	 primary	 communication	 channel.	
Although	B2C	e-commerce	receives	a	lot	of	attention,	the	volume	of	B2B	transactions	in	the	
broader	 economy	 is	 still	 larger	 than	 in	 just	 the	 e-commerce	 sector.	 According	 to	 research	
conducted	by	the	US-based	International	Data	Corporation	(IDC),	it	is	estimated	that	global	
B2B	 e-commerce,	 especially	 among	 wholesalers	 and	 distributors,	 amounted	 to	 USD	 12.4	
trillion	at	the	end	of	2012.	This	in	comparison	with	the	value	of	global	B2C	transactions	that	
was	 estimated	 to	 reach	 USD	 1.2	 trillion	 at	 the	 end	 of	 2012,	 or	 about	 10%	 of	 total	 B2B	
transactions.	
	
Open	standards	and	technology	allow	smaller	companies	to	break	out	of	trading	silos.	
eCommerce	via	webshops	and	mobile	applications	is	currently	often	a	one-sided	automation	
for	the	seller,	with	manual	data	exchange	by	the	buyer	with	the	seller	who	may	automate	the	
processes	 at	 his	 end	 (the	 buyer	 visits	 the	 website	 of	 the	 seller	 and	 enters	 details	 about	
himself	 and	 his	 purchase	 requests,	 often	 without	 the	 option	 to	 upload	 or	 download	 any	
data).	Buyers	then	are	forced	to	operate	in	“trading	silos”	dictated	by	their	sellers	with	only	
accidental	 synergies	 for	 the	 buyers.	 This	 is	 a	 very	 similar	 issue	 to	 the	 creation	 of	 such	
“trading	 silos”	 by	 large	 buyers	 when	 they	 impose	 their	 automation	 on	 smaller	 suppliers,	
giving	them	access	to	websites	or	portals	to	submit	their	invoices	on-line.	
	
Exhibit	14:	Data	flow	and	integration	along	the	purchase	to	pay	process	
           	                                                                   Data(and(Informa2on(Flow(Integra2on(along(the(Purchase(to(Pay(Process(
                                                                     Seller%                                                                                                                      Buyer%
	                                                                                                                                                                     2(

                                1.1( Customer)File)                                   1.2( Product)Catalogue)
                                                                                                                                                                           Some)wholesalers)and)
                                                                                                                                                                           retailers)may)digitally)
                                                                                                                                                                           record)vendor)data;)but)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           	
    Customer)ID)may)
                                 Name%
                                 ID%
                                 Registra.on%Nr.%
                                 Bank%A/C%
                                                                                            Ref#%%Cat.%Product% Price% RRP%                                                most)will)not)                              Most)wholesalers)and)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       retailer)will)not)have)a)           	
    be)used)to)                  Bank%Iden.ﬁer%                                                                                                                                                                        digital)inventory)
    populate)invoice/            Credit%limit%%                                                                                                                                                                        management)system;)
    payment)message)                                                                                                                                                                                                   but)those)that)do)need)
                                                                                                                                                                                  Inventory)
                                                                                                                                                                              Management)System)                       digital)means)to)record)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       new)stock)
                                                              4(                                    5(
                            3( Purchase)Order)                     Delivery)Note)                               Invoice)
                                                                                                      Customer%ID%             Invoice%#%
                             Ref#%%%%%%%%Product% Qty% Amt%                     Qty% Amt%
                                                               Ref#%%%%%%%%Product%
                                                                                                      Ref#%%%%%%%%Product% Qty% Amt%

                                                                                                                                                                       Does)the)retailer)have)
                                                                                                      Value%Date%       Amt%Due%$$$%
                                                                                                                                                                       credit)notes)to)oﬀset)the)                       6A(
                                                                                                                                                                       total)payable)amount?)                             Payment)Instruc:on)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Unique%ID%
                                                                         Beneﬁciary’s%A/C%Ins4tu4on%                                                                 Creditor’s%A/C%Ins4tu4on%                            Benef:%BIC%/%Account%Number%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Name%
                                                                                                                                               Payment((                                                                  Currency/Amount%
                                                                                                                                            Infrastructure(                                                               Debtor%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Value%Date %Reference%#%
                                                                                                                                                                      6B(
                                                                                                                                                                               Authorised)
                                                                                     Credit)No:ce)))                                                                       Payment)Instruc:on)
                                                                                Unique%ID%                                                                                 Unique%ID%
                                   Conﬁrma:on)                                  Benef:%BIC%/%Account%Number%                                                               Benef:%BIC%/%Account%Number%
                        )   )       of)payment)                                 Name%                                                                                      Name%                                         Payment)
                                                                                Currency/Amount%                                                                           Currency/Amount%                            Authorisa:on)
                                                                                Debtor%                                                                                    Debtor%
                                                                                Value%Date %Reference%#%                                                                   Value%Date %Reference%#%

     Conﬁrma:on)may)be)
     provided)by)the)creditor)                                                                                                                                                                                                   Payment)inputs)may)be)
     bank,)a)PSP)or)by)the)                                                                                                                                                                                                      validated)onJline;)
     Beneﬁciary’s)bank)                                                                                                                                                                                                          Retailer)needs)to))
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 authen:cate)instruc:on)

                                                                                                                                                                                        7B( Reconcilia:on)
                                                              7A( Reconcilia:on)                      For%Reconcilia4on%                                          Inventory)
                                                                                                                                                              Management)System)                                          Payment(

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40	
                                  )Payment(                                                          Accounts)Receivable)                                             )                                                  statements(
                                   records(                                                          Customer%ID%             Invoice%#%                       Stock)Registered)

                                                                                                                                                                                           Small)retailers)unlikely)
	
                                                                                                     Ref#%%%%%%%%Product% Qty% Amt%
                                                    A)ﬁle)may)be)provided)                                                                                                                 to)perform)any)formal))
                                                    by)Beneﬁciary’s)bank)or)                         Value%Date%       Amt%Due%$$$%                                                            or)automated)
                                                    a)3rd)party)integrator)                                                                                                                    reconcilia:ons)


                   x(       Reference)number)refers)to)the)respec:ve)sec:on)of)the)detail)analysis)of)data)ﬂow)contained)in)Annex)B.))
    	
    Box	5:	Selective	initiatives	in	the	evolution	of	automation	in	the	payments	industry		
In	 the	 same	 period	 where	 large	 companies	 and	 tax	 authorities	 triggered	 the	 establishment	 of	 EDI	
message	 standards	 and	 built	 many	 bilateral	 interfaces	 between	 companies	 for	 the	 electronic	
exchange	 of	 orders	 and	 invoices,	 banks	 worked	 on	 their	 own	 structuring	 and	 automation	 of	 the	
inter-bank	payment	processes.	
	
To	provide	an	alternative	for	the	exchange	of	faxes	and	telexes	for	instructing	payments,	239	banks	
established	in	1973	an	interbank	EDI	network,	with	its	own	message	standards,	called	SWIFT.	This	
was	set	up	as	a	closed	network	between	banks,	since	these	banks	did	have	an	interest	in	automation	
and	 standardisation	 between	 themselves	 but	 not	 in	 standardisation	 of	 their	 data	 exchange	 with	
bank	 clients	 since	 this	 could	 simplify	 the	 migration	 of	 clients	 between	 banks	 and	 could	 result	 in	
payments	rapidly	becoming	a	commoditised	business.		
         	
The	 banks	 did	 however	 develop	 dedicated	 interfaces	 between	 themselves	 and	 their	 larger	 clients.	
These	 interfaces	 enable	 sellers	 to	 receive	 data	 about	 incoming	 payments	 (in	 electronic	 bank	
statements)	 directly	 in	 their	 payment	 systems	 which	 they	 can	 reconcile	 with	 invoices	 and	 credit	
notes.	These	same	interfaces	enable	buyers	to	send	payment	instructions	to	the	bank	electronically	
that	 are	 generated	 in	 the	 same	 systems	 that	 register	 the	 incoming	 invoices	 to	 be	 paid	 and	 the	
related	credit	notes.		
         	
In	some	countries	companies	came	together	to	develop	and	implement	open	solutions	that	can	be	
used	for	instructing	payments	to	multiple	banks	and	receiving	bank	statements	from	multiple	banks	
via	one	single	interface	design	or	possibly	via	one	single	interface.	An	example	is	the	collaboration	
of	German	corporates	in	de	development	of	the	Banking	Communication	Standard	(BCS/FTAM).		
         	
In	 1995	 it	 became	 compulsory	 for	 all	 German	 banks	 to	 comply	 with	 this	 standard,	 which	 thus	
established	 itself	 as	 the	 German	 industry	 standard	 for	 corporate	 customer	 payment	 transactions.	
This	 means	 that	 for	 many	 years,	 German	 corporate	 clients	 have	 benefited	 from	 flexibility	 in	 their	
choice	of	a	financial	institution	-	a	situation	largely	unknown	in	many	markets.	The	standard’s	user	
neutrality	 regarding	 business	 transactions,	 data	 formats	 and	 system-to-system	 communication	
protocol	 ensured	 that	 specialised	 solutions	 were	 developed	 (e.g.	 Multicash)	 as	 gateways	 for	
corporates	to	exchange	payment	transaction	data	files	with	multiple	banks	in	Germany	through	one	
single	interface.	
         	
Other	 examples	 are	 the	 efforts	 of	 RosettaNet	 around	 2000	 to	 establish	 one	 standard	 between	 ICT	
companies	and	their	banks	for	the	structuring	of	remittance	information	and	the	efforts	of	TWIST	to	
create	the	first	version	of	ISO	20022	XML	standards	for	payments,	billing	of	bank	services	and	the	
opening	and	maintenance	of	bank	accounts.		
         	
When	the	European	Commission	created	the	PEPPOL	network,	payments	were	explicitly	left	out	of	
scope.	 Financial	 industry	 stakeholders	 explained	 that	 the	 standards	 applied	 by	 corporates	 would	
not	 be	 applicable	 for	 bank	 services.	 Instead	 the	 European	 banks	 offered	 to	 deliver	 electronic	
payment	services	based	on	ISO	standards.	These	standards	would	structure	data	sent	and	received	
between	banks	and	their	customers	but	would	not	structure	system-to-system.	
	
The	 PEPPOL	 standards	 are	 themselves	 an	 evolution	 of	 the	 EDIFACT	 standards	 just	 like	 the	 ISO	
20022	 XML	 standards	 are	 an	 evolution	 of	 the	 EDI	 payments	 standards	 that	 were	 originally	
developed	by	SWIFT.	
	
Public	procurement	authorities	throughout	the	EU	have	started	in	2016	with	the	implementation	of	
the	 PEPPOL	 standards,	 setting	 staged	 deadlines	 for	 suppliers	 to	 be	 compliant	 within	 the	 next	 1-2	
years.	 As	 it	 happens	 the	 UK	 has	 become	 one	 of	 the	 most	 driven	 implementers	 of	 the	 PEPPOL	
framework.	The	UK	government	recognizes	the	value	of	these	standards	in	improving	procurement	
controls	and	processing	efficiencies,	as	demanded	to	manage	costs	in	the	public	healthcare	sector.	
	
In	the	meantime	corporates	have	at	national	level	become	active	in	some	EU	countries	to	negotiate	
with	 their	 banks	 the	 usage	 of	 bank-independent	 solutions	 and	 open	 standards	 complementary	 to	
ISO	20022.	One	such	initiative	is	in	the	Netherlands,	where	large	billers	including	the	tax	authorities	
(in	totality	representing	60%	of	the	payment	volume	in	the	Netherlands)	are	supporting	solutions	
that	 are	 not	 owned	 or	 developed	 by	 banks	 for	 direct	 debit	 eMandate	 management	 and	 have	
specified	code	lists	for	direct	debit	returns	that	enable	automated	handling	of	these	returned	direct	
debits.		
    	

                                                                                                                    41	
    	
	
	


    V.                          Payment	Service	Requirements		
	
This	section	describes	the	high	level	and	detail	requirements	for	expanding	usage	of	
electronic	payments	for	B2B	transactions.	These	requirements	are	determined	in	part	by	
the	 general	 business	 and	 operational	 requirements	 described	 in	 the	 previous	 section.	 But	
many	 choices	 about	 infrastructure,	 standard	 and	 solutions	 are	 also	 context	 dependent.	
Solving	for	some	problems	may	impose	indirect	requirements	on	other	parts	of	the	process;	
and	 meeting	 the	 needs	 or	 demands	 of	 actors	 in	 one	 part	 of	 the	 process	 may	 constrain	 or	
impose	 choices	 in	 other	 areas.	 Hence	 a	 sub-section	 of	 this	 chapter	 exposes	 in	 more	 detail	
what	some	of	these	options	and	trade-offs	are	introduces	three	main	stylized	infrastructure	
scenarios	that	are	relevant	to	Indonesia’s	context.	
	

Business	Requirements	
Exhibit	15:	overview	of	requirements	
         Business'Requirements'                           Primary(Set(of(Requirements(                   Detail(Requirements(

    1'
          Posi%ve(Cost(/(Beneﬁt(
                Outcome(                        2'

                                                          Stability(and(Trustworthiness(       A(              Data(Integrity(
                                 (Sales(
          (Seller(




                                Eﬃciency(       3'
                                                                                               B(               Data(Quality(
                                                            Reliability(and(Ease(of(Use(
                                  Cost(


                                 (Sales(        4'                                             C(       Payer(Funding(&(Control(
                                                                Data(Exchange(&(
          (Buyer(




                                                                  Automa%on(
                                Eﬃciency(
                                                                                               D(            Transparent(Pricing(
                                  Cost(         5'

                                                                 Reach(&(Scope(
          (Payment(Provider(




                                 (Sales(
                                                                                               E(   Consistent(and(Timely(Se@lement(
                                                6'
                                Eﬃciency(
                                                             Free(Choice(of(Provider(
                                  Cost(                                                        F(   Conﬁrma%ons(&(Proof(of(Payment(

                                                                                                                                         	

	

     1"                        !!!Posi&ve!Cost!/!Beneﬁt!Outcome!                           	
                                            Seller	                                            Buyer	
                                                      	                                                  	
    “Can	I	electronically	support	customer	set-up,	       “Can	I	electronically	support	vendor	set-up,	
       sales	&	delivery,	payment	collection	and	           stock	ordering	&	purchase,	payments	and	
    multiple	management	functions	such	that	the	        multiple	management	functions	such	that	I	can	
          sale	of	my	products	is	profitable?”	                  run	my	business	much	better?”	
                                	                                                   	
    “Can	I	use	electronic	payments	and	technical	solutions	to	fully	replace	cash	payments	and	manual	
                                                activities?”	
	
Electronic	 payments	 must	 compete	 with	 the	 main	 incumbent:	 cash.	 Overall	
solutions	need	to	generate	enough	benefits	for	users	to	switch,	and	to	hold	them	there	in	
the	long	term.	Benefits	can	include	enhancement	to	sales	of	distributors	or	retailers,	or	
even	banks	and	payment	providers.	Important	benefits	also	come	in	the	form	of	firm	and	
sector	level	efficiency	gains	from	automation	and	supply	chain	integration.	
	


                                                                                                                                       42	
	
	
Payment	 solutions	 need	 to	 adjust	 to	 the	 extent	 to	 which	 underlying	 business	
processes	 and	 operations	 of	 suppliers	 and	 retailers	 are	 digitised.	 Electronic	
payments	 and	 supply	 chain	 bring	 the	 greatest	 efficiency	 gains	 when	 they	 fit	 well	 with	
automated,	effective,	time	saving	and	low	cost	processes	between	sellers	and	buyers.	The	
more	 these	 parties	 have	 already	 adopted	 automated	 or	 semi-automated	 processes,	 the	
more	likely	this	will	accelerate	the	adoption	of	electronic	payments.		
	
Payment	services	need	be	design	in	a	manner	that	supports	sales	and	commercial	
development	 aims.	 Payment	 services	 may	 not	 need	 to	 fulfil	 other	 business	 processes	
like	 promotions,	 credit	 or	 sales	 analytics.	 But	 where	 process	 automation	 and	 data	
collection	steps	are	needed,	they	should	support	these	aims	in	order	to	enhance	adoption	
incentives.	
	
Efficiency	comes	from	linking	activities	in	the	chain	and	achieving	scope.	Island	or	
silo	based	payments	solutions	will	undermine	or	negate	the	potential	gains	in	efficiency	
or	 control	 that	 automation	 and	 digital	 business	 processes	 otherwise	 support.	 The	
applicability	of	electronic	payments	as	integral	part	of	the	buyer’s	and	seller’s	business	
further	depends	on	the	combination	of	payment	services,	system	applications	and	other	
third	party	services.		
	
Adoption	 will	 be	 influenced	 by	 the	 marginal	 cost	 and	 ease	 of	 implementing	
solutions	 that	 stretch	 beyond	 just	 payments.	 Retailers	 and	 distributors’	 decision	 to	
implement	 electronic	 purchasing,	 management	 and	 payments	 will	 depend	 on	 many	
aspects	 such	 as	 their	 functionality,	 ease	 of	 use,	 ease	 of	 implementation,	 trust,	
accessibility	and	obviously	price.	Multiple	service	providers	need	to	be	in	the	market	and	
multiple	 solutions	 need	 to	 be	 made	 available	 that	 are	 interconnected	 with	 “plug-and-
play”	 interfaces,	 based	 on	 comprehensive	 data	 standards	 plus	 mature	 and	 secure	
electronic	communication	protocols.		
	

    2"       Stability(and(Trustworthiness(
                                                       	
                          Seller	                                               Buyer	
                                    	                                                    	
    “Am	I	informed	by	my	bank	who	instructed	the	          “Can	I	trust	that	the	payments	I	instruct	will	be	
     payment	and	can	I	trust	that	the	payments	I	           received	by	the	specific	seller	I	included	in	my	
      receive	are	instructed	by	the	specific	buyer	           payment	instruction	and	that	the	seller	is	
              indicated	in	the	payment?”	                   informed	that	the	payment	comes	from	me”?	
             	                                                     	
                                    	                                                    	
         “Can	I	trust	that	all	data	included	in	the	payment	instruction	by	the	payer	is	unaltered	when	
                               processed	by	the	banks	and	delivered	to	the	payee?”	

	
Payments	 services	 must	 inspire	 a	 high	 degree	 of	 trust	 in	 users.	 Payments	 are	
ultimately	 about	 the	 transfer	 of	 value	 from	 one	 individual	 to	 another	 individual	 or	 –	 in	
the	 case	 of	 B2B	 payments	 –	 one	 company	 to	 another	 company.	 Banks	 and	 their	
regulators	have	incentives	to	ensure	the	integrity	and	reliability	of	the	payments	system.	
Payment	infrastructure	needs	to	be	robust	from	end-to-end	for	transactions	on	a	day-to-
day	 basis	 and	 increasingly	 on	 a	 24-hour	 basis.	 Payments	 systems	 also	 need	 to	 protect	
against	 fraud	 or	 misuse	 –	 both	 internal	 and	 external	 –	 to	 ensuring	 that	 everyone	 has	
confidence	in	the	payment	systems	to	“do	what	one	expects	it	to	do”.	
	
Measures	need	to	be	taken	to	ensure	the	integrity	and	mutual	coherence	of	data.	
Payment	data	is	 entered	by	users	and	used	by	the	banks	and	other	payments	providers.	
Some	 data	 is	 contained	 in	 the	 payment	 instruction	 to	 be	 delivered	 to	 banks	 by	 the	
payers.	 Even	 in	 markets	 with	 mature	 payment	 infrastructures,	 consumers,	 businesses	
and	other	organisations	may	not	always	be	confident	that	electronic	payments	are	made	

                                                                                                                43	
	
	
to	 the	 correct	 payee.	 Data	 format,	 syntax	 and	 reference	 standardisation	 are	 key	 means	
adopted	 by	 banks	 to	 ensure	 quality	 and	 consistency	 of	 instructions	 can	 support	
automated	payment	processing.	
	
Other	measures	to	ensure	the	integrity	of	data	relate	to	the	governance	of	payment	
systems.		Access	to	the	system	need	to	be	controlled	and	member	roles,	obligations	and	
capacities	 need	 to	 be	 carefully	 defined.	 Participation	 in	 a	 payment	 system	 or	 scheme	
generally	 requires	 fulfilment	 of	 proportionate	 obligation	 in	 terms	 of	 training,	 security	
and	 skills	 as	 well	 as	 financial	 capacity.	 Data	 sources	 for	 systemic	 information	 such	 as	 a	
bank	code,	a	client	identifier	or	authorisations	must	be	appropriate	and	secure.	Although	
users	 themselves	 can	 sometimes	 help	 to	 monitor	 and	 control	 information,	 overall	
integrity	 of	 data	 that	 runs	 payment	 systems	 must	 be	 strong	 for	 it	 to	 provide	 a	 stable	
infrastructure	that	users	can	trust.				
	
Many	 countries	 have	 undertaken	 steps	 to	 enable	 participants	 to	 confirm	 that	 a	
bank	 account	 and	 holder	 exist	 before	 making	 a	 payment.	 For	 example	 in	 the	 UK	
banks	created	a	“central	billers	database”	that	is	used	to	advise	payers	-	before	the	bank	
of	 the	 payer	 accepts	 the	 payment	 instruction	 -	 if	 they	 have	 incorrectly	 formatted	
references,	A	third	activity	of	the	UK	banks	in	this	context	is	their	collaboration	with	the	
UK	government	in	assuring	the	identities	of	individuals	and	businesses	and	in	providing	
highly	secure	authentication	systems	that	make	sure	that	users	of	payment	services	(i.e.	
both	the	payer	and	the	payee)	are	who	they	say	they	are	and	are	entitled	to	participate	in	
and	transmit	payment	on	behalf	of	customers	and	account	holders.	
	
	
    3"    Reliability)and)Ease)of)Use)
                                                                     	
                        Seller	                                             Buyer	
                                 	                                                    	
         Can	I	account	for	incoming	payments	
                                                         Can	I	instruct	payments	electronically	in	a	few	
        electronically	without	the	need	to	take	
                                                          steps	that	I	can	remember	and	that	I	can	do	
    additional	steps	such	as	calling	my	bank	or	the	
                                                                             quickly?	
                         buyer?	
                                 	                                                    	
     Does	the	bank	allow	me	to	use	the	in-house	system,	on-line	tool	or	mobile	solution	that	I	find	very	
    easy	to	operate	without	any	need	to	use	bank	systems	as	well?	Or,	if	I	do	not	need	any	system	of	my	
            own,	is	the	bank	system,	on-line	tool	or	mobile	solution	of	the	bank	easy	to	operate?		
	
Convenience	of	cash	versus	electronic	payments	for	companies.	When	companies	make	
electronic	payments,	the	reliability	and	easy	of	use	depends	on	the	systems	those	companies	
have	 put	 in	 place	 to	 support	 the	 payment	 process	 and	 whether	 these	 systems	 can	 be	
connected	directly	with	the	systems	of	the	bank	or	payment	service	provider.	For	instance,	if	
the	bank	requires	payments	to	be	authorised	in	the	bank	system	only,	companies	may	need	
senior	officers	to	authorise	in	both	their	own	systems	and	in	the	bank	system,	which	may	be	
impractical	and	cause	senior	officers	to	use	cash	instead.	
	
Handling	 of	 cash	 can	 in	 practice	 be	 cumbersome	 for	 businesses	 in	 particular	 when	
these	 businesses	 involve	 more	 than	 one	 person	 in	 the	 payment	 process.	 When	 the	
owner	 of	 a	 business	 makes	 the	 payments	 himself,	 then	 cash	 can	 be	 convenient	 because	 he	
can	 easily	 control	 what	 is	 paid	 to	 whom.	 When	 cash	 payments	 are	 delegated	 to	 another	
employee	however,	he	or	she	needs	not	only	to	secure	the	cash	but	also	prove	he	or	she	is	
handling	 the	 cash	 correctly.	 In	 this	 situation	 it	 might	 well	 be	 that	 electronic	 payments	 are	
simpler	to	handle	and	pose	less	of	a	personal	risk	than	the	handling	of	cash	payments.	
	
Cash	and	cheques	will	have	to	be	accounted	for.	Electronic	payments	can	be	accounted	for	
automatically.	Cash	and	cheques	will	have	to	be	manually	counted	at	least	on	a	daily	basis	

                                                                                                            44	
	
	
and	any	outgoing	or	incoming	cash	recorded,	which	also	is	a	manual	process.	When	cash	is	
not	accounted	for,	handling	cash	can	be	convenient.	But	as	soon	as	payments	and	collections	
have	 to	 be	 recorded	 and	 are	 recorded	 in	 systems,	 electronic	 payments	 surrounded	 by	
automated	controls	can	be	more	convenient.		
	
The	 process	 for	 the	 retailer	 needs	 to	 be	 completed	 in	 no	 more	 than	 3-steps.	 When	
making	electronic	payments	this	should	be	as	intuitive	and	little	time	consuming	as	paying	
by	 cash	 or	 writing	 a	 cheque.	 This	 avoids	 errors	 but	 also	 makes	 electronic	 payments	 as	
convenient	 as	 paying	 by	 cash	 or	 cheque.	 Ideally	 the	 relevant	 details	 of	 the	 payment	 are	
already	filled	in	for	the	payer,	for	instance	by	presenting	an	invoice,	such	that	the	payer	only	
needs	 to	 verify	 and	 either	 authorise	 or	 reject	 the	 payment.	 The	 authorisation	 or	 rejection	
should	 also	 be	 intuitive	 and	 not	 time	 consuming.	 For	 the	 authentication	 of	 the	 authoriser	
one	 extra	 step	 might	 be	 needed,	 such	 as	 the	 verification	 of	 a	 code	 or	 the	 typing	 in	 of	 a	
passphrase.	 The	 result	 would	 be	 that	 payments	 could	 be	 verified,	 authorised	 and	
authenticated	in	no	more	than	3	steps.		
	
Data	entry	and	validation	needs	to	facilitate	use	and	reliability.	Payment	errors	can	be	
costly	but	also	inconvenient	to	handle.	Some	data	such	as	payment	amount	can	be	reviewed	
or	 defined	 easily	 by	 the	 user	 of	 an	 electronic	 payment	 mechanism.	 But	 other	 data,	 such	 as	
the	account	details	of	the	creditor	or	even	of	the	debtor	can	be	hard	to	obtain,	is	often	not	
intuitive	and	can	easily	be	typed	in	erroneously.	The	creditor	effectively	generates	most	data	
in	 the	 payment	 instruction.	 An	 invoice	 for	 instance	 contains	 all	 the	 data	 elements	 of	 a	
payment	 instruction	 apart	 from	 the	 bank	 account	 details	 of	 the	 debtor.	 Therefore	 the	 best	
way	 to	 facilitate	 data	 entry	 and	 validation	 of	 payments	 is	 by	 electronically	 presenting	 the	
invoice	to	the	payer	for	payment.	This	would	also	enable	the	correct	recording	of	payment	
reference	 data	 with	 the	 payment	 that	 the	 creditor	 can	 reconcile	 automatically.	 In	 the	
absence	 of	 invoice	 or	 bill	 presentment,	 presenting	 the	 account	 details	 and	 identification	 of	
the	creditor	to	the	payer	at	the	moment	of	payment	will	help	reducing	the	time	spent	with	
data	entry	and	minimise	errors	in	the	payment	instruction.	
	
Technical	issues	such	 as	 network	 stability	 must	 not	 undermine	 user	 experience.	The	
end-to-end	technical	infrastructure	used	to	transmit	and	process	payments	must	be	reliable	
and	 robust.	 Systems	 must	 be	 able	 to	 operate	 on	 a	 regular	 basis	 without	 errors	 or	
inaccessibility.	 The	 devices	 and	 networks	 that	 users,	 banks,	 payment	 providers	 or	 end	
customer	 used	 to	 access,	 transmit	 and	 receive	 payment	 information	 are	 quick,	 stable	 and	
reliable.	Appropriate	telecommunications	infrastructure	must	also	therefore	be	considered	
a	requirement	for	fulfilling	the	payment	needs	of	this	segment	of	the	economy.	

	

    4"     Data$Exchange$&$Automa1on$                                 	
                        Seller	                                              Buyer	
                             	                                                       	
   “Will	I	receive	the	information	the	payer	              “Can	I	deliver	with	the	payment	the	payee	
  included	in	his	payment	instruction	about	             information	about	invoice	reference(s),	credit	
   invoice	reference(s),	credit	note(s),	other	         note(s),	references	to	other	payment	triggers	or	
payment	triggers	or	possibly	information	about	            references	to	payment	notification(s)	and	
               partial	payments?”	                      possibly	information	about	partial	payments?”	
            	                                                   	
    “Can	I	trust	that	all	data	that	is	included	in	the	payment	instruction	by	the	payer	is	unaltered	when	
                             processed	by	the	banks	and	delivered	to	the	payee?”	
	
Payment	services	need	to	support	data	exchange	and	automation	of	related	business	
processes.	 This	 requires	 very	 detailed	 descriptions	 of	 data,	 how	 they	 are	 to	 be	 generated	
and	what	they	have	to	adhere	to	are	essential	for	ensuring	that	each	system	in	the	payment	


                                                                                                             45	
	
	
chain	understands	exactly	what	it	receives	from	the	system	that	feeds	it	and	what	it	has	to	
do	to	deliver	data	to	the	next	system	in	the	chain.		
	
Enable	 the	 payee	 to	 automatically	 match	 or	 reconcile	 incoming	 payments	 and	 credit	
notes	 to	 receivables.	When	paying	invoices	(possibly	complemented	by	credit	notes)	it	is	
important	that	the	payer	can	inform	the	payee	what	he	is	paying.	This	enables	the	seller	to	
link	the	incoming	payment	from	specific	buyers	to	the	outstanding	invoices	and	credit	notes	
for	 that	 buyer	 or	 to	 any	 other	 payment	 trigger	 provided	 by	 the	 seller	 to	 the	 buyer.	 Ideally	
this	should	be	done	in	a	manner	that	enables	reconciliation	to	be	performed	in	an	automated	
fashion	 with	 little	 intervention	 or	 error	 handling	 required.	 Companies	 generally	 process	
large	volumes	of	payment	instructions	and	reconciliations	in	daily	routines.	This	means	that	
in	 practice	 most	 companies	 will	 combine	 any	 outstanding	 invoices	 and	 credit	 notes	 of	 a	
seller	in	one	single	payment	that	day	to	the	seller.	It	will	then	be	important	for	the	seller	to	
receive	 information	 about	 the	 multiple	 invoices	 and	 credit	 notes	 –	 or	 part	 thereof	 –	 the	
buyer	has	paid	with	the	single	payment.	
	
Even	 when	 specific	 data	 fields	 are	 dealt	 with	 slightly	 differently	 by	 systems,	 the	
integration	 between	 them	 can	 become	 complicated.	 As	 an	 example,	 when	 sending	
payment	 instructions	 through	 the	 RTGS	 payment	 infrastructure	 in	 Indonesia	 a	 data	 field	
needs	to	be	filled	that	has	been	given	the	number	50	and	is	called	“Ordering	Customer”.	This	
field	 has	 a	 maximum	 of	 140	 characters	 that	 are	 to	 be	 grouped	 in	 4	 “lines”.	 RTGS	
recommends	that	this	field	is	filled	with	“Account	plus	Name	&	Address	of	Customer”,	which	
means	 the	 bank’s	 customer	 that	 instructs	 the	 payment,	 not	 the	 customer	 of	 the	 payer.	
Indonesia’s	other	payment	infrastructure,	SKN	currently	supports	the	field	“Nama	Pengirim”	
(in	English	“Sender	Name”)	which	is	40	characters.	It	is	not	very	clear	whether	the	“Account”	
and	“Address”	of	the	sender	are	important	as	well	and	what	to	do	if	the	account	and	address	
of	the	payer	are	known	by	the	system	that	is	linked	to	SKN.	The	result	is	that	for	payments	
processed	by	SKN	the	payee	can	knows	the	name	of	the	payer	and	can	probably	not	do	much	
in	 case	 the	 payment	 is	 made	 inadvertently.	 Whereas	 for	 payments	 processed	 by	 RTGS	 the	
payee	 also	 knows	 the	 payer’s	 account	 number	 and	 address	 and	 can	 contact	 him	 when	
necessary.	
	
Provide	for	structured	exchange	of	data	about	the	payment,	such	as	in	the	form	of	an	
invoice	reference	or	for	credit	notes.	Structuring	the	data	of	what	exactly	is	paid	for	in	a	
payment	 instruction	 is	 useful	 for	 both	 buyer	 and	 seller.	 Banks	 and	 payment	 service	
providers	 can	 help	 validating	 the	 data	 input	 by	 the	 buyer,	 for	 instance	 by	 creating	 a	 data	
field	 for	 invoice	 reference(s)	 and	 credit	 note(s)	 and	 a	 data	 field	 for	 references	 of	 other	
payment	triggers	and	a	field	for	the	reference	of	the	payment	notification	of	the	buyer	to	the	
seller.	 Technically	 these	 do	 not	 need	 to	 be	 separate	 fields	 as	 long	 as	 the	 payer	 can	 inform	
with	the	payment	which	“field	option”	he	is	using	and	that	this	choice	is	delivered	together	
with	 the	 content	 (such	 as	 the	 invoice	 reference)	 to	 the	 seller.	 For	 example,	 in	 Scandinavia	
the	banks	have	introduced	the	option	for	the	data	input	of	invoice	references	to	be	validated	
with	 a	 check-digit.	 As	 long	 as	 this	 functionality	 is	 made	 optional,	 sellers	 and	 buyers	 can	
choose	to	implement	it	in	their	processes	and	systems	when	they	like	it	at	the	moment	that	
suits	them	best.	
	
Facilitate	 additional	 automated	 controls	 that	 filter	 data	 before	 it	 is	 integrated	 and	
used	 by	 seller	 and	 buyer	 systems.	 With	 electronic	 payments,	 the	 exchange	 of	 data	
between	corporate	and	bank	systems	makes	the	collection	process	for	a	seller	efficient	but	
also	 allow	 the	 application	 of	 automated	 controls.	 These	 automated	 controls	 for	 instance	
ensure	 that	 data	 is	 validated	 before	 it	 is	 accepted	 by	 the	 system,	 that	 new	 data	 input	 is	
linked	 to	 data	 that	 is	 already	 in	 the	 system	 and	 that	 two	 or	 more	 persons	 are	 needed	 to	
authorise	the	processing	of	certain	data.	
	
Facilitate	 timely	 cash	 flow	 management	 of	 distributors.	 Companies	 that	 manage	 their	


                                                                                                        46	
	
	
cash	 tightly	 can	 operate	 a	 practice	 where	 they	 identify	 at	 the	 moment	 payments	 are	 to	 be	
made	 how	 much	 funds	 are	 available	 for	 that	 day	 and	 which	 creditor	 will	 be	 paid	 and	 how	
much.	It	will	then	be	important	for	the	payer	(the	buyer	in	our	context)	to	be	able	to	inform	
the	payee	(seller)	what	invoices	and	credit	notes	are	paid	in	full	with	the	specific	payment,	
what	invoices	are	paid	partially	and	preferably	when	the	remainder	is	expected	to	be	paid.	
	

    5"    Reach&&&Scope&
                                       	
                        Seller	                                            Buyer	
                                  	                                                 	
                                                        	“Can	I	easily	instruct	funds	to	be	transferred	
    “Can	I	receive	the	funds	in	the	bank	account	or	    from	my	bank	account	or	account	with	my	e-
                 wallet	of	my	choice”?	                Money	provider	to	the	account	with	the	bank	or	
                                                          e-Money	provider	of	choice	of	the	payee?”	
           	                                                   	
                           	                                                        	

	
The	 more	 counterparts	 you	 can	 pay	 or	 be	 paid	 by,	 the	 more	 valuable	 the	 payments	
infrastructure	 is.	 Payers	 are	 likely	 to	 want	 to	 be	 able	 to	 make	 payments	 to	 any	 of	 their	
suppliers/payees	 without	 opening	 a	 new	 service.	 Likewise	 sellers	 (payees)	 will	 want	 to	
ensure	 that	 their	 bank	 or	 payment	 service	 provider	 can	 collect	 payment	 on	 their	 behalf,	
regardless	which	bank	the	buyer	uses.		
	
Large	companies	consolidate	their	finances	with	banks.	 Firms	beyond	a	certain	size	and	
level	of	formality	have	a	broader	range	of	payment	and	financial	operations	to	address,	most	
of	 which	 need	 today	 to	 be	 catered	 for	 by	 formal	 sector	 banks.	 Even	 very	 small	 companies	
that	wish	to	grow	their	business	will	at	some	point	open	bank	accounts.	In	many	markets,	
including	in	Indonesia,	non-bank	payment	service	providers	can	also	offer	payment	services.	
These	payment	services	my	serve	individuals	and	businesses	that	are	beyond	the	reach	or	
focus	 of	 banks	 and	 often	 far	 from	 fixed	 infrastructure	 such	 as	 branches	 and	 ATMs.	 For	
sellers	 it	 will	 be	 important	 for	 their	 clients	 to	 have	 access	 to	 a	 range	 of	 payment	 solutions	
that	will	ensure	that	payment	is	not	inhibitor	for	completion	of	the	purchase.	
	
Solutions	need	to	address	the	incentive	that	payment	service	providers	have	to	build	
on	 their	 payer	 network	 and	 encourage	 payees	 to	 become	 direct	 users	 of	 their	
payment	 service	 as	 well.	 The	 commercial	 model	 of	 most	 of	 these	 payment	 service	
providers	is	such	that	payers	have	the	convenience	of	the	service	but	do	not	pay	very	little	
for	 it,	 whereas	 the	 businesses	 that	 are	 being	 paid	 have	 the	 benefit	 of	 receiving	 funds	 from	
the	payer	and	pay	for	the	service.	
	
Solutions	 need	 to	 build	 on	 existing	 reach	 of	 other	 payment	 providers	 and	 retailers’	
existing	 accounts	 to	 minimise	 the	 extra	 costs	 of	 opening	 and	 maintaining	 new	
accounts.	For	businesses	the	opening	and	administering	of	accounts	where	money	resides	
is	costly.	Every	account	needs	to	be	safeguarded	against	errors	and	fraud	and	every	account	
needs	to	be	properly	accounted	for.	For	reasons	of	controls	and	to	ensure	the	funds	of	the	
company	 can	 be	 used	 easily	 for	 paying	 its	 creditors,	 credit	 balances	 are	 nearly	 always	
concentrated	in	one	bank	account.	A	key	requirement	for	companies	in	structuring	banking	
services	is	to	minimise	the	number	of	bank	accounts.	
	                                    	




                                                                                                           47	
	
	
	

    6"        Free$Choice$of$Provider$
                                            	
Free	choice	of	service	provider	that	can	be	given	access	to	payment	accounts	
	
                          Seller	                                             Buyer	
                                    	                                             	
“Can	I	seamlessly	incorporate	information	about	              “Can	I	seamlessly	instruct	payments	and	
   incoming	payments	in	my	applications	that	             incorporate	information	about	payments	made	
            support	customer	set-up,		                     in	my	applications	that	support	vendor	set-up,		
  sales	and	delivery	and	multiple	management	                   purchases	and	delivery	and	multiple	
                   functions?”	                                       management	functions?”	
                                    	                                                  	
          “Can	I	trust	that	I	am	not	dependent	on	the	solutions	and	tools	of	banks	and	payment	service	
         providers	for	the	efficient	and	effective	management	of	my	purchase-to-pay	and	sell-to-collect	
                                                    processes?”	
	
Payment	 initiation	 and	 account	 information	 are	 integral	 part	 of	 the	 purchase-to-pay	
process	 for	 a	 buyer	 and	 account	 information	 is	 an	 integral	 part	 of	 the	 sell-to-collect	
process	 for	 a	 seller.	 For	 account	 information	 to	 be	 efficiently	 used	 in	 large	 systems	 or	
smaller	 applications,	 it	 is	 important	 that	 banks	 and	 other	 payment	 service	 providers	 can	
deliver	this	information	in	a	standardised	and	accessible	manner.	For	payment	instructions	
to	be	generated	in	a	controlled	manner	from	any	system,	standard	protocols	should	be	used	
for	the	secure	and	efficient	transfer	of	instructions	from	the	buyer’s	systems	to	any	bank	or	
payment	service	provider.	
	
When	 buyers	 or	 sellers	 wish	 to	 make	 use	 of	 third	 party	 service	 providers	 for	 the	
administration	of	their	bank	accounts	and	interconnected	functions,	then	banks	and	
other	payment	service	providers	should	not	be	able	to	frustrate	this.	Third	party	access	
to	the	payment	account	must	not	be	made	dependent	on	the	consent	of	an	individual	bank	
or	 other	 payment	 service	 provider	 since	 they	 may	 have	 no	 interest	 to	 allow	 non-bank	
solutions	 or	 third	 party	 service	 providers	 to	 potentially	 compete	 with	 bank	 solutions	 or	
bank	 services.	 To	 ensure	 controlled	 electronic	 access	 to	 banks	 for	 payment	 initiation	 and	
bank	account	information,	banks	and	payment	service	providers	should	be	requested	by	the	
regulator	to	implement	standardised	secure	protocols	and	to	support	their	implementation	
by	customers	and	third	party	service	providers	based	on	predefined	rules	of	engagement.	
	
	
	                                       	




                                                                                                              48	
	
	
Operational	implications	
	

    A$ Data$Integrity$
                                              	
Data	sources	and	coherence	need	to	be	ensured	to	support	trustworthiness.	Two	sets	of	
operational	requirements	need	to	be	addressed:	
	
A.1.		 Standards	to	support	mutual	coherence	and	consistency	of	data	exchange	
       Data	needs	to	be	structured	and	protected	to	ensure	that	it	is	reliable,	mutually	
       intelligible	by	automated	systems	and	uncorrupted.	Agreement	on	and	adherence	to	
       common	standards	for	payment	messages	helps	to	address	these	requirements.	
       Standards	are	composed	essentially	of	agreements	on:	
       	
    - Syntax:		Represents	the	structure	of	the	message.	One	of	the	most	widely	used	
       syntax	in	the	world	today	is	eXtensible	Mark-up	Language	(XML).		XML	syntax	sets	
       out	the	format	for	which	data	is	structured	and	enables	universal	understanding	of	
       the	message	content.		XML	data	is	structured	by	using	opening	and	closing	tags	that	
       indicate	the	meaning	and	structure	of	the	information	that	is	communicated.		This	
       enables	message	content	to	be	electronically	recognized	and	validated.	
           	
    - Data	Elements;	Represents	the	content	of	the	message.		Data	elements	are	
       organized	in	a	logical	hierarchy	within	the	message.	Data	elements	in	a	payment	
       message	may	include	such	information	as	currency,	amount,	and	debiting	and	
       crediting	parties	and	may	or	may	not	be	mandatory	depending	on	the	context.	
           	
    - Reference	Repository;	While	syntax	and	data	elements	are	important	for	ensuring	
       standardization	of	format	and	content,	message	standards	should	also	reference	a	
       reference	repository	to	guarantee	universal	understanding	of	the	message	content.		
       A	reference	repository	is	like	a	dictionary	that	users	can	access	to	ensure	consistent	
       understanding	of	the	data	elements.	
         	
A.2.	 Reference	Data	Legitimacy	and	Consistency	
	
         A.2.1.	Beneficiary	and	Payer	Identification	/	Identifiers	
         Actors	involved	in	the	supply	chain	as	well	as	government	authorities	need	to	be	
         sure	of	the	identity	of	payee,	payer	and	other	actors	in	the	process.	Distributors,	
         banks	and	retailers	may	use	inconsistent	forms	of	identification.	Certain	standards	
         and	data	may	or	may	not	comply	with	legal	or	other	procedural	requirements.		Tax	
         or	company	IDs	are	often	used	a	common	and	unique	basis	for	client	identification.

            Debtor	banks	might	consider	including	the/an	identifier	of	the	debtor	in	the	
            payment	instruction.	This	can	be	the	name	and	address	of	the	private	individual	
            or	the	official	ID	of	the	company	that	is	instructing	the	payment.	This	supports	
            creditors	in	the	correct	identification	of	creditors	and	hence	improving	their	
            reconciliation.	But	also	forces	banks	to	keep	the	registration	of	their	customers	up	
            to	date	and	encourages	debtors	and	creditors	to	use	between	themselves	their	
            identifiers	as	these	are	registered	by	their	banks	
            	
            A.2.2.	Anti-money	laundering	requirements	
            Payment	service	providers	need	to	ensure	that	they	use	KYC	procedures	to	identify	
            retailers	(i.e.	payers)	in	a	manner	consistent	with	AML	and	CFT	legislation	with	
            which	distributors’	(i.e.	sellers)	banks	are	obliged	to	comply.	
            	
            A.2.3.	Bank	and	account	codes	
            Consistent	and	current	reference	data	is	required	to	identify	the	right	actors	in	the	

                                                                                               49	
	
	
            payments	chain,	including	the	institutions	that	hold	accounts	for	the	payer	and	
            payee,	the	account	identifiers	for	the	payee	and	payer	or	other	agents.	These	codes	
            need	to	mutually	intelligible	to	all	actors	involved	in	the	payment	process	along	the	
            chain,	including	non-bank	payment	providers.	
	

    B$ Data$Quality$
                                                  	
Automation	 of	 the	 payment	 and	 related	 processes	 requires	 measures	 to	 ensure	 that	
data	 standards	 are	 adhered	 to	 and	 that	 content	 is	 valid	 and	 accurate.	 Payment	
providers	put	in	place	mechanisms	to	check	data	and	minimise	errors	from	manual	inputs.	
Of	 particular	 importance	 for	 B2B	 payments	 in	 the	 retail	 chain	 are	 the	 following	
requirements:	
	
B.1.		 Existence	of	bank	/	transaction,	payment	service	providers	and	accounts	
           This	would	include	being	able	to	verify	bank	IDs	and	MSISDN,	at	least	where	the	
           latter	are	used	by	mobile	operators	as	account	identifiers	
		
B.2.								Creditor’s	preferred	bank	account	to	be	credited	
            This	data	would	be	important	to	register	if	billers	pre-populate	credit	or	debit	
           instructions	for	the	retailer.	Updates	to	this	data	would	need	to	be	assured	in	order	
           to	avoid	errors	and	account	for	changes	in	the	retailer’s	banking	relationships	
		
B.3								Amounts	and	application	of	appropriate	taxes	
           Sellers,	and	where	registered	also	buyers,	will	need	to	document	amounts	including	
           taxes	in	order	to	maintain	appropriate	records.		
		
B.4.							Payment	limits	and	available	credit	limits	
           Suppliers	need	to	be	sure	to	apply	the	terms	of	credit	or	deferred	payment	as	well	as	
           any	credit	limits	before	finalising	the	invoice	and	payment	amount	due	
		
B.5.							Payee	and	Payer	identification	
           The	set	up	of	the	invoice	and	the	payment	instruction	require	some	appropriate	
           identifier	of	the	parties	to	be	used.	This	should	conform	with	or	be	able	to	match	
           with	the	client	records	of	the	supplier	as	well	at	the	payment	providers	
		
B.6.								Invoice	reference	(and	applicable	credit	notes).	
           Payment	data	should	be	structured	in	such	a	way	that	retailers	can	include	invoice	
           reference	and	applicable	credit	note	details.		This	is	especially	important	to	support	
           partial	payment	of	invoice	amount	and/or	payments	for	multiple	invoices	which	are	
           currently	very	challenging	for	suppliers	to	reconcile	today.			
	                                   	




                                                                                               50	
	
	
	Exhibit	16:	Selected	impact	of	business	requirements	on	payment	services	
	
                                     Selected&Impact&of&Detail&Requirements&on&Payment&Opera;ons&

              Seller&               •  To#properly#calculate#amounts#&#taxes#(B.3.)!the#seller#needs#to#                                                           Buyer&
                               1&      register#informa-on#about#the#client;#
                                    •  The#iden-ty#of#the#payer#needs#to#be#recognised#and#valid#for#AML,#
         Customer#set<up#              tax#and#other#processes#(B.5.)'                                                                                          Vendor#Set<up#
                                    •  Seller#needs#to#know#what#the#retailer#payment#and#credit#terms#
          Sales#Planning#              and#limits#are#(B.4.)'
                                                                                                                                                            Inventory#Management#
                                           2& If#payment#is#ini-ated#by#the#seller,#they#need#to#register#informa-on#
          Sales#Proposals#                    about#the#buyer’s#preferred#bank#or#account#for#payment#(B.2.);'this#
                                              helps#minimise&manual&input#of#a/c#details#                                                                        Stock#Check#

         Order#Processing#                                                                                                                                     Order#Placement#

        Order#Prepara-on#           ##Sellers#need#to#be#able#to#adjust&and&control&invoice&details&and&payment&amounts&&&
                                       (B.2.)'at#the#last#moment#to#accommodate#changes#due#to#out#of#stock,#returns,#                                        Returns#/#Discounts#
                                3& discounts#and#other#damaged#goods#etc..#the#Seller#should#inform#the#buyer#about#any#
             Delivery#                           changes#through#complementary#invoices#or#credit#notes#only.#
                                                                                                                                                               Stock#Inspec-on#
                                                            4& #For#payment#ini-a-on,#Payee#and#Payer#bank#accounts#need#to#be#
      Returns#&#Amendments#                                    entered#and#checked#that#they#exist,#are#accurate#(B.1.'&'A.2.3)'
                                                                                                                                                             Invoice#Conﬁrma-on#
                               7& ##Seller#needs#immediate#                                     5& #Buyers#need#to#be#able&to&fund&the#payment#
             Invoicing#           conﬁrma;on#of#“good#funds”#or#                                   (C.1.)'through#current#balance#or#credit#terms#
                                  payment#&                                                                                                                 Provisioning#and#Credit#
                                                        Beneﬁciary’s,A/C,Ins1tu1on,                         Creditor’s,A/C,Ins1tu1on,
         Payment#Receipt#                                           F&
                                                                                             Payment((                                               6&            Payment#
                                                            Payment(Receipt(              Infrastructure(             Payment(

          Reconcilia-on#                                                                                                                ##Retailer#wants#
                                      8&                                                                                                                       Stock#registra-on#
                                                                                                                                        some#control#of#
                                       ##A#payment#                                                                                       the#payment#
        Account#Receivable##           reference&is#
                                                                                               9&                                         process#–#for#
           Management#              required#to#iden-fy#                                                                                 security#and#to#    Credit#/#Payables#Mgt#
                                    who#paid#them#and#                                    ##Banks#and#other#                            be#able#manage#
       Manage#Credit#&#Risk#           for#what#the#                                    payment#processors#                             cash#(C.2'&'.3.)'
                                     payment#is#(B.5.)'                               need#to#be#able#to#rely#                                              Account#Management#
                                                                                      on#consistent#message#
        Cash#Management#                                                              standards,#content#and#                                                 Cash#Management#
                                                                                         the#integrity#of#the#
                                                                                            data'(A.1'&'2.)'
      Tax#Repor-ng#&#Claims#                                                                                                                                      Tax#&#VAT#
                                                                                                                                                                                         	
	
	

    C& Payer&Funding&&&Control&
                                                  	
Retailers	in	the	traditional	space	need	to	be	able	to	easily	fund,	monitor	and	control	
spending.	 	 There	 are	 three	 operational	 requirements	 that	 payment	 solutions	 need	 to	
address	 in	 order	 to	 ensure	 that	 retailers	 or	 other	 payers	 can	 manage	 funding	 of	 their	
payments	accounts	and	enjoy	sufficient	control	over	the	payment	process.	
	
C.1.		Building	on	the	requirement	of	reach,	solutions	must	make	it	easy	for	retailers	to		
     fund	their	payment	account.	 Traditional	retailers	are	generally	cash	based	businesses.	
     They	 do	 not	 have	 ready	 funds	 on	 bank	 or	 other	 payment	 accounts	 and	 hence	 require	
     means	to	easily	deposit	cash	or	have	it	collected	before	funds	are	available	for	payment.	
     Short-term	 credit	 facilities,	 although	 at	 a	 cost,	 can	 also	 in	 effect	 help	 to	 fund	 accounts	
     and	 reduce	 the	 urgency	 or	 frequency	 of	 cash	 deposits	 or	 collections.	 Where	 this	
     expanded	 liquidity	 supports	 greater	 sales	 by	 retailers,	 the	 cost	 of	 a	 credit	 line	 may	 be	
     warranted.	
	
C.2.	 Retailers	 may	 need	 to	 verify	 available	 funds	 and	 cash	 flow	 before	 making	 a	
     payment.	 Retailers	 may	 not	 know	 how	 much	 they	 have	 available	 on	 an	 account	 and	
     hence	 may	 not	 be	 sure	 whether	 the	 total	 payable	 amount	 can	 be	 covered.	 A	 failed	
     transaction	could	result	in	loss-of-face	and	delay	or	could	generate	a	negative	position	
     for	 which	 the	 retailer	 might	 incur	 penalties.	 Retailers	 should	 be	 able	 to	 check	 the	
     current	available	balance	of	their	account	before	making	a	transaction,	or	at	least	they	
     should	 be	 assured	 that	 they	 will	 have	 time	 to	 address	 any	 shortfall.	 This	 could	 be	
     achieved	 through	 a	 delayed	 value	 date	 –	 such	 as	 the	 case	 with	 usage	 of	 cheques	 –	 or	
     through	short	term	funding	or	delayed	debit.		
	
     When	funds	of	the	retailer	are	held	with	multiple	providers,	such	as	multiple	banks	or	a	

                                                                                                                                                                                       51	
	
	
        combination	 of	 banks	 and	 e-money	 providers,	 the	 retailer	 should	 be	 able	 to	 view	 the	
        balances	of	the	accounts	with	the	distinct	service	providers	in	one	single	solution,	such	
        as	 his/her	 accounting	 system	 or	 via	 an	 on-line	 aggregator	 service.	 This	 means	 that	
        account	 balances	 and	 account	 statements	 should	 be	 made	 available	 electronically,	
        applying	a	single	and	uniform	reporting	format.	
	
C.3.	 Retailers	 will	 along	 with	 ease	 of	 use	 demand	 some	 control	 over	 the	 payment	
     process.	 As	 a	 specific	 “ease	 of	 use”	 requirement,	 the	 actual	 payment	 process	 should	
     ensure	 that	 retailers	 have	 or	 feel	 that	 they	 exercise	 control.	 Although	 distributor	 or	
     biller	led	payment	processes	can	help	to	reduce	the	effort	required	from	retailers,	they	
     can	 make	 the	 retailer	 feel	 a	 loss	 of	 control	 or	 insecurity.	 This	 is	 often	 the	 case	 with	
     direct	 debit	 systems,	 which	 require	 a	 payer	 to	 provide	 an	 open-ended	 agreement	 or	
     payment	mandate	to	a	biller.	It	is	true	that	in	many	countries,	direct	debits	are	widely	
     used	 and	 accepted	 by	 consumers;	 but	 they	 often	 do	 so	 grudgingly.	 Poorer	 clients	 and	
     those	 with	 irregular	 cash	 are	 often	 concerned	 about	 going	 overdrawn	 and	 incurring	
     penalties16.		
	
	

    D) Transparent)Pricing)
                                                   	
Pricing	 structures	 and	 fees	 need	 to	 be	 transparent	 and	 avoid	 creating	 surprises	 for	
payers	 and	 payees.	To	ensure	that	the	agreed	amount	to	be	paid	is	received	in	full	by	the	
seller,	 the	 buyer	 needs	 to	 be	 sure	 that	 banks	 and	 service	 providers	 in	 the	 payment	 chain	
cannot	deduct	any	fees	from	the	nominal	payment	amount.	When	fees	are	deducted	from	the	
nominal	payment	amount,	sellers	cannot	reconcile	these	incoming	payments	automatically	
with	their	receivables.	Transferring	the	funds	in	full	also	avoids	discussions	between	buyers	
and	sellers	about	who	is	responsible	for	covering	these	deducted	fees.	
	
	

    E( Consistent(and(Timely(Se0lement(
                                                 	
Settlement	 periods,	 timing	 and	 arrangements	 need	 to	 be	 consistently	 managed.	It	is	
very	 difficult	 for	 buyers	 and	 sellers	 to	 accommodate	 different	 settlement	 periods	 for	
different	sellers	or	buyers	respectively.	Also	given	the	lack	of	control	by	individual	payment	
service	 users	 over	 such	 settlement	 periods,	 regulators	 are	 required	 to	 stipulate	 maximum	
settlement	periods	for	distinguished	payment	methods.	Preferably	these	settlement	periods	
are	 aligned	 or	 even	 harmonised	 for	 multiple	 payment	 methods	 to	 avoid	 complexity	 for	 in	
particular	smaller	buyers	and	sellers	in	managing	their	cash	position	with	multiple	payment	
service	providers	and	banks.	
	
	
    F* Conﬁrma(ons*&*Proof*of*Payment*
                                                  	
It	is	important	for	buyers	to	have	proof	that	the	payment	was	made	to	the	seller	and	
for	 the	 seller	 that	 the	 payment	 was	 received	 from	 the	 buyer.	This	is	required	for	both	
the	buyer	and	the	seller	to	minimise	the	risk	of	error	and	fraud	or	at	least	be	able	to	detect	
errors	and	frauds	rapidly	after	payments	are	processed.	This	proof	is	also	required	for	both	
buyer	 and	 seller	 as	 formal	 proof	 of	 the	 sale	 =	 purchase:	 even	 if	 no	 formal	 contracts	 are	
exchanged,	the	fact	that	a	buyer	has	paid	for	a	purchase	means	that	he	intended	to	make	the	
purchase.	 A	 third	 reason	 for	 having	 proof	 that	 payments	 were	 made	 and	 from	 whom	 to	
																																																								
16	The	UK	Payment	Systems	Regulator	has	launched	a	consultation	on	among	other	issues	how	to	improve	upon	

or	provide	alternatives	to	direct	debits.	See:	https://www.ft.com/content/d2515990-799f-11e6-a0c6-
39e2633162d5				

                                                                                                         52	
	
	
whom	is	for	accounting	and	fiscal	compliance	reasons.	Ultimately	the	payment	is	also	proof	
for	the	tax	authority	that	a	purchase	has	been	made,	which	means	that	the	seller	will	have	to	
pay	sales	tax	and	the	buyer	can	credit	sales	tax.	
	
Before	 completing	 the	 delivery,	 sellers	 want	 to	 have	 confirmation	 or	 proof	 of	
payment.	When	using	cash	and	cheques,	the	physical	exchange	of	paper	from	buyer	to	seller	
easily	achieves	this.	But	when	a	payment	is	electronic,	the	seller	needs	to	obtain	some	other	
form	of	proof	or	confirmation	from	the	buyer	that	the	funds	are	transferred	-	or	at	least	will	
be	-	from	buyer	to	seller.		
	
Real-time	payment	infrastructures	are	not	needed	to	meet	this	requirement,	but	can	
help.	 In	 the	 UK,	 India,	 the	 U.S.,	 Singapore	 and	 other	 countries	 instant	 retail	 payments	
infrastructure	 (such	 as	 FasterPay,	 IMPS,	 FAST)	 are	 either	 already	 implemented	 or	 under	
development.	These	services	can	enable	the	payer	to	transfer	funds	in	real-time	or	near	real-
time	and	the	payee	to	receive	a	near	instant	confirmation	from	their	institution	that	funds	
have	been	received.	Short	periods	between	debiting	the	accounts	of	buyers	and	crediting	the	
accounts	 sellers	 are	 desired	 as	 mentioned	 above,	 but	 to	 deliver	 proof	 of	 payment	 to	 the	
seller	 however	 one	 does	 have	 to	 make	 use	 of	 a	 real-time	 settlement	 infrastructure.	 Such	
proof	can	also	be	provided	when	payment	service	providers	and	banks	can	send	a	message	
to	the	payer	or	his	system	that	the	payment	instruction	has	been	accepted.	This	message	an	
then	be	shown	or	forwarded	electronically	by	the	buyer	to	the	seller	as	long	as	the	payment	
service	providers	and	banks	deliver	the	acceptance	of	the	payment	instruction	electronically	
to	the	buyer	and	in	a	standardised	format.	
	
The	 way	 in	 which	 these	 requirements	 are	 met	 depends	 on	 the	 systems	 and	
infrastructure	 used	 by	 the	 participants.	 Payment	 processes	 are	 part	 of	 a	 broader	 inter-
dependent	structure	that	for	business	payments	requires	increasingly	levels	of	automation	
and	 customisation.	 It	 is	 hence	 wise	 to	 try	 to	 understand	 these	 content,	 process	 and	 other	
interdependencies	before	making	individual	changes	to	payments	infrastructure	or	policy	A	
better	 understanding	 the	 ‘business	 requirements”	 of	 small	 retailers	 and	 their	 suppliers	
should	inform	decisions	to	improve	or	enhance	specific	payment	systems.	
	
	
	                                 	




                                                                                                    53	
	
	
Exhibit	17:	detail	payment	process	steps	and	tasks	
                                                                                              Detail(Payment(Processes(and(Tasks(

                                                                                                                 Payment(Steps(



                             Invoicing(&(          Provisioning(&(                             Valida+on(&(         Authorisa+on((        Payment(             Clearing(&(
                                                                       Payment(Ini+a+on(                                                                                           Reconcilia+on(
                            Conﬁrma+on(                Credit(                                Authen+ca+on(          &(Control(         Conﬁrma+ons(           Se:lement(

                          Conﬁrm(stock(          Conﬁrm(available(     Payment(Method(        Reference(Data(          Payer(
                                                                                                                                       Payee(No+ﬁca+on((        Clearing(
                             order(                   funds(              Selec+on(             Valida+on(          Authorisa+on(

            Apply(credit(notes(                   available(credit/(        Beneﬁciary(A/C(       Input((           Limit/Funding(      Payer(Payment(     InterIbank/ins+tu+on(
              and(returns(                        payment(terms(             designa+on(        Valida+on(             Control(          Conﬁrma+on(             se:lement(

                             Conﬁrm((                                        Creditor(A/C(        Payer(          Payer’s(Ins+tu+on(                             Creditor(
                                                  Provision(account(                                                                                           (book(entry(
                           Amounts(Due(                                      designa+on(      (Iden+ﬁca+on(         Authorisa+on(

                 Conﬁrm(payable(                                       Amount(entry(and(          Payee(             Transac+on(                               Beneﬁciary(
                    amounts(                                             conﬁrma+on(          Authen+ca+on(          Monitoring((                              (book(entry(


                                                                              Value(Date(


                                                                       Payment(reference(
                                                                         iden+ﬁca+on(


                                                                                                                                                                                                      	
	
    Process+
                                                 Task+                      Requirements+
     Step+
                                        Payment(Method(                 •  Retailers(and(Suppliers((Buyers(and(Sellers)(should(be(able(to(choose(which(payment(and(bank(service(provider(
                                           Selec+on(                       they(use(for(the(transac+on(

                                            Beneﬁciary(A/C(             •  It(should(not(be(necessary(to(manually(enter(in(these(a/c(and(ins+tu+on(IDs;(They(may(be(preJregistered(or(
                                             designa+on(                   looked(up(onJline(to(ensure(they(are(valid(and(correct.(
        Payment(Ini+a+on(




                                                                        (


                                             Creditor(A/C(              •  These(codes(should(be(mutually(recognised(by(all(actors(involved(in(the(payments(chain(and(enable(them(to(
                                             designa+on(                   process(payment(instruc+ons(in(an(automated(and(reliable(manner.(

                                        Amount(entry(and(               •  Amount(needs(to(be(veriﬁed(and(consistent(with(invoice,(taxes,(credit(notes;(IDR(currency(requires(very(long(
                                          conﬁrma+on(                      numbers(to(be(entered(or(captured(automa+cally(to(avoid(errors(and(displayed(in(an(easy(to(conﬁrm(manner(

                                                                        •  The(buyer(and(seller(may(need(to(alter(and(specify(value(date(based(on(credit(terms(and(seOlement(cycles(
                                              Value(Date(
                                                                           agreed(upon(by(them;(this(must(be(recognised(by(the(payment(processors(

                                       Payment(reference(               •  The(payment(should(be(able(to(be(matched(to(an(invoice(and(payer;(a(consistent(payment(reference,(easily(
                                         iden+ﬁca+on(                      captured(and(carried(with(the(payment(instruc+on(may(fulﬁll(this(requirement(

                                                                        •  All(the(entries(for(bank(codes,(account(numbers,(IDs(and(amounts(or(dates(need(to(be(validated(for(syntax,(
                                            Reference(Data(
                                                                           accuracy(and(correctness(before(the(payment(is(conﬁrmed.(This(cannot(be(an(itera+ve(process(that(lengthens(
                                              Valida+on(
        Valida+on(&(Authen+ca+on(




                                                                           or(complicates(the(payment(experience(

                                                Input((                 •  The(other(payment(instruc+on(data(such(as(amount(and(value(date(or(references(need(to(be(validated(in(real(
                                              Valida+on(                   +me(by(systems(and(controls(by(the(creditor’s((i.e.(Buyer’s)(account(holder(or(the(payment(service(provider(

                                                Payer(                  •  The(payment(processor(or(account(holding(ins+tu+on(must(authen+cate(the(ID(of((the(payer(using(appropriate(
                                            (Iden+ﬁca+on(                  security(means(


                                                Payee(                  •  The(account(holding(ins+tu+on(must(conﬁrm(that(the(named(beneﬁciary((payee/seller)(account(matches(with(
                                            Authen+ca+on(                  the(indicated(name(of(beneﬁcial(owner(of(that(account.(


                                               Payer(                   •  If(the(preceding(controls(and(authen+ca+on(steps(are(posi+ve,(the(payer(should(be(able(to(quickly(or(without(an(
                                            Authorisa+on(                  addi+onal(step(conﬁrm(and(authorise(the(instruc+on(to(pay.(
     Authorisa+on((




                                            Limit/Funding(              •  The(account(holding(ins+tu+on(or(other((including(the(supplier)(needs(to(immediately(conﬁrm(that(funds(or(a(
      &(Control(




                                               Control(                    credit(line(are(available(for(payment(of(the(stated(amount;(banks(may(need(to(check(against(other(outstandings(

                                       Payer’s(Ins+tu+on(               •  The(account(holding(ins+tu+on(of(the(payer(must(if(preceding(checks(and(controls(are(posi+ve(either(authorise(
                                         Authorisa+on(                     payment(or(reject(it.(

                                             Transac+on(                •  The(payer(ins+tu+on(may(need(to(capture(payment(data(on(ID,(beneﬁciary(in(a(standardised(format(that(enable(
                                             Monitoring((                  them(to(match(to(and(monitor(overall(payment(and(transac+on(paOerns(in(compliance(with(AML(&(CFT(rules.(
     Conﬁrma+ons(




                                                                        •  The(supplier(or(its(collec+on(or(delivery(agent(must(receive(immediate(conﬁrma+on(via(secure(means(that(
                                        Payee(No+ﬁca+on((
       Payment(




                                                                           payment(has(been(made(of(of(“good(funds”(this(message(may(need(to(be(processes(via(their(internal(systems(

                                            Payer(Payment(              •  The(payer(should(receive(immediate(conﬁrma+on(that(the(payment(instruc+on(was(accepted(and(successful.(
                                             Conﬁrma+on(                   This(may(need(to(cons+tute(commercial(/(legal(proof(of(payment(and(not(the(reference(of(the(invoice.(

                                                                        •  The(payer(and(the(payee’s(ins+tu+ons(need(to(have(direct(or(indirect(clearing(arrangement(with(eachother((
                                              Clearing(
                                                                           to(be(able(to(conﬁrm(and(process(transac+ons(

                                      InterJbank/ins+tu+on(             •  SeOlement(can(be(via(the(central(bank(or(another(ins+tu+on;(it(should(be(regular(and(enable(payee(and(payer(to(
     (SeOlement(
      Clearing(&(




                                            seOlement(                     rely(on(a(set(schedule(as(well(as(avoid(unforeseen(fees(or(charges(depending(on(the(seOlement(par+es(

                                               Creditor(                •  The(payer’s(banks(should(provide(terms(to(the(retailer(to(manage(risk(but(also(allow(if(agreed(for(deferred(
                                             (book(entry(                  payment,(credit(or(overdraW(facili+es(

                                             Beneﬁciary(                •  The(payee’s(ins+tu+on(should(be(able(to(collect(or(contribute(to(funds(aggrega+on(and(sweeps(on(a(+mely(
                                             (book(entry(                  basis.(
                                                                                                                                                                                                      	
                                                                                                                                                                                                    54	
	
	
                                                                                                                                    	
                                                                                                                                    	
	
Exhibit	18:	Summary	of	key	requirements	from	a	user	perspective	
                                                                                                                         Can(I….?((
                                                                                             (key'requirements'from'the'user'perspec5ve)'
                                                                               Seller&                                                                                          Buyer&
                                                                                                                                                                                retailer'
    Enterprise)Data)




                                                                                                                                             1$                                                2$




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Enterprise'Data'
                             Customer)set*up)                                                                                                                                                                             Vendor'Set*up'
                                                                                                                                                  Use$my$exis)ng,$or$                            easily$fund$/$preH
                                                                                                                                                   my$choice$of$new$                            fund$the$account?$
                       Marke/ng)&)Sales)Planning)                                    3$                                                                                                                               Inventory'Management'
                                                                                                                                                  account$to$pay$the$                             and$check$my$
                                                     •  Issue$invoice$or$reference$#s$to$                                                                  supplier?$                                balance?$$
                              Sales)Proposals)          track$payment?$                                                                                                                                                    Stock'Check'
                                                     •  Have$my$bank$accept$payments$
                             Order)Processing)          from$the$retailer’s$preferred$                                                                                                                                   Order'Placement'
                                                        bank$/$payment$provider?$                                 Easily$enter$and$capture$
                                                                                                                  payment$instruc)on$details?$                                                      6$
                             Order)Prepara/on)                                                                                                                    4$
                                                                                                                                                        5$
                                                                                                                                                                                              Be$sure$of$what$I$        Returns'/'Discounts'
                                                                                                                  •  Payer’s$a/c$?$                                    Choose$which$
                                                                                                                  •  Payee’s$ins)tu)on$iden)ﬁer$?$                     device$I$use$to$       am$paying$for$and$
                            Delivery)&)Logis/cs)                                                                                                                                                                         Stock'Inspec;on'
                                                                                                                  •  Payee’s$a/c$iden)ﬁer$?$                           instruct$payment?$     that$amounts$are$
                                                                                                                                                                                              correct$?$
                        Returns)&)Amendments)                                                                                                                                                                          Invoice'Conﬁrma;on'
                                                          11$                                                                 Payment((              Payer’s&A/C&Ins2tu2on&
                                                                                 Beneﬁciary’s&A/C&Ins2tu2on&
                                 Invoicing)           Get$immediate$                                                       Infrastructure(                                                                            Provisioning'and'Credit'
                                                      conﬁrma)on$of$
                             Payment)Receipt)           payment$?$                                                                                                       7$                                                  Payment'

                                                                                                     9$
                                                                                                                                                              Enable$my$client$to$instruct$and$
                               Reconcilia/on)                                                                              8$                                 validate$the$payment$instruc)on$                           Stock'registra;on'
                                                    Plan$my$ﬁnances$     13$      Extract$and$aggregate$
                                                                                  payment$references$for$           Process$the$payment$messages$                      quickly,$easily?$$
                            Accounts)Receivable))   based$on$set$
                                                    seGlement$)ming$?$            my$client?$                        automa)cally$without$errors$                                                                      Credit'/'Payables'Mgt'
                               Management)
                                                                                                                        from$mul)ple$sources?$                                                                12$
                         Manage)Credit)&)Risk)                                                              10$                                                                                                       Account'Management'
                                                                                                                                                                                              Receive$a$receipt$&$
                                                                       14$                                Be$sure$of$the$source$of$funds$                                                     proof$of$payment$?$
                            Cash)&)Liquidity)       Match$and$                                                                                                                                                           Cash'&'Liquidity'
                             Management)            reconcile$payments$                                      and$comply$with$AML?$                                                                                        Management'
                         Finance)&)Accoun/ng))      automa)cally$?$                 ERP(                                                                                                                              Finance'&'Accoun;ng'
                        Tax)Repor/ng)&)Claims)                                                                                                                                                                             Tax'&'VAT'


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	
	
	
                                                                                                                                	e-Money	                                      	ATM	Switch	                             	ACH	
                                 illustra(ve	evalua(on	Framework	
                       1	       Use	my	exis)ng,	or	my	choice	of	new	account	to	pay	                                   Are	the	payment	accounts	and	solu2ons	retailers	and	distributors	use		inter-operable	
                                the	supplier?	                                                                                                      across	all	networks	?	
                       2	
                                easily	fund	/	pre-fund	the	account?	and	check	my	                                     All	solu2ons	have	limited	networks	for	“cash	in”	or	deposits;	deposits	via	third	party	
                                balance?	Either	through	credit	or	deposi)ng	cash?	                                             ins2tu2ons	do	not	allow	credited	funds	to	be	accessed	immediately	

                       3	
                               •  Issue	invoice	or	reference	#s	to	track	payment?	
                               •  Have	my	bank	accept	payments	from	the	retailer’s	
                                  preferred	bank	/	payment	provider?	

                       4	
                               Choose	which	device	I	use	to	instruct	payment?	

                                 Easily	enter	and	capture	payment	instruc)on	
                       5	        details?	    •  Payer’s	a/c	?	
                                              •  Payee’s	ins)tu)on	iden)ﬁer	?	                                                                                                                                               	
                                              •  Payee’s	a/c	iden)ﬁer	?	

                       6	     Be	sure	of	what	I	am	paying	for	and	that	amounts	are	
                              correct	?	
                       7	      Enable	my	client	to	instruct	and	validate	the	
                               payment	instruc)on	quickly	and	easily?		
                               If	it	made	to/from	MSIDN	or	Bank	A/C	?	
                       8	
                               Process	the	payment	messages	automa)cally	
                               without	errors	from	mul)ple	sources?	

                       9	
                               Extract	and	aggregate	payment	references	for	my	client?	


                       10	     Be	sure	of	the	source	of	funds	and	comply	with	AML?	


                   11	        Get	immediate	conﬁrma)on	of	payment	or	“good	
                              funds”	for	the	delivery	to	be	released	?	
                   12	

                               Receive	a	receipt	&	proof	of	payment	?	

                   13	
                               Plan	my	ﬁnances	based	on	set	seIlement	)ming	?	

                   14	
                               Match	and	reconcile	payments	automa)cally	?	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    		


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 55	
	
	
As	an	“ideal”	scenario,	payment	and	data	integration	enable	a	straight	through	process	to	be	
put	 in	 place	 between	 sellers,	 buyers	 and	 their	 banks	 with	 minimal	 extra	 intervention	 to	
adapt	data	or	manually	intervene	in	the	overall	process.	This	view	of	the	requirements	helps	
to	set	a	benchmark	for	how	B2B	payment	services	can	be	facilitated.	
	
Exhibit	19:	illustrative	distributor	led	scenario	to	fulfill	operational	requirements	
                       Distributor/Seller'                                                                                              Payment'
                                                                   Buyer/Payer'                 Payer’s'Bank'or'a/c'insGtuGon'       Infrastructure'
                                                                                                                                                       Beneﬁciary’s/'Distributor’s'Bank'
                         (Beneﬁciary)'
         1'          Client'ID'File'
                !  Client'ID'
                !  Preferred'
                   'payment'A/C'


                                                         3'
         2'          Invoice'Data'
                                                                    AuthenGcate'
                !  Client'ID'
                                                                  Payment'Instruct.'
                !  Invoice'#'/'Ref'
                !  Amt'
                !  Qty..'                                         Validate'Payment'
                                                                     Instruc5on'
                                                         4'                                5'                                                            9'
                                                          ''''To:''''''Benef.’s'A/C'#'                 Validate'Payment'
                                                          ''''From:'Payer'ID/Client'ID'                                                                         Payment'receipt''
                                                                                                       (Credit'available?)'                 8'
                                                          ''''''''''''''''Payer’s'A/C'#'                                                                           and'data'
                                                                                                           (Security)'
                                                          ''''Why:'''Ref.'#'='Invoice'#'


                                        7'                                                 6'
                   ConﬁrmaGon'                                                                             ConﬁrmaGon''
                     Receipt'                                                                        (that'amt'is'/'will'be'paid)'



                                                                                                                                                        10'
                                                                                                                                                                    Credit'to''
                                                                                                                                                                  Beneﬁciary’s''
                                                                                                                                                                      A/C'




                                       12'                                                                                                              11'
                                                                                                                                                               !  Payer’s'ID'
                 Match'payment'to'
                                                                     Reconcilia5on'File'                                                                       !  Amount'
                accounts'receivable'
                                                                                                                                                               !  Reference'#'




                                                                                                                                                                                           	
                   Process'Step'                                       Assump0ons'                                                   Implica0ons'for'Coordina0on'

                                             If'retailers'set8up'payment'a/c'terms'with'distributors'                  Client'IDs'are'recognised'by'bank'and'non8bank'
    1"          Client'File'Set8up'          for'payments'ini0ated'by'the'distributor,'payment'a/c'                    providers'and'can'be'matched'with'Distributor'data'
                                             details'need'to'be'stored'by'the'seller'                                  IDs'comply'with'applicable'KYC'and'AML'requirements'

                  Invoice'Data'              The'billing'informa0on'is'set8up'by'the'seller,'with'valid'               Account'numbers'and'Iden0ﬁers'of'payment/bank'
    2"
                Popula0on/entry'             banking'details'and'amounts'already'entered'                              ins0tu0ons'are'consistent'and'can'be'validated'on8line'

                    Payment''                The'buyer'only'needs'to'validate'a'payment'by'entering'                   Buyers'can'use'simple'and'secure'payment'
    3"                                                                                                                 authorisa0on'processes'consistent'across'banks'
              Authorisa0on'by'buyer'         a'PIN'or'equivalent'form'of'authen0ca0on'

                                                                                                                       Banks'and'payment'providers'use'consistent'message'
                    Payment''                The'full'payment'ﬁle'contains'consistent'and'validated'
    4"                                                                                                                 standards'&'adhere'to'ﬁeld'usage'to'minimise'need'for'
                 Instruc0on'File'            data'needed'for'seMlement'and'reconcilia0on'
                                                                                                                       integrator'services'

              Payment'Valida0on'by'          The'account'holding'ins0tu0on'of'the'buyer'approves'                      Payment'instruc0ons'can'be'validate'in'real'0me'to'
    5"
               the'Payer'Ins0tu0on'          the'payment'request'sent'by'the'system'of'the'seller'                     avoid'errors'or'delay'in'the'payment'process'

                    Payment''                The'seller'is'no0ﬁed'immediately'whether'the'payment'                     The'payer’s'ins0tu0on'provides'immediate'conﬁrma0on'
    6"
                  Conﬁrma0on'                has'been'approved'and'deemed'“good'funds”'                                of'good'funds'

    7"        Conﬁrm'payment'and''           The'seller'is'able'to'conﬁrm'payment'is'good'and'                         Suppliers'receive'immediate'conﬁrma0on'through'
                 release'goods'              release'the'goods'to'the'buyer'                                           reliable'and'auditable'conﬁrma0on'message'in'real'0me'
                                                                                                                       Diﬀerent'banks'and'e8money'account'holders'will'need'
    8"              Clearing'&''             The'payment'instruc0on'can'be'routed'to'clear'and'
                                                                                                                       to'be'able'to'reliably'and'quickly'seMle'funds'between'
                    SeMlement'               seMle'with'any'party'in'the'market'using'the'data'
                                                                                                                       each'other'
                                             A/C'ins0tu0on'can'extract'all'relevant'data'including'ID'
                     Receipt'of''                                                                                      Payment'operators'will'need'to'adhere'to'common'or'
    9"                                       and'invoice'or'reference'ﬁeld'in'order'to'transmit'them'
              credit'and'related'data'                                                                                 compa0ble'standards'in'order'to'facilitate'automa0on''
                                             to'the'buyer''

10"                                          The'seller’s'account'ins0tu0on'credit'their'account'with'                 Reach'of'ins0tu0ons'must'be'assured'so'that'payer’s'
                Credit'book'entry'
                                             the'amount'due'                                                           ins0tu0on'can'reliably'pay'suppliers'at'other'ins0tu0ons'

                                                                                                                       Payment'ﬁles'need'to'adhere'to'some'consistent'
11"             Reconcilia0on'File'          The'seller’s'ins0tu0on'compiles'all'data'from'payment'
                                                                                                                       standards'for'data;'Payment'integrators'can'ﬁll'some'
                   genera0on'                receipts'and'transmits'them'to'the'seller'
                                                                                                                       gaps'in'data'format'standards'
                                                                                                                       Seller’s'ability'to'match'records'will'depend'on'bank’s'
                                             Seller'can'match'payment'receipts'to'accounts'
                  Reconcilia0on'                                                                                       and'payment'integrator’s'capacity'to'aggregate'
                                                                                                                                                                                               	
12"                                          receivable'posi0ons,'invoices'and'clients'
                                                                                                                       payment'records'and'adapt'ﬁle'stds'to'the'supplier'ERP'

	

                                                                                                                                                                                                   56	
	
	
	
	
	
Box	5	ISO20022	payment	message	standards	explained		
         	
Corporates	and	banks	are	gradually	adopting	ISO20222	internationally	to	improve	integration	
of	 business	 and	 payment	 service	 automation.	 Good	 payment	 standards	 and	 implementation	
guidelines	 offer	 detailed	 and	 unambiguous	 descriptions	 and	 can	 easily	 be	 obtained	 by	 system	
developers.	 The	 standards	 that	 are	 most	 widely	 used	 for	 electronic	 payments	 are	 developed	 by	 ISO	
and	 freely	 available	 via	 the	 Internet.	 The	 most	 modern	 version	 of	 ISO	 payment	 standards	 is	 called	
ISO20022.	This	standard	makes	use	of	a	language	that	is	readable	for	systems	and	ensures	minimal	
misunderstanding	by	a	receiving	system	of	what	the	sending	system	is	sending.	This	language,	called	
XML,	provides	a	description	of	the	data	elements	that	are	sent	together	with	the	data	in	a	“document”.	
                             Simpliﬁed	ISO20022	payment	ini2a2on	message	format	and	content	highlights	

                    Group	Header	                     Op1onal	elements	include:	
                                                      -  Authorisa1on	
                       Message	ID	                    -  Forwarding	Agent	
                      Crea1on	Date	

                    Number	of	Trans.	                 This	includes	Name,	Postal	Address,	Country	
                     Ini1a1ng	Party	                  of	Residence…	

                    Payment	Informa1on	
                                                                      Corporate	clients	can	choose	payment	
                         Payment	Info	ID	
                                                                      methods,	e.g.	through	the	RTGs,	ATM	
                         Payment	Method	                              network	etc.	
                    Requested	Execu1on	Date	          This	includes	Name,	Postal	Address,	
                              Debtor	                 Country	of	Residence…(can	impact	AML	
                                                      processes)	
                          Debtor	Account	

                           Debtor	Agent	                                   Name	and	type	of	account	can	be	speciﬁed,	
                                                                           poten1ally	also	indica1ng	“e-money	a/c”	
                     Credit	Transfer	Trans	Info	


                      Transac1on	Informa1on	
                        End-to-End	Iden1ﬁca1on	

                                 Amount	

                           Instructed	Amount	

                                 Creditor	

                         RemiFance	Informa1on	      This	ﬁeld	can	be	used	to	capture	a	reference	#	set	by	the	payer	
                              Unstructured	

                                Structured	

                         Creditor	Reference	Info	

                                Reference	

                                                                                                                          	
         	
As	more	markets	in	the	region	prepare	for	ISO20022	migration,	policy	makers	and	industry	should	
consider	how	implementation	and	adaptation	of	these	standards	can	help	to	address	needs	of	small	
business	and	benefit	from	the	extra	reach	that	new	e-money,	non-bank	and	agent	based	payment	
services	can	provide.		
	
In	implementations	elsewhere,	the	ISO20002	standard	has	proven	to	not	only	to	be	aligned	with	older	
standards	 but	 also	 more	 prescriptive,	 richer	 and	 easier	 to	 be	 incorporated	 in	 fully	 automated	
processes.	The	richness	however	also	means	more	options	of	what	is	used	and	what	is	not	used.	To	
ensure	simple	and	rapid	implementations	it	is	advisable	to	provide	clear	implementation	guidelines	
and	re-use	functionality	and	data	structures	that	already	exist	in	the	corporate	systems	that	have	to	
generate	and	read	the	data	in	the	ISO	20002	standard.	A	good	way	to	achieve	this	is	to	copy	and	paste	
implementation	 guidelines	 already	 tried	 and	 tested	 elsewhere	 and	 to	 stay	 as	 close	 as	 possible	 to	
standard	functionality	of	corporate	systems.		



                                                                                                                        57	
	
	
	
	
	   	




        58	
	
	
VI.     Implications	for	Payment	Systems	Development	
	
Payment	service	improvement	for	the	traditional	retail	sector	can	generate	broader	
benefits	for	the	economy.	
	
    § Traditional	 retailers	 and	 their	 suppliers	 can	 benefit	 from	 efficiency	 gains	 if	
        improved	 digital	 payment	 solutions	 -	 along	 with	 associated	 supply	 chain	 and	
        management	 automation	 –	 are	 introduced.	 These	 efficiency	 gains	 may	 help	
        traditional	retailers	to	compete	more	effectively	with	modern	retail	and	enable	them	
        to	 share	 in	 the	 gains	 that	 modernization	 of	 the	 consumer	 goods	 industry	 generate.	
        These	efficiency	gains	currently	accrue	mostly	to	the	larger	companies	in	the	sector.	
        	
    § The	 size	 of	 the	 market	 is	 large,	 in	 terms	 of	 value	 and	 volume	 of	 payments	 as	
        well	 as	 employment	 and	 GDP.	 Gains	 generated	 here	 can	 also	 have	 a	 positive	
        impact	 on	 consumer	 welfare	 if	 efficiency	 gains	 are	 shared	 in	 a	 competitive	 market	
        with	consumers.	
	
    § The	 volume	 and	 value	 of	 payments	 in	 this	 market	 segment	 can	 help	 achieve	
        economies	of	scale	in	emerging	non-bank	and	agent	based	payment	solutions.	
        This	 can	 also	 contribute	 to	 achieving	 broader	 objectives	 of	 increasing	 electronic	
        transactions	in	the	economy.	
	
    § Traditional	 retailers	 can	 contribute	 to	 broader	 uptake	 of	 digital	 payment	
        solutions	by	under-banked	consumers.	Usage	of	electronic	payments	and	banking	
        services	 by	 traditional	 retailers	 can	 set	 an	 example	 for	 consumers.	 Many	 small	
        retailers	 are	 or	 may	 become	 agents	 in	 e-money	 and	 agent	 banking	 schemes.	 With	
        appropriate	alignment	of	commercial	incentives,	retailers	can	encourage	end	clients	
        to	increase	their	usage	of	non-cash	payments.		
	
Government	 and	 industry	 need	 to	 come	 together	 to	 address	 a	 set	 of	 inter-related	
challenges	 to	 improve	 payments	 usage.	 Each	 link	 in	 this	 chain	 must	 be	 strengthened	 in	
order	 for	 efforts	 to	 be	 effective	 and	 help	 achieve	 an	 expansion	 in	 the	 usage	 of	 electronic	
payments.	Additional	developments	and	improvement	will	need	to	be	pursued	by	individual	
services	 providers	 including	 banks,	 payment	 processors	 and	 technology	 companies.	 The	
following	is	a	working	list	of	payment	system	recommendations.	They	warrant	discussion	by	
stakeholders	from	industry,	payment	service	providers,	banks	and	government.			
	
1. Encourage	and	facilitate	industry	level	collaboration	–	such	as	through	as	
     National	Payments	Council	–	to	identify	challenges	to	broader	usage	of	electronic	
     payments	in	this	market	segment	and	the	role	of	collaboration	and	central	
     infrastructure.	
     	
        §     Industry	and	policy	makers	should	consider	the	evolution	of	distribution	
              models	 for	 payments	 services	 to	 small	 enterprises	 and	 retailers.	 Many	
              markets	 are	 witnessing	 a	 growth	 in	 non-bank	 service	 providers	 and	
              payment	 service	 aggegrators	 that	 complement	 traditional	 modes	 of	
              distribution	of	banking	and	payments.	There	may	be	a	need	to	encourage	
              or	 facilitate	 entry	 into	 the	 market	 of	 such	 intermediaries	 to	 extend	 the	
              reach	of	formal	payment	services.	
        	
        §     National	 Payments	 Councils	 (where	 they	 exist)	 should	 be	 encouraged	 to	
              consult	 with	 the	 retail	 and	 distribution	 sector	 and	 deliberate	 on	 the	
              evolving	 requirements	 of	 corporate	 payment	 users.	 Payment	 Councils	
              may	 need	 to	 review	 how	 they	 interact	 with	 and	 take	 account	 of	 users’	


                                                                                                      59	
	
    	
                     needs,	 possibly	 integrating	 representatives	 of	 this	 industry	 as	 members	
                     or	within	selected	working	groups.	
             	
             	
    2.       Adopt	forward-looking	message	standards	that	support	broader	industry	
             modernization	and	are	consistent	with	international	standards.	
         	
                §    Migration	 to	 ISO20022	 standards	 can	 be	 leveraged	 to	 harmonise	 use	 of	
                     payment	 messages	 by	 the	 banking	 industry	 and	 accommodate	
                     requirements	 of	 industry	 users	 with	 regards	 to	 automation	 and	 reach	
                     payment	references.	
                	
                §    Integration	 of	 mobile	 payment	 with	 ATM	 operations	 could	 leverage	 ISO	
                     8583	to	harmonise	message	standards	for	bill	payments	
                	
                §    Government	 should	 review	 scope	 to	 adopt	 practices	 from	 other	 related	
                     standards.	This	should	include	the	areas	of	e-invoicing,	procurement	(e.g.	
                     PEPPOL)	 as	 well	 standards	 being	 adopted	 by	 the	 banking	 industry,	 such	
                     as	 EBICS,	 to	 address	 security	 and	 payment	 authorization	 issues	 in	 the	
                     emerging	areas	of	internet	based	systems.	
         	
    3.       Expand	the	reach	of	payment	systems	and	services	by	integrating	new	
             participants	and	supporting	broader	use	cases.	
         	
                §    New	payment	services	and	services	providers,	in	particular	agent	banking	
                     and	regulated	non-bank	payment	service	providers	should	be	allowed	or	
                     enabled	 to	 become	 members	 or	 effective	 participants	 in	 existing	 inter-
                     bank	payment	networks.	
                     	
                §    This	may	require	agreement	on	adoption	of	consistent	payment	messages	
                     formats	 and	 reference	 data,	 development	 of	 appropriate	 business	 rules	
                     for	governance,	risk	and	operations	for	clearing	and	settlement.	
    	
                §  Support	 and	 encourage	 early	 expansion	 of	 services	 to	 agents	 /	 e-money	
                   agents.	 This	 may	 include	 amendments	 to	 the	 payment	 types	 and	 limits	
                   that	 these	 agents	 and	 their	 business	 partners	 can	 support	 and	 the	 roles	
                   that	they	can	play	in	the	overall	collections	and	payment	services.	
                   	
    4.       Enhance	and	strengthen	existing	interbank	clearing	and	settlement	
             arrangements.	
         	
                §    To	 meet	 the	 specific	 needs	 of	 small	 business	 payment	 flows,	 specific	
                     enhancements	may	need	to	be	made	to	existing	infrastructure.	These	may	
                     include	 adaptations	 to	 validation	 processes,	 settlement	 cycles	 and	
                     confirmations	 as	 well	 as	 setting	 up	 appropriate	 rules	 and	 technology	 to	
                     enable	non-bank	payment	initiators	to	extend	reach.	
                	
                §    To	support	the	reach	of	payments	infrastructure	(cf	#2),	in	particular	to	
                     integrate	 payment	 flow	 to	 and	 from	 e-money	 providers	 and	 agents	
                     banking	 operations,	 other	 enhancement	 to	 membership	 rules,	 clearing	
                     and	settlement	arrangement	may	need	to	be	introduced.	
	
    5.       Identify	requirements	and	appropriate	means	to	enhance	data	quality	and	
             integrity,	such	as	through	central	reference	data	repositories	or	standards.	
                	


                                                                                                          60	
    	
    	
            §    Identifiers	 for	 bank	 and	 payment	 institutions	 and	 account	 numbers	 may	
                 benefit	 from	 central	 reference	 sources	 that	 enable	 participants	 to	
                 minimise	manual	inputs,	validate	codes	and	reduce	errors.	
                 	
            §    Common	 client	 identifiers	 or	 the	 establishment	 of	 equivalency	 may	 help	
                 to	 address	 KYC	 and	 AML	 issues	 as	 well	 as	 facilitate	 reconciliation	 and	
                 payment	processing.	
	
    6.   Improve	mechanisms	available	to	generate	and	transmit	real-time	confirmations	
         to	payee	and	payer	across	networks.	
            	
            §   Services	may	need	to	be	put	in	place	to	ensure	that	payees	(and	payers)	
                can	 receive	 timely	 confirmation	 of	 payment	 in	 a	 recognized	 and	 reliable	
                manner	 even	 if	 payment	 are	 conducted	 across	 different	 networks.	 This	
                will	 become	 important	 in	 conjunction	 with	 an	 expansion	 of	 the	 reach	 of	
                payment	systems	(cf.	#2).	
	
    7.   Build	capacity	of	small	retailers	and	wholesalers	and	facilitate	their	adoption	of	
         digitization	and	process	automation.	
            	
            §    Adoption	 by	 small	 retailers	 and	 wholesalers	 of	 electronic	 inventory	 and	
                 management	 tools	 will	 reduce	 the	 barriers	 and	 enhance	 benefits	 from	
                 adoption	 of	 electronic	 payments.	 Government	 can	 play	 a	 role	 in	
                 facilitating	 and	 incentivizing	 their	 adoption	 of	 appropriate	 technology	
                 and	business	practices.	
            	
            §    Government	 may	 consider	 programs	 to	 simplify	 adoption	 of	 technology	
                 by	 retailers	 and	 the	 role	 that	 incentive	 schemes	 and	 e-invoicing	 or	 tax	
                 reforms	 can	 play	 in	 promoting	 modernization	 of	 traditional	 retailers’	
                 business	practices.	
	
    8.   Ensure	that	communications	infrastructure	can	support	new	payments	services	
         to	the	broader	industry.	
            	
            §    Most	 of	 the	 proposed	 initiatives	 require	 very	 strong	 and	 cost	 effective	
                 telecommunications	 infrastructure.	 Mobile	 network	 based	 services	 to	
                 initiate,	validate	and	complete	payments	require	secure	data	exchanges	to	
                 take	place	quickly	and	without	broken	connections.	Service	interruptions,	
                 bandwidth	restrictions	or	other	technical	issues	can	severely	undermine	
                 the	overall	ease	of	use	and	trust	in	alternative	payment	mechanisms.	
                 	
            §    Telecommunication	 firm	 may	 need	 to	 carefully	 assess	 existing	 network	
                 quality	and	make	new	investments.	Inability	to	establish	a	wireless	signal,	
                 interrupted	 communications	 and	 slow	 data	 speed	 can	 all	 contributes	 to	
                 very	 poor	 payment	 experience.	 	 If	 more	 than	 occasional	 they	 can	 totally	
                 undermine	other	investments	in	payments	infrastructure.	
    	
    An	inter-dependent	set	of	changes	needs	to	be	made	to	meet	the	full	requirements	of	
    retailers,	 suppliers,	 banks	 and	 other	 actors	 in	 traditional	 retail	 the	 supply	 chain.	
    While	 individual	 banks	 and	 service	 providers	 can	 make	 some	 incremental	 enhancements,	
    many	others	will	require	coordination	with	other	providers	and	central	infrastructure.	In	a	
    country	 like	 Indonesia,	 with	 a	 fragmented	 financial	 services	 market	 and	 widely	 dispersed	
    population,	 no	 one	 bank	 or	 payment	 provider	 can	 hope	 to	 cover	 the	 full	 needs	 of	 supply	
    chains.	 Hence	 the	 overriding	 priority	 for	 industry	 is	 to	 expand	 and	 enhance	 connections	
    between	payment	networks.		

                                                                                                      61	
    	
	
       	
									Exhibit	20:	summary	recommendations	for	payment	service	improvement	
                         Ac#on&for&coordina#on&                                 Ac#ons&for&individual&service&providers&

       Enable'automated'payments'across'e2money'and'bank'           Improve'user'design'and'support'
       networks:'
       2  Align'ins9tu9on'and'account'iden9ﬁers'                    Facilitate'funding,'balance'enquiry''
       2  Adhere'to'consistent'message'standards'and'usage'
       2  Facilitate'user'valida9on'of'reference'data'and'          Enable'short'term'credit'or'deferred'debit'facili9es'for'
          Iden9ﬁers'                                                retailers'
       2  Address'Client'ID'consistency'issues'and'AML'reqs.'
       2  Automate'clearing'and'seFlement''
                                                                    Promote'or'facilitate'integra9on'with'merchant'/'retailer'
       2  Establish'appropriate'conﬁrma9on'messages'                services'and'plaKorms'
       2  Facilitate'integra9on'of'standard'payment'references'
                                                                    Accommodate'anomalies,'bespoke'requirements'and'
       Create'standards'guidelines'and'APIs'that'facilitate'
                                                                    billing'adjustments'
       provision'of'integra9on'and'payment'ini9a9on'services'by'
       third'par9es'

       Support'common'security'guidelines'and'user'educa9on'

       Ensure'new'payment'and'related'services'are'anchored'in'
       a'sound'legal'and'risk'management'framework'

       Establish'appropriate'commercial'terms'and'condi9ons'to'incen9vize'uptake'and'usage'
                                                                                                                                 	


Annex	A:	Information	Flow	Analysis	of	the	End-to-End	Process	
	
This	section	describes	in	greater	detail	the	possible	steps	of	the	full	purchase	to	pay	
business	operation.	Starting	from	the	process	for	a	buyer	to	identify	services	and	products	
that	 fulfill	 his	 needs,	 to	 find	 suppliers	 that	 he	 would	 like	 to	 use	 and	 then	 to	 register	 /	
contract	with	the	supplier,	order	the	goods	and	services,	handles	any	issues	around	delivery	
and	ultimately	makes	the	payment.	The	structure	described	here	is	a	“strawman”,	driven	by	
requirements	 of	 a	 buyer-user	 journey	 where	 the	 buyer	 only	 provides	 data	 about	 himself	
when	required	for	his	own	objective	of	the	purchase	and	where	the	buyer	does	not	need	to	
provide	any	data	element	more	than	once.	
	
The	 structure	 is	 described	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 process	 steps	 and	 documents	 that	 are	
exchanged	 between	 seller	 and	 buyer.	 These	 documents	 could	 be	 exchanged	 via	 the	
Internet	or	Mobile,	where	either	the	seller	or	the	buyer	interacts	electronically	and	the	other	
party	 uses	 a	 web-based	 or	 mobile-based	 user	 interface	 to	 receive	 data	 and	 type	 in	 data.	
These	documents	could	also	be	exchanged	by	file	transfers	between	the	systems	of	the	seller	
and	 the	 systems	 of	 the	 buyer.	 A	 third	 option	 is	 a	 combination	 of	 the	 above,	 whereby	 for	
instance	 the	 identification	 of	 products	 /	 services	 and	 suppliers	 happens	 via	 web-based	 or	
mobile	based	interface	but	orders,	invoices,	delivery	notifications	and	payments	are	handled	
between	 the	 systems	 of	 the	 seller	 and	 the	 buyer	 (plus	 the	 payment	 infrastructure	 for	 the	
payment).	
	
The	structure	of	the	data	exchange	and	the	“customer	experience”	of	the	small	retailers	with	
their	Procure	to	Pay	process	could	be	as	follows.	
	
    1. Identification	and	selection	of	products	and	distributors	

      When	using	the	Internet	/	mobile	for	buying	products	or	services	then	the	first	step	for	
      the	small	retailer	could	be	to	search	the	web	for	products	and	services.	To	minimise	the	
      time	spent	with	the	search	for	the	combination	of	seller	/	buyer	and	product	offered	/	
      product	needed,	the	app	could	enable	the	potential	buyer	to	share	a	minimum	set	of	data	
      to	identify	what	product	or	service	may	best	suit	his	needs.	
	

                                                                                                                                     62	
	
	
    1.1. Preliminary	registration	buyer	
    Examples	of	the	data	that	the	buyer	may	share	with	the	potential	seller	are:	
     §   Type	of	business	the	buyer	company	is	in	
     §   Size	of	the	buyer	company	
     §   Period	for	which	the	buyer	is	willing	to	contract	(no	contract	/	annual	contract)	
     §   City	in	which	the	buyer	company	is	located	
     §   Type	of	product	/	service	the	buyer	is	looking	for	
     §   Quantity	of	product	/	volume	of	service	the	buyer	is	looking	for	
         	
    1.2. Catalogue	of	products	
    In	the	case	the	buyer	already	knows	what	type	of	products	he	needs	he	may	skip	the	
    aforementioned	step	and	search	directly	for	specific	products.	The	seller	will	have	an	
    catalogue	of	products,	their	attributes	and	prices	which	can	be	accessible	on-line.	From	
    the	buyer’s	perspective	he	likely	requires	to	see	the	following	data	displayed	by	the	
    potential	seller:	
    §    Product	category	(examples:	Softdrinks;	Packaged	food;	Household	items)	
    §    Product	identifier	(such	as	a	standard	barcode)	
    §    Product	description	(examples:	Diet	Coke;	Dolmio	Bolognese	Original	Sauce;	Ecozone	Non	
         Bio	Laundry	Capsules)	
    §    Measurements	(examples:	1.	8	x	330ml;	320g;	20	per	pack)	
    §    Other	product	attributes	(examples	ingredients;	sugar	content)	
    §    Picture	of	product	
    §    Price	offer	yes	/	no	
    §    Offer	(examples:	Buy	any	2	for	$5;	Only	$1,	was	$1.50;	Buy	any	1	add	1	free)	
    §    Remarks	about	availability	(example:	"This	product	is	available	for	orders	to	be	delivered	
         after	6am	on	Thursday")	or	the	number	of	items	the	seller	has	in	stock	
    §    Indicator	whether	price	includes	/	excludes	tax	(normally	tax	is	excluded	when	purchased	
         by	a	company)	
    §    Price	
    §    Normalised	price	(Examples:	Price	per	100ml:	16.6c;	Price	per	100g:	31.3c;	Price	each:	52.5c)	
    §    General	delivery	charges	

    When	the	buyer	likes	the	products	/	services	of	the	seller	and	the	attributes	that	come	
    with	it	he	may	decide	to	purchase	the	products	/	services	as	long	as	he	is	happy	with	the	
    terms	and	conditions	for	the	purchase	stipulated	by	the	specific	seller.	
	
2. Registration	buyer	
   The	next	step	then	is	the	registration	by	the	buyer	of	the	buyer’s	general	company	
   details	plus	details	of	the	buyers’	representative	who	acts	as	the	first	contact	for	the	
   seller.	These	are	usually	the	following	data:	
    §    Buyer’s	legal	name	
    §    Buyer	registered	legal	company	address	
    §    Buyer	registered	official	registration	number	
    §    Buyer	registered	fiscal	registration	number	
    §    Buyer	contact	first	name	
    §    Buyer	contact	surname	
    §    Buyer	contact	email	address	
    §    Buyer	contact	office	phone	number	
    §    Buyer	contact	mobile	phone	number	
    §    Buyer	contact	log-in	identifier	for	the	website	or	mobile	interface	of	the	seller	
    §    Buyer	contact	password	to	enter	the	website	or	mobile	interface	of	the	seller	

    Upon	registration	the	buyer	contact	will	receive	a	Client	number	that	may	be	serve	in	
    combination	with	the	log-in	ID	and	password	as	authentication	of	the	buyer.	
    After	registration	of	the	company	details	the	buyer	books	a	delivery.	This	can	involve	
    the	following	details:	
    §    Delivery	address	or	collection	point	
    §    Requested	delivery	date	
    §    Requested	delivery	timeslot	on	the	day	


                                                                                                     63	
	
	
        §    Accepted	specific	delivery	charge	

    Finally	the	buyer	is	presented	with	the	payment	methods	that	are	acceptable	for	the	
    seller.	Depending	on	the	payment	method	selected	by	the	buyer	the	following	details	are	
    to	be	provided	by	the	buyer:	
        §    Billing	address	(required	for	paper-based	invoice	as	trigger	for	a	credit	transfer)		
        §    Name	bank	account	(in	the	case	of	a	direct	debit)	
        §    Bank	id	+	bank	account	number	(in	the	case	of	a	direct	debit)	
        §    Card	details	(in	the	case	of	a	card	payment)	
        §    Credit	terms	(in	the	case	of	a	credit	transfer	or	direct	debit)	
        §    Payment	date(s)	

        By	instructing	the	payment	via	card	or	direct	debit,	the	buyer	formally	acknowledges	
        the	purchase.		
	
3. Purchase	order	buyer	=	purchase	order	seller	
   The	result	will	be	an	order	which	for	the	buyer	is	a	purchase	order	and	for	the	seller	is	a	
   sales	order.	This	order	contains	the	following	data	elements:		
        §    Date	of	issue	of	the	order	
        §    Order	number	
        §    Seller	name	
        §    Seller	registration	number	
        §    Customer	name	
        §    Customer	official	registration	number	
        §    Customer	registration	number	with	supplier	(“Client	number”)	
        §    Delivery	date	
        §    Delivery	timeslot	
        §    Delivery	address	
        §    Product	descriptions	
        §    Price	to	pay	per	product	description	
        §    Estimated	sub	total	cost	*)	
        §    Delivery	charges	
        §    Discounts	
        §    Estimated	total	cost	*)	

        *)	The	cost	is	estimated	because	some	of	the	items	that	might	have	been	ordered,	such	as	meat	and	cheese,	
        are	generally	sold	by	weight.	The	exact	cost	will	be	shown	on	the	delivery	notification	when	the	order	is	
        delivered	and	the	invoice.	
	
4. Delivery	notification	
   When	the	products	are	delivered,	the	buyer	receives	a	delivery	notification.	The	delivery	
   notification	has	the	same	data	elements	as	the	order	but	then	with	its	own	date	of	
   issuance	and	sequential	and	unique	number	plus	the	actual	items	delivered,	potentially	
   information	about	substitutes	for	ordered	products	and	the	planned	delivery	of	missing	
   items.	The	estimated	cost	is	replaced	with	actual	cost	(the	weight	of	the	item	is	know	at	
   the	time	of	delivery).	
    	
    The	seller	may	send	a	delivery	notification	before	the	actual	delivery,	enabling	the	buyer	
    to	refuse	substitutes	or	even	make	last	minute	changes	to	his	order.	This	minimizes	the	
    risk	and	cost	of	delivering	items	that	the	buyer	wants	to	return.	
	
5. Invoice	
   Requirements	for	the	invoice	from	a	tax	perspective	
	
   Booking	an	invoice	into	the	company	account	is	one	of	the	main	objectives	of	the	In	
   those	countries	where	sales	tax	(VAT)	is	levied,	tax	authorities	define	what	constitutes	a	
   “VAT	invoice”.	For	example,	an	invoice	that	is	sent	or	received	and	accounted	for	in	the	
   EU	must	support	the	following	data	requirements	for	VAT:	
        i.   The	date	of	issue	of	the	invoice	

                                                                                                               64	
	
	
          ii.   A	sequential	invoice	reference	number,	based	on	one	or	more	series,	which	uniquely	
                identifies	the	invoice	
         iii.   The	seller's	VAT	identification	number	
         iv.    The	buyer's	VAT	identification	number	(when	the	buyer	is	liable	to	pay	the	VAT)	
          v.    The	seller's	and	the	buyers	full	name	and	address.	
         vi.    Quantity	and	nature	of	the	goods	or	services	supplied	or	the	extent	and	nature	of	the	
                services	rendered,	per	item.	
        vii.    The	date	of	the	supply	or	the	date	a	payment	was	made	or	completed	if	the	payment	
                preceded	the	invoice.	
        viii.   The	taxable	amount	per	rate	or	exemption,	the	unit	price	exclusive	of	VAT	and	any	
                discounts	or	rebates	if	they	are	not	included	in	the	unit	price,	per	item.	
         ix.    The	VAT	rate	applied	per	item.	
          x.    The	VAT	amount	payable,	except	where	a	special	arrangement	is	applied	under	which,	in	
                accordance	with	the	EU	directive,	such	detail	is	excluded.	
         xi.    In	the	case	of	an	exemption	or	where	the	customer	is	liable	for	payment	of	VAT,	reference	
                to	the	applicable	provision	of	the	EU	directive.	

    Requirements	for	the	invoice	from	an	accounting	perspective:	
    Booking	an	invoice	into	the	company	account	is	one	of	the	main	objectives	of	the	invoice.	
    An	Invoice	must	provide	for	information	at	document	and	line	level	that	enables	booking	
    both	the	debit	and	the	credit	side.	The	details	required	by	tax	authorities	are	generally	
    enough	to	account	for	the	sale	or	purchase	of	goods	or	services.	
         	
    Requirements	for	the	invoice	from	a	payment	perspective:	
    The	invoice	represents	–	together	with	credit	notes	–	the	formal	basis	for	any	funds	
    transfers	between	buyer	and	seller.	To	facilitate	the	actual	payment,	the	invoice	should	not	
    also	include	the	requested	total	amount	to	be	paid	by	the	buyer	but	also	the	payment	
    method	acceptable	for	the	seller,	the	agreed	/	required	payment	date	and	the	details	the	
    buyer	needs	from	the	seller	to	make	the	payment.	The	relevant	details	are	the	name	and	
    address	of	the	seller	as	already	requested	for	the	invoice	by	the	tax	authorities,	
    complemented	with:	
    § The	payment	method	acceptable	for	the	seller	
    § Relevant	details	to	make	the	payment	(account	details	for	electronic	credit	transfers,	website	or	
      link	to	instruct	card	payment	online,	telephone	number	to	instruct	card	payment	via	telephone)	
    § (when	applicable)	the	option	for	partial	payments	of	the	invoice	
    § The	required	payment	date(s)	

    Requirements	for	the	invoice	for	invoice	verification	and	audit:	
    Given	that	the	invoice	is	a	formal	document	for	tax	and	accounting	purposes	and	serves	as	
    the	basis	for	payment	by	the	buyer,	it	is	also	used	as	a	key	control	instrument	for	both	the	
    corporate	seller	and	buyer.	To	support	the	auditing	processes	of	both	seller	and	buyer,	it	
    needs	to	provide	sufficient	information	for	the	following:	
    §     Identification	of	the	relevant	parties	
    §     Identification	of	the	product	/	services	traded,	including	description,	value	and	quantity.	
    §     Information	for	connecting	the	invoice	to	its	settlement.	
    §     Information	for	connecting	the	invoice	to	relevant	documents	(e.g.	contracts	and	orders)	

    In	practice	this	means	that	the	following	data	elements	are	added	to	those	required	for	tax	
    purposes	and	payment	to	ensure	the	invoice	can	be	verified	by	the	buyer	and	in	general	
    enables	the	auditing	by	seller	and	buyer	of	the	purchase-to-pay	process:	
    § Preceding	purchase	order	number	/	contract	number	(to	be	provided	by	the	seller)	
    § Description	of	the	products	and	services	delivered	as	provided	in	both	the	order	and	delivery	
      notification	(to	be	provided	by	the	seller)	
    § The	buyer’s	reference	for	the	invoice	(to	be	provided	by	the	buyer)	
    § The	buyer’s	responsible	person	or	department	for	verification	and	approval	of	the	invoice	for	
      payment	(to	be	provided	by	the	buyer)	
      	
6. Payment	


                                                                                                         65	
	
	
     When	it	comes	to	the	payment,	the	buyer	can	verify	the	invoice	and	can	instruct	the	
     payment	based	on	the	data	provided	with	the	invoice	and	the	eventual	complementary	
     invoice	and	credit	note.	
     In	case	the	buyer	does	not	agree	with	the	requested	payment	amount	in	the	invoice	and	
     credit	note	is	provided	by	the	seller,	the	buyer	will	want	to	pay	partially	and	make	a	note	
     of	this	in	his	own	accounts.	When	the	process	of	purchasing	and	paying	is	entirely	on-
     line	via	the	website	of	the	seller,	then	the	buyer	is	generally	forced	to	pre-accept	the	
     payment	before	the	delivery	in	full	and	request	a	refund	afterwards.	
     Generally	the	seller	provides	the	buyer	with	a	payment	confirmation	after	the	successful	
     collection	by	the	seller	of	the	payment	from	the	buyer.	
	
7. Reconciliation	
   In	the	on-line	procure	to	pay	process,	the	seller	collects	the	relevant	data	and	presents	
   sales	orders,	delivery	notifications	and	invoices	electronically	and	defines	the	amount	to	
   be	paid.	This	means	that	the	seller	can	fully	reconcile	all	incoming	payments	(triggered	
   by	the	seller	himself)	with	the	invoices,	complementary	invoices	and	credit	notes	issued	
   by	the	seller.	
     	
     The	buyer	however	may	have	a	manual	process	of	retrieving	purchase	orders,	delivery	
     notifications,	invoices	and	payment	confirmations.	This	may	satisfy	internal	control	
     requirements	but	does	not	guarantee	the	complete	documentation	of	the	purchase	for	
     auditing	and	tax	purposes.	For	instance,	the	absence	of	credit	notes	would	provides	the	
     risk	for	the	buyer	of	inadvertently	overstating	the	tax	declaration	of	purchases	and	
     hence	overstating	the	VAT	credit	claimed	with	tax	authorities.		
	
                                                                                           Registration	          Registration	
        Preliminary	                                      Registration	buyer	legal	
                               Product	catalogue	                                            delivery	               payment	
     registration	buyer	                                    entity	and	contact	
                                                                                           preferences	            preferences	
    • Type	of	business		      • Product	category		      • Buyer’s	legal	name	             • Delivery	        •   Billing	address	
    • Size	of	the	buyer	      • Product	identifier		    • Buyer	registered	legal	           address		        •   Name	bank	
      company	                • Product	                  company	address	                • Requested	           account		
    • Period	for	which	         description		           • Buyer	registered	official	        delivery	        •   Bank	id	+	bank	
      the	buyer	is	willing	   • Measurements		            registration	number	              date	                account	number		
      to	contract		           • Other	product	          • Buyer	registered	fiscal	VAT	    • Requested	       •   Card	details		
    • City	in	which	the	        attributes		              registration	number	              delivery	        •   Credit	terms		
      buyer	company	is	       • Picture	of	product	     • Buyer	contact	first	name	         timeslot		       •   Payment	date(s)	
      located	                • Price	offer	yes	/	no	   • Buyer	contact	surname	          • Accepted	                     	
    • Type	of	product	/	      • Offer		                 • Buyer	contact	email	              specific	
      service	the	buyer	      • Remarks	about	            address	                          delivery	
      is	looking	for	           availability	stock	     • Buyer	contact	office	phone	       charge	
    • Quantity	of	            • Price	excluding	          number	                              	
      product	                  VAT	                    • Buyer	contact	mobile	
                              • VAT	rate	                 phone	number	
                              • VAT	amount	             • Buyer	contact	log-in	
                              • Price	including	          identifier	for	the	website	
                                VAT	                      or	mobile	interface	of	the	
                              • Normalised	price	         seller	
                                                        • Buyer	contact	password	to	
                                                          enter	website/mobile	
                                                          interface	of	the	seller	
	


            Order	                  Delivery	note	                Invoice	               Credit	Note	              Payment	
    • Date	of	issue	of	the	     • Date	of	issue	of	         • Date	of	issue	of	       • Date	of	issue	of	    • Date	of	issue	
      order	                      delivery	note	              invoice	                  invoice	               payment	
    • Order	number	             • Delivery	note	            • Invoice	number	         • Invoice	number	      • Payment	identifier	
    • Seller	name	                number	                   • Order	number	           • Seller	name	         • Name	bank	
    • Seller	registration	      • Seller	name	              • Seller	name	            • Seller	                account	customer	
      number	                   • Seller	registration	      • Seller	registration	      registration	        • Bank	id	+	bank	
    • Customer	name	              number	                     number	                   number	                account	number	
    • Customer	official	        • Customer	name	            • Customer	name	          • Customer	name	         customer	
      registration	number	      • Customer	official	        • Customer	official	      • Customer	official	   • Name	bank	
    • Customer	                   registration	number	        registration	             registration	          account	seller	
      registration	number	      • Customer	                   number	                   number	              • Bank	id	+	bank	
      with	supplier	              registration	number	      • Customer	               • Customer	              account	number	
      (“Client	number”)	          with	supplier	              registration	             registration	          seller	
    • Planned	delivery	           (“Client	number”)	          number	with	              number	with	         • Payment	amount	
      date	                     • Actual	delivery	            supplier	(“Client	        supplier	(“Client	     (from	invoice	/	

                                                                                                                               66	
	
	
     • Planned	delivery	         date	                       number”)	               number”)	              credit	note)	
       timeslot	               • Actual	delivery	        •   Delivery	date	        • Product	             • Payment	date(s)	
     • Delivery	address	         timeslot	               •   Delivery	timeslot	      descriptions	        • Remittance	
     • Product	descriptions	   • Delivery	address	       •   Delivery	address	       returned	              information	
     • Price	to	pay	per	       • Product	descriptions	   •   Product	                products	              (invoice	/	credit	
       product	description	    • Price	to	pay	per	           descriptions	         • Volume	of	             note)	
       excluding	VAT	            product	description	    •   Price	to	pay	per	       products	                      	
     • VAT	                      excluding	VAT	              product;	excluding	     returned	
     • Prices	to	pay	per	      • VAT	                        VAT	                  • Price	of	product	
       product	description	    • Price	to	pay	per	       •   VAT	                    excluding	VAT	
       including	VAT	            product	including	      •   Price	to	pay	per	     • VAT	
     • Volume	of	products	       VAT	                        product	              • Price	of	returned	
       ordered	                • Volume	of	products	         descriptionincludi      product	
     • Est.	sub	total	cost		     delivered	                  ng	VAT	Volume	of	       including	VAT	
     • Delivery	charges	       • Sub	total	cost	             products	delivered	   • Total	amount	
     • Discounts	              • Delivery	charges	       •   Sub	total	cost	
     • Est.	total	cost		       • Discounts	              •   Delivery	charges	
                               • Total	cost	             •   Discounts	
                                                         •   Total	cost	
    IN	BLUE	THE	DATA	ELEMENTS	THAT	CAN	BE	DERIVED	FROM	DATA	COLLECTION	EARLIER	IN	THE	PROCESS	
	
	                                        	




                                                                                                                            67	
	
	
References	and	further	reading	
	
	
D’Arcy, Patrick, Norman, David and Shan, Shalini. “Costs and Margins in Retail Supply Chain”. Reserve
Bank of Australia Quarterly Bulletin, June 2012

Bain & Co. “Winning on the Next Frontier: Five Rules for Reaching Indonesian Shoppers”; Nader
Elkhweet, Mike Booker and Jean-Pierre Felenbok

Better Than Cash Alliance: “Development Results Focused Research Program Country Diagnostic:
COLOMBIA”, 30 September 2013

Boylaud, Olivier and Nicoletti, Guiseppe, (2003), “Regulatory reform in retail distribution”, OECD
Economic Studies, Vol. 2001/1.

ECB: Glossary Of Terms Related To Payment, Clearing And Settlement Systems. 2009

Economist Intelligence Unit. Consumer goods and retail Industry Report, Indonesia. January 2015.

EuroMonitor International, World Retail Data and Statistics 2014. Eighth edition

Fellenz, Martin. Cara Augustenborg, Mairead Brady and, IrelandJoe Greene. “Requirements for an
Evolving Model of Supply Chain Finance: A Technology and Service Providers Perspective”.
Communications of the IBIMA Volume 10, 2009

Jallath-Coria, Eduardo S. , Mukhopadhyay, Tridas, Slaughter, Sandra, Yaron Amir: “The Economic Value
of Network Externalities in an Electronic Inter-Bank Payment Network: An Empirical Evaluation”, 2001

Johnston, A., Porter, D., Cobbold, T. and Dolamore, R. 2000, Productivity in Australia’s Wholesale and
Retail Trade, Productivity Commission Staff Research Paper, AusInfo, Canberra.

Mandiri Economic Research: Reviewing the Indonesian Consumer Sector from Developments in the Retail
Sector. September 2014

Level one project: leveloneproject.org

Nigeria Inter-Bank Settlement System. “NIBSS Technical Specification Document for NIBSS Instant
Payments (NIP) Third Parties”. April 2012.



	
	




                                                                                                         68	
	
