           Improving Land
          Governance in West
               Bengal

                           STATE REPORT
              Land Governance Assessment
                      Framework




                                     LGAF Team
                                     August 2014


   Coordination: Landesa/Rural Development Institute - West Bengal




1|P a g e L a n d Go v e r n a n c e A s se s sm e n t F r a m e w or k – W e st B e n g a l
                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS


          Sl.                               Content                                 Page
          No.
                 Acronyms                                                              3
         I.      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                     5
         II.     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                                     18
         III.    INTRODUCTION                                                         19
         IV.     METHODOLOGY                                                          21
         V.      GENERAL STATE CONTEXT                                                24
         VI.     ASSESSMENT                                                           36
         VII.    ANALYSIS AND POLICY RECOMMENDATION                                  146
                 a. Substantive Findings                                             146
                 b. Strength and Weakness                                            147
                 c. Policy Matrix and Suggested Reform Actions                       152
                 d. Data Gap                                                         165
                 e. Evolution of Land Governance in West Bengal                      166
                 f. Suggestion for Monitoring                                        177
                 g. Best Practices                                                   177
         VIII. CONCLUSION                                                            179
         IX.     OVERALL SCORE CARD                                                  181
         X.      BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                        187
         XI.     ANNEXURE                                                            188
                 Annexure 1: Expert Investigator Report (Background Notes)           188
                 Annexure 2: Panel Reports (Aide Memoire)                            285
                 Annexure 3: Expert Investigators and Panel Composition              361
                 Annexure 4: Government Orders                                       365




2|P a g e L a n d G ov e r n a n c e A s se s sm e n t F r a m e w or k – W e st B e n g a l
                                             Acronym

BLLRO                   :   Block Land and Land Reforms Officer
BPL                     :   Below Poverty Line
BS                      :   Bhumi Sahayak
BSUP                    :   Basic Services for Urban Poor
BT Act                  :   Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885
CAG                     :   Comptroller and Auditor General
CMU                     :   Change Management Unit
CORD                    :   Computerization of Registration of Documents
CSO                     :   Central Statistical Organization
CSR                     :   Corporate Social Responsibility
DDP                     :   Draft Development Plan
DLLRO                   :   District Land and Land Reforms Officer
DPR                     :   Detailed Project Report
EIs                     :   Expert Investigators
EWS                     :   Economically Weaker Section
FRA                     :   Scheduled Tribe and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition
                            of Forest Rights) Act, 2006
GDP                     :   Gross Domestic Product
GO                      :   Government Order
GoWB                    :   Government of West Bengal
GSDP                    :   Gross State Domestic Product
HMC                     :   Howrah Municipal Corporation
HR                      :   Human Resource
IAY                     :   Indira Awas Yojna
IR Act                  :   Indian Registration Act
IS Act                  :   Indian Stamp Act
JFM                     :   Joint Forest Management
JFMC                    :   Joint Forest Management and Protection Committees
JNNURM                  :   Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
KMA                     :   Kolkata Metropolitan Area
KMDA                    :   Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority
KUSP                    :   Kolkata Urban Services for Poor
LA                      :   Land Acquisition
LAMPs                   :   Large Sized Multipurpose Cooperative Societies
LGI                     :   Land Governance Indicators
LIG                     :   Lower Income Group
L&LR Department         :   Land and Land Reforms Department
LRTT                    :   Land Reforms Tenancy Tribunal
LUDCPs                  :   Land Use Development Control Plan
LUMRs                   :   Land Use Map and Register
MVDB                    :   Market Value Data Base
NGNB                    :   Nijo Griha Nijo Bhumi (My Home My Land Scheme)
NGO                     :   Non-Government Organizations
NTFP                    :   Non-Timber Forest Produce
RAY                     :   Rajiv Awas Yojna
RoR                     :   Record of Rights
RR                      :   Resettlement and Rehabilitation
RTI Act                 :   Right to Information Act
SC                      :   Scheduled Caste
SDLLRO                  :   Sub-Divisional Land and Land Reforms Officer
3|P a g e L a n d Go v e r n a n c e A s se s sm e n t F r a m e w or k – W e st B e n g a l
SIPRD                   :   State Institute of Panchayat and Rural Development
ST                      :   Scheduled Tribe
TAG                     :   Technical Advisory Group
ULB                     :   Urban Local Bodies
USHA                    :   Urban Statistics And Human Resource Assessment Survey
WBEA Act                :   West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act, 1953
WBIDC                   :   West Bengal Industrial Development Corporation
WBIIDC                  :   West Bengal Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation
WBLR Act.               :   West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955
WBMMDC                  :   West Bengal Mines and Minerals Development Corporation
WBSIDC                  :   West Bengal Small Industries Development Corporation
WBTDCC                  :   West Bengal Tribal Development Cooperative Corporation




4|P a g e L a n d Go v e r n a n c e A s se s sm e n t F r a m e w or k – W e st B e n g a l
I.   Acknowledgements
 The State Governments of West Bengal together with Andra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Jharkhand
 and Odisha through the Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development,
 Government of India, requested in 2012 the World Bank to support the undertaking of an
 independent land governance assessment in each state using the LGAF approach. In each of the
 participating states, a well reputed local institution was selected to undertake the State-level
 Coordination of the LGAF, which was Landesa for West Bengal. Landesa identified the State
 Coordinator and a team of local State experts to undertake the assessment in consultation with a
 nodal officer assigned by the State Government. The six State institutions and LGAF teams are
 supported by the Technical Advisory Group (TAG), comprising of highly accredited and capable team
 members of nationally recognized experts each covering one of the LGAF thematic areas. The LGAF
 process and TAG are coordinated by the TAG secretariat, hosted by the Council for Social
 Development in Delhi. CSD coordinated regularly with DoLR and The World bank, which has
 provided financial support and methodological guidance.

 We are grateful to the Government of West Bengal, particularly the L&LR Department for
 continuously encouraging Landesa to conduct the exercise. We also express our deep
 acknowledgement and appreciation to all the expert investigators, the key technical input providers
 who in spite of several other preoccupations agreed to take the responsibilities, bear with us even at
 odd hours to work incessantly with deep involvement and commitment. These expert investigators
 (list is attached in annexure) are highly respected and widely acknowledged for their background,
 experience and expertise in specific areas of land governance assigned to them and we have been
 humbled by their rich contribution in the untiring effort to finalise the background reports, initial
 ranking of the dimensions in the context of the state with analysis which is understood to be the core
 area of LGAF.

 A lot of effort was spent to identify, coordinate and convince the panel members all with
 distinguished background from a range of professional fields, but in the end, this has proved to be a
 highly rewarding exercise when one looks at the rich contribution and value addition these people
 have made to raise the standard and quality of discussions leading to consensus ranking of the
 dimensions. LGAF has provided us with a great opportunity to interact with the renowned TAG
 members who had come forward with their illustrious expertise to provide valuable guidance on
 LGAF exercise and deliverables.

 We also take this opportunity to sincerely thank all the colleagues in Landesa, in Kolkata, Delhi and
 Seattle who have provided admirable support, encouragement and much needed appreciation to
 accomplish this challenging assignment and above all endured with the testing priorities. Last but
 not the least; our special compliment extends to the Global Coordinator, LGAF and National
 Coordinator, Technical Advisory Group who have been source of continuous encouragement,
 understanding and advice which greatly facilitated the work.

 It has been an eye-opener and a fulfilling experience for me to act as the state coordinator and I also
 wish to thank all other complementary role players who worked tirelessly to complete the writing of
 reports, collection and collation of inputs from the experts and panellists to give the report a final
 shape.


                                                                                         Pinaki Halder
                                                                            State Coordinator, LGAF &
                                                                  State Director, Landesa, West Bengal




 5|P a g e L a n d G ov e r n a n c e A s se s sm e n t F r a m e w or k – W e st B e n g a l
II.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

  Background

  West Bengal, the fourth largest Indian state in terms of population, is situated at the eastern
  part of the country. The state is known across the globe for its successful Land Reforms
  measures and a tradition of attempts to establish a better Land Governance mechanism. Here,
  Land governance refers to institutional and legal systems, procedures on ownership, use and
  transaction of land. The purpose of land governance is to ensure that the institutions, legal
  framework, process & procedures follow the principles of equity, efficiency, transparency and
  accountability as well as positively contribute to economic and social development, and
  environmental sustainability.

  This draft report on West Bengal chapter of Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF), a
  global initiative developed by the World Bank in partnership with FAO, UN Habitat, IFAD,
  IFPRI, the African Union, and numerous bilateral partners has endeavoured to capture the
  contextual land governance in the state measured by several indicators on a number of thematic
  areas. LGAF is a diagnostic tool to assess the status of land governance at country level in a
  participatory process that draws systematically on local expertise and existing evidence rather
  than on outsiders. For West Bengal, Landesa was assigned the responsibility of coordinating the
  entire exercise in the state and the State Director was entrusted with the responsibility of State
  Coordinator (hereafter referred to as the State Coordinator of LGAF).


  Land Issues in West Bengal

  The land situation in West Bengal is marked by three major characteristics: a) Very high
  population density and an adverse land-man ratio, compared to much of the rest of India, b)
  Large scale, successful and enduring land reforms by way of land redistribution to the landless
  and registering the sharecroppers as tillers on government records, c) Quite a high percentage of
  total population are marginal and small farmers and landless labourers, as well as urban
  landless1.

  The land reform in West Bengal has two important components: tenancy reform and
  redistribution of land. The WBEA Act, 1953 abolished zamindary and all rent receiving interests.
  Those who held land became tenants directly under the state irrespective of their previous
  status. The erstwhile proprietor of land and the cultivator at the lowest level were thus brought
  on the same platform. The Act also imposed a ceiling on individual holding of land in khas.
  Thereafter, from the early seventies a new ceiling was imposed on holding of land on the basis of
  the size of a family under the provisions of WBLR Act, 1955. The ceiling surplus lands under the
  above two Acts were distributed in accordance with the principles laid down in section 49 of the
  WBLR Act.

  The BT Act, 1885 virtually ignored the bargadars. After Independence attempt was made under
  the West Bengal Bargadars Act, 1950 to make the rights of the bargadars more secure.

  The WBLR Act contains detailed provisions to protect the interests of bargadars. However, if the
  bargadars are not recorded they face the unenviable task of proving in a dispute with the owners

  1Agriculture   survey, Government of India, 2011
  6|P a g e L a n d Gov e r n a n c e A s se s sm e n t F r a m e w or k – W e st B e n g a l
of the lands that they cultivate the land as bargadars. During the revision of records under the
LR Act till 1978 a little over 6 lakh bargadars were recorded. This was found to be much less
than the estimated number of bargadars actually existing. A special drive was taken to record
the still unrecorded bargadars. This special drive came to be known as “Operation Barga”.
Several meetings were held informally to make the bargadars get rid of the fear of incurring the
wrath of the owners of the land and instil courage into them so that they could give out that they
were cultivating the lands as bargadars. Finally 14 lakh bargadars of which over 30% were
Scheduled Castes (SCs) and 12% were Scheduled Tribes (STs) were recorded. For the
redistributive justice, ceiling surplus land was distributed among the landless of which the share
of SC pattadars is more than 37% and that of STs is more than 19% (source - West Bengal
Human Development Report 2004).

The Rationale: Land Governance & LGAF

Land governance refers to institutional and legal systems and procedures on ownership, use and
transaction of land. Before getting into the detailed discussion, we need to have a clear
understanding on the roles and responsibilities of the public institutions in the land sector. The
discussion on this could be streamlined under three pointers:

First, states (land is a state subject in India) need a legal and institutional framework that clearly
defines the rules for allocation of property rights and, by allowing cost-effective enforcement,
encourages and facilitates land-related investment.

Second, reliable and complete information on land and property rights needs to be made easily
available to interested parties. Access to land information would then allow for low-cost
verification of land-ownership status, which in turn would form the basis for low-cost land
transfers to more productive use or users and may facilitate the use of property as collateral in
financial markets.

Weak governance of the land sector and a failure to perform these functions effectively will
negatively affect development by reducing investment levels, property transfers, financial sector
activity, and the scope for meaningful decentralization. Since the poor lack other assets, access
to land is more important to them. Bad land governance will have undesirable distributional
consequences and disproportionately hurt the poor.

The points and concerns mentioned above led to the identification of five key areas of good land
governance:

   1. A legal, institutional, and policy framework that recognises existing rights, enforce
      them at low cost, and allows the users to exercise them in line with their aspirations and
      in a way that benefits society as a whole.
   2. Arrangements for land use planning and taxation that avoid negative externalities
      and support effective decentralisation.
   3. Clear identification of state land and its management in a way that cost-effectively
      provide public good; use of acquisition process only as a last resort and only for direct
      public purposes with quick payment for fair compensation and effective mechanisms for
      appeal.
   4. Public provision of land information in a way that is broadly accessible,
      comprehensive, reliable, current and cost-effective in the long run.
   5. Accessible mechanisms to authoritatively resolve disputes and manage conflict,
      with clearly defined mandates and low cost operation.

For the five key areas, a series of land governance indicators, each divided into several
dimensions, have been selected on the basis of international experience adapted to suit the

7|P a g e L a n d Gov e r n a n c e A s se s sm e n t F r a m e w or k – W e st B e n g a l
Indian context. For each dimension, pre-coded statements are given for scoring (from best
practice (A) to weak practice D), again based on international experience.

The LGAF process helps to establish a consensus and priority actions on (i) gaps in existing
evidence; (ii) areas for regulatory or institutional change, piloting of new approaches, and
interventions to improve land governance on a broader scale (e.g. by strengthening land rights
and improving their enforcement); and (iii) criteria to assess the effectiveness of these
measures. LGAF also helps to put in place a structure and process to systematically track
progress in improving land governance over time. The framework has been completed or is
being applied in over 30 countries with growing demand.

Methodology/ process

The process of LGAF studies is a well thought and tested methodology and has been guided by a
framework of land governance indicators that cover five thematic areas and relate to a basic
principle of governance.
There are 27 “land governance indicators” (LGI). Each indicator is further broken down into a
number of “dimensions” with pre-coded statements that draw on global experience (on a scale
from A to D). There are in total 116 dimensions in the LGAF.

Nine expert panels organized by subject ranked the dimensions by selecting an appropriate
option from the list of pre-coded answers. The panel deliberations were based on preparatory
data gathered and analysis by the expert investigator.

The Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in West Bengal has been implemented by
using a highly participatory process for about six months that drew systematically on local
expertise and existing evidence. To provide the common basis of information that is
indispensable as a basis of consensus on rankings or priority actions three sets written outputs
were developed. First, to characterize the setting, a tenure typology describes key types of
tenure in the country, quantifies the extent and population under each type, and identifies key
gaps and overlaps for each of them. Similarly, a map of institutions in the sector identifies the
functions performed by these at different levels as well as gaps and overlaps. Second, relevant
material from existing studies and ‘grey’ literature is synthesized in background reports
corresponding to the key LGAF areas to provide the substantive understanding needed. Third,
panel briefings are put together by the coordinator to instruct panel members by explaining the
indicators and pointing towards relevant material.
Intensive work sessions of between half a day and a day per topic were organized by the State
Coordinator for panels consisting of a group of subject matter experts and users of land systems,
from different backgrounds/works of life. The panel members discussed each of the dimensions
in detail to arrive at a consensus regarding the ranking and agreed policy priorities. Discussions
are summarized in aide memoires and the record of these discussions is reviewed and agreed
upon by panellists.
This synthesized report would be shared with a wide range of people and would be discussed at
a state level validation and policy workshop before consolidation of the key points from the state
report into the national report as a part of the national level consolidation of LGAF.

The key points that emerged out of the study are summarised in brief.

Key points from Panel 1 :       Land Tenure Recognition

A system of tenure explains how people, communities and others gain access to land, forests,
and fisheries, and how those are regulated by societies. These tenure systems determine who can

8|P a g e L a n d Go v e r n a n c e A s se s sm e n t F r a m e w or k – W e st B e n g a l
use what resources, for how long and on and under what conditions. Such systems may be based
either on written policies and laws or unwritten customs and practices.

West Bengal is known for its rich heritage of attempts to develop effective systems of land
tenure. The indigenous system of land-law that existed till the end of 12th century was more
socio-political than legal. Two persons were basically interested in land and its produce -- the
king and the tiller. Intermediate interests or sub-letting were unknown. This system came into a
severe conflict in the beginning of the 13th Century with the Islamic jurisprudence brought in by
the Muslim conquerors who started with the proposition that upon conquest all individual
ownership came to an end, and all land stood vested in the conqueror. During the tenure of the
great Mughal Emperor Akbar, his finance Minister Todarmal introduced a system of assessing a
fixed sum as rent on actual measurement of land and collecting rent directly from the tillers of
the soil ignoring the intermediaries like jagirdars. This system recognised peasant
proprietorship.

After getting the Dewani (revenue administration) of Bengal, Behar and Orissa, East India
Company adopted the structure of land revenue administration introduced by the previous
Muslim ruler Murshid Kuli khan but went on putting pressure for collection of more revenue.
This excessive pressure on cultivators is said to be one of the main causes of the great famine of
1176 BS (corresponding to 1770 Christian era) which resulted in the death of nearly one- third of
the total population of Bengal.

Cornwallis (the then Governor General) under Regulation I of 1793 permanently settled
estates with the zamindars with proprietory rights on land. The permanent settlement was
proved to be an unmitigated disaster for Bengal. The Zamindars felt free to do whatever they
liked and started creating tenants under them for collection of rent. This is how sub-
infeudation took place and middlemen of different layers between the landlords and the
cultivators came into existence, making the condition of the actual cultivator even worse.

The Bengal Tenancy (BT) Act came into existence in 1885. The most significant contribution of
this Act is that it provided for a detailed survey and settlement operation in respect of each and
every piece of land of every village. Accordingly cadastral map of each and every village was
prepared with each and every piece of land with classification according to use as well as
ownership plotted therein.

After independence, the EA Act was passed in pursuance to the constitutional provisions
regarding acquisition of estates. This Act abolished the Zamindary system and imposed ceiling
on individual holding of land. As a follow-up of the EA Act by a comprehensive measure of land
reforms so as to remodel the system of land tenure, the West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955
(WBLR Act) was passed.

The Government of West Bengal acts both as regulator and manager in respect of all lands
within the state. It acts as manager in respect of lands at its disposal, and as a regulator in
respect of lands held by raiyats who are the owners of their lands enjoying heritable and
transferable rights. The Land & Land Reforms Department as the administrative department of
the West Bengal Land Reforms Act deals with all matters relating to land except the lands held
by other departments.

The tenural arrangements before 1955 had a multi-layered rent receiving intermediaries above
the actual cultivator. With the abolition of Zamindary under the EA act, the only landlord is the
state and whoever holds land is a tenant called a raiyat under the state. The tenure typology
table provides a descriptive view of all categories of tenures, mode of creation and recognition of
tenure and number of such tenureship and area covered.


9|P a g e L a n d Gov e r n a n c e A s se s sm e n t F r a m e w or k – W e st B e n g a l
The rights of a raiyat in respect of land comprising his tenure are transferable and heritable and
the right to use the land is subject to certain restrictions. The sharecropper/ bargadar has the
occupancy right to cultivate the land as bargadar which cannot be terminated except in
accordance with law on the order of prescribed authority and his right is also heritable but non-
transferable. The law does not permit creation of tenancy on private land but there are
concealed / oral leasing prevalent in parts of the state.

The occupiers of private land with or without the land owner’s leave or squatters on Government
land do not have any tenurial security. The government has undertaken time bound
programmes for allocation/ regularisation of homestead micro plots to the landless poor, thus
creating another form of tenancy (My Home My Land – Nijo Griha Nijo Bhumi programme has
helped more than 120,000 landless to receive secure tenure over last three years).

The situation in regard to recording of women’s land right in the state is problematic, although
more than 70% agricultural workforce in the state is women. In West Bengal land means land of
every description and a raiyat is a person or institution who holds land for any purpose
whatsoever. Tenure security is defined as 1) protection against eviction; ii) scope of selling and
transferring rights through inheritance, and iii) the possibility of having access to credit under
certain conditions. In West Bengal after the reforms, a very skewed and complex land tenure
system has been replaced by a simple one where the state is the landlord and whoever holds
land is a raiyat under the state. Couple of issues on secure tenure rights to be adhered are:
    1. Identification and codification of customary rights
    2. Better recording of women’s land rights

During post-tenancy reform situation, the government considered and made legislative
provisions for providing institutional finance to the sharecroppers to enable them to become
landowners of the parcel of land they are cultivating. But this provision has not been
implemented. The government may consider implementing the provisions to erase the tension
between the land owner and the bargadar, which is inherent in the system of share-cropping.
The government might consider undertaking a survey for assessing the extent and pattern of
concealed/ oral leasing which is being practiced in rural Bengal significantly in violation of
section 4 of the WBLR Act.

The recommendation also mentions about the need of appropriate legal provisions for
compulsory mutation during the transfer of property. The tribal land alienation continues to be
a main cause of concern. The Govt. may consider developing a complete database on tribal land
ownership and subsequent causes of alienation.

Key points from Panel 2 :      Rights to Forest and Commons Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations

In West Bengal all the lands stands recorded in the latest record of rights either in the name of a
raiyat or government. Register VIII maintained at the field office of the Land reforms
Department contains the details of government land which is in use by the public and not to be
settled. The private lands at times are also used as commons during non- cultivation season.
Under the EA Act, 1953, all the recorded forests of the state other than those under lease
agreements with the tea gardens had vested in the state and their management was given to
Forest Department, West Bengal. Subsequently the Tea garden forests were taken over as
“Resumed Forests” and transferred to Forest department. At present, all the recorded forests of
the State are classified as Reserved Forests, Protected Forests and Unclassed State Forests,
under the Indian Forest Act, 1927. The recorded forestland of the State (11879 sq.km.) is 1.54%
of the recorded forest land of India (770078 sq.km.).

The forest lands are identifiable on revisional survey maps but demarcation on ground does not
exist in all cases.
10 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
West Bengal changed its forest policy in line with National Forest Policy of 1988, by switching
over to Joint Forest Management (JFM), as pioneer in the country, and giving more priority to
people’s need and biodiversity conservation than commercial exploitation and revenue earning.
There is a need to institutionalize and legalize this JFM to ensure that people’s participation is
independent of Forest department initiative. People- forest interaction for collection of NTFP
has been addressed through JFM. Now the monopoly rights for collection of NTFP have been
given to LAMPS through WBTDCC. The LAMPS in several forest areas, as collector’s
cooperatives have applied for the community forests rights under the provisions of FRA 2006,
which is pending at the level of higher authorities. Till December 2013, a total of about 31000
individual pattas and 312 community pattas have been issued by the authorities though the
number of cases rejected is quite high. Some critical issues which have been discussed in the
background note for this panel are: a) conversion of forest villages into revenue villages, b) to
make the JFMCs coterminous with Gram Sansads and streamline those under the provisions of
FRA 2006.

The key policy recommendations have tried to address the issues mentioned above by
suggesting suitable measures; one important area is to endeavour to achieve functional synergy
between JFMCs and provisions of FRA 2006.

Regarding rural land use, the WBLR Act has imposed several restrictions on change of land use,
particularly from agricultural to non- agricultural purposes. The process for filing application is
quite complicated and the disposal process is time-consuming with the main consideration
whether the proposed change is likely to affect adversely the interest of any person or will have
deleterious effects on environment. However, land use change has to happen to keep pace with
rapid urbanization and infrastructure development across the state. The government needs to
review the restrictions on effecting land use changes and take a more practical view on this
based on present day realities.

Key points from Panel 3 :          Urban Land Use, Planning and Development

West Bengal has witnessed slightly higher decadal urban population growth (31.89%) than the
national average which is 31.16%. The problems faced by the urban land governance are
manifold, like scarcity of developed urban land, accumulation of housing backlogs, inadequate
infrastructure and services and environmental degradation. The overall situation gets further
worsened with the rapid increase in number of urban poor.

Land use planning is understood as a systematic and iterative procedure carried out in order to
create an enabling environment for sustainable development of land resources which meets
people’s needs and demands. It assesses the physical, socio-economic, institutional and legal
potentials and constraints with respect to optimal and sustainable use of natural resources and
land and empowers people to make decision about how to allocate those resources.

The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 and the flagship scheme of the central
government, Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) brought about
much desired changes in the paradigm of thinking, functioning and implementing urban
planning and development management process. As a result the planning processes are also
undergoing changes, where policy decisions ought to be taken through greater participation of
private sector, non-government organizations, and the civil society in which the marginalized
and vulnerable poor are included.

The state has a series of acts and regulations which have made adequate and mandatory
provisions on urban land use planning but somewhat non-priority approach on this important
aspect of urban governance has given rise to informal tenureship across all the cities and towns

11 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
in the state. To cope with the urban growth several steps have been taken by the government by
creating 10 Development Authorities and Planning Areas in the state. Developing Draft
Development Plans (DDP) at the ULB level was introduced through KUSP urban reforms
program. The land use plan and development is covered under component I of the DDP along
with slum infrastructure, environment development etc. A study conducted by ATI in 2009
indicated that in the public consultation process the issues like encroachment, lack of open
green space etc. were given priority and land issues were identified in all the cases as well. One
important recommended action to address the challenges faced in urban land use planning is:
setting up of modern educational infrastructure to create a cadre of technically qualified urban
planners. Another important issue which needs immediate attention is the disaster management
and prohibition of settlement in disaster prone urban areas. A proper DDP planning process
with application of GIS for developing modern and updated plans is a priority area for
consideration. A policy to adopt low cost housing for the urban poor in addition to the centrally
sponsored schemes also might be given priority in policy framing.

Key points from Panel 4 :          Public Land Management

Public land in broad sense means lands held by different departments of both the Central and
State Governments, such as the Railways, the Defence, the Irrigation Department, Public Works
Department, the Forests Department, local bodies etc. The land held by WBIIDC, WBIDC,
WBSIDC are also public land. Chapter VII of the WBLR act deals with the management of land
at the disposal of the state government and mandates the collector of a district.

The state of West Bengal is the absolute owner of all lands lying within its geographical
boundaries. In respect of lands at the disposal of the state government, the role is that of a
manager. In terms of distribution of agricultural land to land poor, West Bengal is one of the
pioneer states in the country. Of the 12.14 lakh acres of land at the disposal comprising both
agricultural land and homestead land the government has distributed till October, 2013 a total
of 11.41 acres of land benefiting 31.41 lakh landless and land-poor persons. In selecting the
beneficiaries preference has been given to the persons belonging to SCs and STs. The settles
have been given heritable rights on lands, but their rights are not transferable so that they can
hold on the lands given to them. In the process formalization of land possession by the poor and
particularly homestead land has been achieved.

Settlement of land for non- agricultural purpose is also done by the collector of the district with
prior approval of the L&LR Department. Such settlement may take place with a person, a group
of persons, an organization or a statutory body on such terms and conditions as may be specified
by the department. A total of 6.43 lakh acres of non- agricultural land has vested in the state and
a major part of which has been utilized for the purpose of distribution to the land poor as
homestead, transfer to other departments, settlement on long-term lease etc. and some land has
been kept for development purpose. Settlement of ferries, fisheries, part- vested tank is done by
the DL&LRO.

Acquisition of land under any land acquisition Act is done by the L&LR Department. Land
acquisition whether for public purpose or for private company takes place through the L&LR
Department.

In a state like West Bengal the government does not own large tracts of non-agricultural land in
compact blocks. Even if a few blocks are available they are situated at places which are not
endowed with infrastructure facilities. Infrastructure facilities are available in the areas where
land does not belong to government. But land is needed for growth in industry which is
necessary to reduce dependence on agriculture for sustaining a growing population and
improving the standard of living. There would be limitation on procuring land directly from
farmers. State would be required to exercise its power of ‘eminent domain’ to acquire land.

12 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Strategies would have to be developed so that minimum use of force is resorted to, and pain
caused to the affected families is minimized by providing them adequate compensation, which
includes the benefit of the use of acquired land in future, resettlement etc.

In December 2012, the Government of West Bengal came up with a comprehensive ‘land
allotment policy’ applicable for land owned or held by any department or agency funded by the
government. The L&LR Department is the nodal department for inter-departmental transfer of
land or long-term lease of land at the disposal of the government. Market value of land to be
settled on long-term lease would be based on the sale deeds of the area or the market price as
determined by the Inspector General of Registration, whichever is higher.

The policy states that land meant for commercial use shall invariably be auctioned to the highest
bidder. The new Land Acquisition law (Right to fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2014) has replaced the colonial Land
Acquisition Act, 1894. The new Act is inclusive, exhaustive and has taken into account many
aspects which were earlier not covered in 1894 Act.
Key points from Panel 5 :          Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Private Investors

Since the government of West Bengal did never have large tracts of land the question of transfer
of such land to the private investors has never arisen. However, small parcels of land have been
settled with the private investors for non-agricultural purposes strictly in accordance with
section 49(5) of the WBLR Act read with Rule 20A (6) and the principles of settlement for non-
agricultural purposes contained in the WBLR Manual, 1991. According to the decision of the
state government of 2012, lands to be used for non-agricultural purposes have to be settled on
long-term basis for 99 years with option for successive renewals. Land meant to be used for
commercial purposes shall be invariably auctioned and settled with the highest bidder. Such
auction should be given wide publicity including through internet.

Thus attempt is being made to meet the need of industries from whatever land is available with
the government. Previously attempt was made to acquire large tracts of land under the LA Act,
but such attempt met with stiff opposition from all quarters. The policy of the present
government is not to acquire land forcibly for any purpose whatever. Hence the need of land for
private industries is sought to be met by land from Land Bank of the government and
acquisition with the consent of landowners.

For developmental purpose, be it in the name of public purpose or for setting up of private
industry, land transfer or acquisition involves displacement and as it happens everywhere
economically and socially disadvantaged groups suffer more in the process. However,
developmental needs cannot be entirely compromised for it is also the condition for the
transformation of a nation from a low income to a high income group. But care has to be taken
that rehabilitation and resettlement schemes are well suited to the needs of the displaced
population.
Key points from Panel 6 :          Public Provision of Land Information: Registry and Cadastre

In West Bengal, Land Information System has three distinct divisions, i.e. (a) cadastral map (b)
Record of rights (c) registration of conveyance instruments for transfer of land and mortgages.
While cadastral map and record of rights are prepared by the Land and Land Reforms
Department, registration of deed of conveyance for transfer of land and mortgages is
administered by the Finance Department.

The Bengal Tenancy Act 1885 for the first time provided the legal basis for preparation of
revenue village maps following the method of cadastral survey. On the basis of such maps the
records of rights were prepared. The RoRs contained particulars relating to each tenant or

13 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
occupant of the land or sharecropper, the name of each tenants or occupant’s landlord ,
classification and quantity of land of each tenant etc. The RoRs were revised in the fifties under
the WBEA Act, 1953. Revision of RoRs was again taken up in 1975 under the WBLR Act, 1955,
and is not complete yet in respect of all the mouzas of the state.

The formalization of land possession in rural areas under the provisions of WBLR act was taken
up to settle vested land with landless and land poor, and sharecroppers up to one acre if the
person together with member of family owns less than one acre. Homestead land is also settled
under the appropriate provision up to 0.08 acre. Priority has been given to the persons
belonging to SC, ST etc. and such rights are heritable but not transferable. Till October 2012, a
total of 11.41 lakh acres of land has been distributed benefitting 31.41 lakh persons.
Formalization of land possession was also done under the provisions of Homestead Act 1975 up
to the extent of 0.08 acres. Till date the families benefitted under this provision is about 3.26
lakhs. The government has taken up homestead allocation to absolute landless poor by
implementation of schemes (NGNB) under which land may be purchased at market price or
distribution of vested land fit for homestead.

The tenants within the city of Kolkata (first 100 wards) and Howrah municipal area known as
thika tenants and tenants existing in the urban areas beyond the city of Kokata known as non-
agricultural tenants did not enjoy well-protected rights before 1949. Thika Tenancy Act and
Non-Agricultural Tenancy Act, 1949 between them covering all the urban areas of West Bengal
provided for more secure rights to the tenants of urban areas. Their rights were made more
secure by the later Acts.

In the year 1990 West Bengal started digitizing the record of rights. Presently the RoRs are
completely digitized except those of 1473 odd revenue villages of three districts. Those records
are expected to be completed within a short period of time. The digitized maps and records of
rights are being updated and managed by software named “Bhuchitra”. The map data and
textual data of records of rights are available in website http://www.banglarbhumi.gov.in, which
can be accessed by the interested citizens

West Bengal is first State to integrate digitized cadastral maps with related RoR. The State has
recently amended sec. 50(2) of West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 to facilitate e-delivery of
land records by affixing digital signature. West Bengal has rolled out ‘over the counter’
Information services to provide copy of RoR, Plot Information and Plot Map from counter
within 5-15 minutes through process re-engineering. This has enhanced speed of service delivery
to great extent.

Analysis of the existing mechanism for recognition of rights over land, clearly indicate that there
are robust laws and procedure for formalization of land possession by poor. But,
implementation of process for formal recognition of possession needs to be more transparent.
Appropriate steps need to be taken for ensuring that RoRs are recorded as soon as the patta is
granted to the land-poor families.

As a step to reduce large scale evasion of stamp duty particularly by the poor people in rural area
primarily due to high rate of stamp duty, the panel recommended for the reduction in the stamp
duty to ensure that each property transfer is registered.

State Government has enacted West Bengal Rights to Public Service Act 2013 to establish
service standard and ensure providing service as per established service standard. Under this
Act, officials failing to give service as per standard will be punished. It has been recommended
by the panel that the service standard for all services needs to be established and notified and
service should be ensured. For this purpose, skilled manpower strength should be increased and
investments in modern infrastructure need to be made. A proper mechanism should be put in
place to monitor service delivery standard. However, the shortcoming that needs mention is that
14 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
RoR has not been maintained update by incorporating all the changes as a result of transfer,
inheritance etc., that have taken place since the revision of RoRs. Attempt was made to simplify
the process of mutation in 2009. However, the process is still not simple. Moreover, the tone
and tenor of the existing procedure suggests that the entire responsibility rests with the
transferees or successors. The government overlooks the obligation cast upon it by section 50 of
WBLR Act to keep the record up-to-date, steps should be taken immediately to make a special
drive to record the changes that have taken place.
Key points from Panel 7 :          Land Valuation and Taxation

The levy and collection of stamp duty and registration fees during the land/ property transfer
are regulated under the Indian Stamp (IS) Act, 1899 and the Indian Registration (IR) Act, 1908
and the Rules framed there under as applicable in West Bengal.

West Bengal Municipal Act 1993 provides guidelines about the power to levy Property Tax on
lands and buildings within the areas of urban local bodies (ULBs). Property tax is one of the
main sources of internal revenue of the ULBs. Provisions have been made to determine such
property tax on the basis of a formula. But such tax (annual) shall not exceed 30% of the annual
value of the land or building concerned.

At present in West Bengal the market value of any property (land, building) is determined
through the system of the Computerisation of Registration of Documents (CORD) software
started in the year 2000. The West Bengal Stamp (Prevention of Under-Valuation of
Instruments) Rules 2001 was introduced with effect from 1.3.2001. In the changed scenario of
computerisation, the process of determination of market value has been changed accordingly
and a digitised market value database covering all the plots under the jurisdiction of the
registering officer has been installed and interlinked with CORD software. The digitised market
values are periodically revised according to the field situation. In November 2011 online
assessment of market value and e-payment of stamp duty and registration fees have been
introduced. The discretion used in determination of property tax base and rate as in the present
system should be reduced. Market Value Data Base (MVDB) for all registration offices has been
prepared and is used for assessment of market value by CORD. Predefined appreciation and
depreciation factors were incorporated in CORD for use with MVDB during such assessment to
avoid subjectivity in assessment of market value. The system is now working in all 241
registration offices of the state in a PPP model with three technical support providing private
partners

Property tax is one of the main sources of internal revenue of the ULBs. Since enactment of the
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1923, two systems of assessment of lands and buildings are followed in
the Urban Local Bodies, namely Annual Rental Value (ARV) System and Capital Value Method.
With growing rate of urbanization and change in the socio-economic scenario the flaws in these
two systems are being surfaced that makes the system of assessment of lands and buildings
more complex.

The panel discussions indicated that there is a need for coordination among the different layers
of the government in use of Market Value Data Base (MVDB) in CORD not only for the purpose
of collection of stamp-duty revenue/registration fee as currently done, but also for calculation of
base of property/land tax and land revenue.

The panel also recommends reduction of stamp duty in respect of transfer of lands between the
poor people who in recent times are avoiding registration because of pre-determined high rate
of stamp duty not based on actual prices at which transactions take place between the poor.
Key points from Panel 8 :          Dispute Resolution


15 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Since resolution of dispute by the civil courts being procedure-bound is time-consuming and
costly the WBLR Act has barred jurisdiction of civil courts in virtually all matters dealt with in
the Act. The mechanism of dispute resolution is this – the disputes either between the raiyats, or
between the government and the raiyats are decided by the revenue officers as primary
authorities. Appeals lie before the DLLRO or the other senior officers designated and appointed
for the purpose of hearing appeals. Against the decisions of the appellate authority aggrieved
party may approach the LRTT. The decision of the Tribunal can be challenged before the
Division Bench of the High court earmarked for this purpose. West Bengal LRTT was created in
1997 under the West Bengal Land Reforms & Tenancy Tribunal Act 1997, which started
functioning in 1999 for expediting disposal of disputes under six specified Acts, including the
WBEA Act 1953 and WBLR Act, 1955. This was done in pursuance to the amendment of the
Constitution of India and insertion of Article 323B. The Tribunal has so far disposed of in
addition the original applications filed before it 30000 cases transferred to it from the High
Court.

In order to augment the speed of disposal of record correction cases, mainly mutation cases by
the revenue authorities, it is recommended that, a system should be introduced for interlinking
the two departments so that simultaneous updation of Land Records can be done when any
transfer is executed (through the Registration Department). This is possible in West Bengal as
Land Records maintained by the Revenue Department (i.e. the Land Reforms Dept.) have all
been computerized, and the functioning of the Land Registration Department has also been fully
computerized. The bridging between the two systems will keep the records updated and thereby
reduce the scope of disputes in this sphere to the minimum. The cost of litigation borne by the
litigant varies from court to court. In cases before the Revenue Authorities, the cost of both the
litigant and the Government is minimal, as the litigant can plead his case in person or through
his representative, who may be a lawyer.

However, in Civil Courts, a litigant has to bear a considerable amount of cost towards the fees of
lawyers for pleading his case. Poor litigants may take the help of Legal Aid Services, but the
prevailing system in the State does come to much of help for them
Key Points from Panel 9 :          Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies

Board of Revenue, the apex administrative body, which was active in colonial state formation
during the company period, played a crucial role in revenue management prior to the
departmentalization of state affairs. In the year 1996-97 Board of Revenue was abolished and
merged with Land & Land Reforms Department.

The L&LR Department deals with land issues and as custodian of all government lands acts as a
coordinator when any situation arises for allotment of any government land to any department
or any public body for public purpose. At the district level this coordination is done by the
DLLRO who is also an Additional District Magistrate and Additional Collector.

The land policy of West Bengal may be inferred from the existing legislations. All activities
relating to land and land reforms and acquisition of land are carried out in this state under the
unifying command of the Land & Land Reforms Department and this department makes laws
and formulates policies for land administration. All activities are to be carried out in accordance
with relevant Acts, Rules made there under and Land & Land Reforms Manual and Land
acquisition Manual. The Directorate of Land Records and Surveys is the main agency through
which all the provisions of the WBLR Act are implemented. So, there is hardly any scope of
overlapping in land and land reforms administration in the state and land acquisition under any
LA Act is done by the Collector of the district as an agent of the state government in the land
reforms department.



16 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The different government departments or public bodies like municipalities, panchayats etc.
maintain inventories of land owned and managed by them but the records are not updated on a
regular basis. The land properties belonging to the public bodies are not recorded in the r-o-r
maintained in the office of the BLLRO. In order to ensure the maintenance of the information
related to land rights, the panel recommended that a drive needs to be initiated by the
government for ensuring all the land properties being physically verified, records and registers
updated jointly in collaboration with the L&LR department and field offices.

In dealing with land matters, no formal mechanism to ensure coordination has been set up.
Processes of dealing with land by different agencies are not regulated by the same set of rules,
manuals and administrative orders. Hence there remains scope for differences of processes and
procedures followed for dealing with land by different public institutions.

Most of the land related major Acts in West Bengal were enacted much before ecology and
environment issues came in the development discourse in a strident way. In November 2005
West Bengal government promulgated the landmark environmental notification, the East
Kolkata Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Ordinance (enactment in 2006) to
safeguard the 12,500 hectares (comprising 46% water body and 39% agricultural land) fragile
wetland located in the eastern fringes of the city of Kolkata. Moreover, the agenda of disaster
risk reduction has to be incorporated in collaboration and consultation with the Disaster
Management Department while preparing the land use maps under the direct supervision of the
L&LR Department.

Considering all the issues related to an effective and efficient land governance system in West
Bengal, the panel recommended that the L&LR department should have a better human
resource infrastructure by way of filling up of the large vacancies in field offices along with a
policy for staff capacity development equipping the HR for improved and citizen-friendly service
delivery.




17 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
WEST BENGAL POLICY MATRIX

Issues                                                                         recommendations                                                          responsible   Monitoring indicator
     1.   Rural land records are not updated regularly and often lack          1.1 Identify & implement on a priority basis, cost-effective ways of     L&LR          % of records verified and
          spatial reference; insufficient coordination between                     verification & updating textual records based on ground reality                    updated
          departments                                                          1.2 Develop and implement mechanism for continued updating of                          % of records identified
                                                                                   textual and spatial records, also to overcome need for special                     on maps
Tenural rights are fully recognized (West Bengal Land Reforms Act,                 drives/ mission modes. Develop a comprehensive program to                          % of area mapped with
1955; West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural                   accomplish this in a specified and realistic time frame                            land holder identified
Labourers, Artisans and Fishermen Act, 1975, West Bengal Thika                 1.3 Assess the resource requirements for record maintenance,                           % of area mapped with
Tenancy Act, 2001) but gap in implementation,. Sharecroppers legislation           verification and resurvey, and requirements for sustainability                     land holder identified
allows recording names in ROR and effective (72% perceived more                    (such as changes in fee structure).                                                having documentation of
tenure security in 2003). Tenure insecurity for some group                     1.4 Establish task force to identify and codify all customary rights                   tenure (gender
rights/customary rights; restriction on tribal land transfers not respected.       and ensure protection under law                                                    disaggregated)
ROR not updated on a regular basis and pending mutation; Faulty records        1.5 Expedite the recording of names of bargadars who are still not
due to non-participation or absence of the parties during the relevant             included in government record
stages of preparation of land records – will cause disputes.. Land
properties belonging to the public bodies not recorded in the ROR.
Digitalization/computerization of records and maps is almost completed
with all information available through website or through OTC services
paying very minimal charges; Ongoing updating cadastral maps and
record of rights of 1473 revenue villages (under WBLR Act, 1975. Fee
structures for different kind of land administration services are not
rational, transparent and do not match with high cost of government
service.
2. Urban land records are incomplete and not spatially referenced;             1.1 Establish a base map for all cities, using existing information as   Revenue       % of area mapped with
High level of buildings is constructed in violation with urban                     much as possible; establish a common spatial data infrastructure     Authorities   land holder identified
regulations                                                                        focusing on maintenance and updating of records.                     ULB           having documentation of
                                                                               1.2 Define workflows and responsibilities for urban land                               tenure (gender
High number of plots have no records.. Constructions of many buildings             management, records maintenance, building permits and                              disaggregated)
are violating the prescribed norms; The state does not have a policy to            monitoring/enforcement, re-engineer where possible
deal with informal tenureship in urban areas                                   1.3 Clearly assign institutional responsibilities, assess resource
                                                                                   requirements and identify gaps, in order to arrive at systems that
                                                                                   are effective and sustainable.
                                                                               1.4 Review laws and systems in place for formalization of urban
                                                                                   housing .
3 Records are not updated automatically and not all transactions               3.1 Strengthen system for interlinking/bridging registration and         L&LR          Ratio of textual to spatial
registered                                                                         mutation so that simultaneous updating of Land Records can be                      records
Cost of recording of property transfer is very high and evasion of stamp           done when any transfer is executed (through the Registration                       Ration Registered vs.
duty is particularly common amongst the rural poor. Record of rights also          Department). This is possible in West Bengal as Land Records                       mutated transactions
does not reflect the real ground situation due to time lag between                 maintained by the Revenue Department (i.e. the Land Reforms
registration and mutation. Not all encumbrances are recorded                       Dept.) have all been computerized, and the functioning of the
                                                                                   Land Registration Department has also been fully

18 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                                                                   computerized. The bridging between the two systems will keep
                                                                                   the records updated and thereby reduce the scope of disputes to
                                                                                   the minimum.
                                                                               3.2 Reduce stamp to encourage that all property transfers are
                                                                                   registered.

4. legal and administrative opportunities to enhance women’s access            4.1 Review effectiveness existing policies and explore                  L&LR          Share of ROR held by
to land are not used sufficiently                                                  opportunities for amendments to enhance women’s access to                         women
                                                                                   land ( e.g. awareness raising legal rights women; reconsider                      Share of pattas issued to
Less than 15% of land recorded to physical persons is recorded in the              opening cases land grants without joint titles; mandatory                         women
name of women either individually or jointly. This is despite the range of         recording women names in ROR -partitionable joint rights or                       (share of women holding
policies in place to enhance women’s access to land. WB Government                 sole rights-; priority allocation of land to ST women requiring                   land?)
policy is to issue patta (deed of title) in the name of women or joint patta       amendment of WBLR Act, 1955; exemption/ reductions
(both in the name of wife and husband) for distribution homestead plot,            payable land revenue; stamp duty, land and property tax;
although joint patta records are not maintained individually. More than        4.2 Introducing ‘gender’ parameter in recording of information in
90% of pattas were issued in the name of women between 2011-2014.                  Record of Rights to help tracking of progress with respect to
                                                                                   women land rights.
                                                                               4.3 Promote representation women working on NTFP in the Large
                                                                                   Sized Multipurpose Cooperative Societies (LAMPS) through
                                                                                   West Bengal Tribal Development Cooperative Corporation
                                                                                   (WBTDCC)
5    Effectiveness of public land redistribution for eligible poor and         5.1             Identify available land for redistribution as well as   L&LR          % of area mapped with
     the actual possession for granted public land needs strengthening             the number of land- or homeless who could benefit from land         Local govt.   land holder identified
                                                                                   distribution.                                                                     having documentation of
West Bengal policy is to use public land for allocation of homestead plots     5.2            Ensure that all patta-holders who have been allotted                   tenure (gender
to absolute landless and homeless through legislation and government               land have updated land record (RoR) issued in their names                         disaggregated)
schemes giving preference to women, ST and SC. Government scheme                   including women’s names                                                           % land less ness/
Nijo-Griho-Nijo-Bhumi Prakalpa in Oct 2011 (My Home My Land                    5.3            Monitor use and land transfer of land distributed to                   homestead less
scheme) to settle 5.5 lac landless poor and provide up to 0.05 acre.               poor beneficiaries’ u/s 49(1) of WBLR Act
3,26,653 persons have been given land with raiyati status creating             5.4            Develop effective steps to ensure continued
equivalent number of tenures; Distribution of ceiling surplus land to              possession and effective use of land that has been redistributed
ST/SC 31,36,297 persons (aug 2013). Data indicate that patta has been              to eligible marginal groups
granted to 3141232 persons but 2457347 (78%) patta recipients are              5.5            Identify landless poor people occupying a homestead
recorded in the RoRs and more importance is to be given to security of             through time bound survey and issue patta;
tenure by including it as one of the objectives of JNNURM.                     5.6            Consider extension of benefits to the eligible persons
                                                                                   occupying homestead land after 26th June 1975, by amending
                                                                                   the West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for
                                                                                   Agricultural Labourers, Artisans and Fishermen Act 1975.
                                                                               5.7            Review strategy for tenure upgrading in informal
                                                                                   settlements; increase effectiveness and efficiency




19 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
6    Lack of clarity in assignment of institutional responsibility for        6.1 Full implementation FRA rules and process to protect rights          Forestry      % of land mapped
     forestland and tribal land prevents assigning ownership,                     tribal peoples and improve synergy between FRA and JFMC              department    identified as CPR/public
                                                                              6.2 prepare cadastral maps and records of rights for forest villages /   GP            land + management
There are 126 non – revenue forest mouzas in the state, 126 chitmahal             126 non-revenue forest mouzas and common lands in forests;                         responsibilities clearly
mouzas (enclaves in Bangladesh) and 22 diluvated mouzas in South 24           6.3 Define responsibilities and workflows involved in forest land                      identified (CPR or not)
Parganas district which are not surveyed and recorded creating gap in             management and assignment of ownership/CPR rights and re-
recognizing the rights of people. Common land within forest areas is not          engineer where possible; synchronize records maintenance
clearly identified. Tribal land alienation continues with high level of non       between Forest Department and L & LR Department;
ST communities in forest villages.
Recent improvements in implementation of Scheduled Tribe and Other
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Rights) Act, 2006; Non-
Forest Tree Act in 2006; National Forest Policy, 1988; around 4000 Joint
Forest Management Committees (JFMC) formed and functioning
protecting nearly 500,000 hectares of degraded forest area, but JFCM not
legally recognised; Under FRA are 30,879 individual and 312
Community tenures create. Forest Department administration well
organised but information gap with revenue department.
7    Urban development and expansion is unplanned and reactive,               7.1 Regular updating of urban land use and creation of data base to      ULB           % of urban land with
     with infrastructure put in place afterwards                                  record the changes in use                                                          claimant identified/
                                                                              7.2 Review the justification for restrictions on urban land use,                       documented evidence
An urban land use policy does not exist although a legal framework is in          ownership and transferability, eliminate those that do not serve
place for urban development and decentralized planning (West Bengal               any useful purpose and improve enforcement.
Town and Country (Planning and Development) Act, 1979 and West                7.3 Develop and maintain databases that allow for routine and
Bengal Municipal Act, 1993 (as amended in 2007) W.B. District Planning            effective implementation of land use restrictions. Simplification
Committee Act 1994, and W.B. Metropolitan Planning Committee Act                  of rules governing the permission of a change in use and narrow
1994 along with the W.B. District Planning Committee Rules 1994). All             the discretion of government officials in authenticating such
127 Municipal bodies/ cooperations have draft development plan with               changes.
support Kolkata Urban Services for the Poor (KUSP). Policy for low cost       7.4 Review and assess the resource requirements for town planning;
housing and services exists but implementation not clear; Planned 1,              urban development and design strategy to address capacity
58,000 dwelling units under BSUP 58% completed; for IHSDP, planned                constraints;
52,000 dwelling units 83% completed                                           7.5 Review implementation low-cost housing policy and accelerate
                                                                                  the implementation of Rajib Awas Yojna (RAY).
8. Public lands not protected nor managed effectively; Transfer of            8.1 Identification and recording remaining public lands, and             L&LR          Share of land in different
public land to private investors does not always serve growth and                 establish unified system for land possessed by different State /     FD            categories mapped with
contribute to inequity and conflict                                               Central Government Departments and Public Sector                     WBIDC         ownership and use rights
                                                                                  Corporations                                                         WBIIDC        clearly assigned
Most public land is not clearly identified on the ground nor on maps; The     8.2 Making public land database easily accessible and interpretable      WBISC         No. disputes filed over
amount of land at the disposal of the L&LR Department differs from                and enabling syncing of public land information across spatial       Local         land acquisition
amount of land in ROR with discrepancies particularly around public land          and textual records along with ground situation                      governments
settled with poor people (Section 49(1) of WBLR Act 1955) and land            8.3 Inventory of land that has been privatized following
settled through lease with private individuals and institutions; Huge             encroachment and Restoration of Govt lands fraudulently
quantum of government land in urban areas is encroached.                          settled with private persons
Policies and procedures are in place for allotment public land to private     8.4 Develop State Land Use and zoning policy for rural and urban

20 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
parties (Land Allotment Policy document through issuance of                        land, identifying viable land for distribution to poor, zoning of
Administrative Order (No. 6686 – LP/1A-18/ 2012 dated 26 December                  industrial areas, protect remaining public land and assign
2012; publicly available guidelines on procedure of transfer of land to            responsibilities for implementation and monitoring
private investors, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme (R&R                8.5 Review and streamline responsibilities and procedures and
Scheme), 2011). Total area of land transferred to other departments is             assess resource requirements for every department having
132,675.33 acres till Dec 2013. However, lack of transparency in                   public land and legal responsibility for safeguarding public
allocating public land to private parties; information is not made publicly        property, prevent and remove encroachment, improve
available; lack of clarity on paying compensation. Multiple agencies               coordination; consider identifying a nodal agency from both
involved in public land management like WBIDC, WBIIDC, WBSIDC in                   state and central government for acquisitions involving both
addition to FD and L&LR dept. There is no avenue for coordination and              levels.
dispute prevention between central and state governments over large scale     8.6 Establish independent benefit assessment system needs to be
acquisition of land where the surface right transfer is dealt with by the          put in place so that maximum benefit can be accrued to the
state while sub-soil rights (e.g. coal mine) are considered by central             public.
government                                                                    8.7 Regular publication of transfers and lease/rent payment, which
                                                                                   also allows follow-up; Ensure that all allocations of public land
                                                                                   to private parties are uploaded in the departmental website to
                                                                                   maintain transparency (WBIDC is following this practice).
                                                                              8.8 Consider third party monitoring to ensure compliance of
                                                                                   contractual obligations by investor and grievance mechanisms
                                                                              8.9 Implement and enforce a rehabilitation and resettlement policy
                                                                                   Upgrading compliance parameters to global best practices
9. Improve tax collection and adjust land valuation procedures to             9.1 Identify and publicize revenue potential vs. actual collection for   ULB CVB   % Property tax
reflect real values                                                                all major cities; Review cost to government of exemption of                   collection/ potential by
                                                                                   taxes to various institutions and religious trusts                            municipalities
WB set up in 1979 a Municipal Finance Commission in 1979 and a                9.2 Improve recording of holdings and updating of records to
Central Valuation Board to overcome the deficiency of under valuation of           increase the revenue (see also 2)
properties in the municipal areas; All 239 registration offices are           9.3 Review and streamline procedures for tax collection assess
computerized and there is a clear and transparent process in determination         resource requirements to improve the administrative capacity;
of market value for property through CORD (Computerisation of                      and improve procedures to collect tax from defaulters, Take up
Registration of Documents) software. However, there is difference                  issue that substantial part of outstanding property tax are to be
between data in land valuation register maintained by the registering              paid by state and central departments and work out an
authorities and value at which land transaction takes place; updating of           acceptable solution for all the parties involved
the register is sporadic;                                                     9.4 Review coordination among the different layers of the
                                                                                   government updating/ using Market Value Data Base (MVDB)
In WB collection of property tax is regular (around 80%) and tax                   in CORD for collection of stamp-duty revenue/registration fee
collected exceeds costs. In particular government departments are not              and also for calculation of base of property/land tax and land
paying taxes that are due.                                                         revenue, also to reduce discretion in determination of tax base,
                                                                                   which is essential for a transparent and efficient tax regime
10. Enhance effectiveness of dispute resolution mechanisms and                10.1 Develop scheme for categorization/recording of disputes for all     Courts    For various courts/
develop monitoring capacity                                                        courts/instances so as to allow identification of                   LRTT      instances & categories of
There are huge numbers of piled up long pending cases in the State, but            legislative/regulatory bottlenecks, type of land dispute cases                disputes
WB has sufficient legislation for land dispute resolution (West Bengal             that are increasing and causes for slow disposal.                             -    Level of pending
Estates Acquisition Act, 1953; West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955,            10.2 Review and streamline procedures and identify steps towards                        land related

21 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
West Bengal Thika Tenancy Act, 2001, West Bengal Land Reforms &                      speedy disposal of cases by ROs, appellate authority and the           disputes
Tenancy Tribunal Act, 1997) The Land Reform Tenancy Tribunal                         LRTT by preventing unnecessary adjournment, timely                 -   No. of cases treated;
(LRTT) is in operation for quick disposal of conflicts.                              submission of proper records and papers by BLLRO, limit the        -   Length
Dispute resolution through Civil Court is very time consuming and                    number of dates for disposal allowed and reduce time span.
repeated adjournment in Civil Courts due to various reasons causes              10.3 Review and assess resource requirements to increase
unnecessary delay in disposal of cases; Cost of proceeding at Civil Court            effectiveness and efficiency of dispute resolution system
is relatively high which makes it less affordable by poor
11. Revision of Legislative and institutional framework to eliminate            11.1 Review justification for legal restrictions on land use,
outdated and ineffective sections, and update specific sections; and                 ownership and transferability, eliminate those that do not serve
improve institutional coordination, efficiency and effectiveness                     any useful purpose and improve enforcement and access to
                                                                                     legal services .(e.g. sale of land cultivated with barga; tribal
WB has comprehensive legislations embodying the policies on land.                    land alienation, community rights in forest villages)
However, land related legislations in the State have largely ignored            11.2 review, rationalize and streamline the administrative structure
ecological and environmental issues. There is no mechanism of tracking               for land administration; reduce discretions at all levels and
the progress of implementation of different policies by the public. Though           inventory of resource requirements and resource availability at
there is a well-defined reporting system on a regular basis within the               all levels
department but the information is not available to the public.
 As per legislation, institutional mandates relating to administration of
land is very clear in the State; The role and function of different layers of
L&LR Department is clearly defined; there is no scope of overlapping.
However, different public institutions deal with land-related matters quite
differently and there is lack of coordination in practice.




22 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
III.   Introduction
   Land governance refers to institutional and legal systems and procedures on ownership, use and
   transaction of land. The purpose of land governance is to ensure that the institutions, legal
   frameworks, process & procedures follow the principles of equity, efficiency, transparency and
   accountability as well as positively contribute to economic and social development, and
   environmental sustainability. Land governance assessment framework is a tool that captures the
   existing legal and institutional scenario of land governance on basis of the above principles, and
   points out where further action is necessary. Land governance assessment framework for West
   Bengal is no exception.

   A system of tenure explains how people, communities and others gain access to land, forests,
   and fisheries, and how those are regulated by societies. These tenure systems determine who can
   use what resources, for how long and under what conditions. Such systems may be either based
   on written policies and laws or on unwritten customs and practices. As environmental
   degradation and climate change reduce availability of land, forests and fisheries, tenure systems
   are put under pressure by world’s growing population and food security situation.

   The land situation in West Bengal is marked by three major characteristics, a) Very high
   population density, and skewed land mass ratio, compared to much of the rest of India; b) Large
   scale successful and enduring land reform by way of land redistribution to the landless and
   registering the sharecroppers as tillers on government records; and c) Very large population of
   marginal and small farmers and landless labourers, as well as urban landless. Thanks to
   successful land reforms, strong local governance institutions, and adaption of green revolution
   technologies, West Bengal has seen high growth in agricultural production for nearly two
   decades though now on decline giving rise to a new set of challenges on land governance.

   Land governance in West Bengal has four most remarkable features: a) government’s enduring
   commitment to pro-poor land reform, b) excellent progress on updation and digitization of land
   records, and c) presence of strong and capable land administration down to grass roots level, d)
   Well articulated laws and procedures of land governance except in a few emerging areas like
   environment .

   Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) is a diagnostic tool to assess the status of land
   governance at country level in a participatory process that draws systematically on local
   expertise and existing evidence rather than on outsiders. It is a global initiative developed by the
   World Bank in partnership with FAO, UN Habitat, IFAD, IFPRI, the African Union, and
   numerous bilateral partners. The exercise has been carried out or being carried out in around 35
   countries along with six states in India. In few countries like Brazil and India it is being carried
   out at sub-national level. For West Bengal, Landesa was assigned the responsibility of
   coordinating the entire exercise in the state under the overall supervision of the State Director
   (hereinafter referred to as the State Coordinator of LGAF).

   The process of LGAF studies is based on a well thought and tested methodology. A team of
   expert investigators and panel members from a wide range of sectors/stakeholders was selected
   for each of the nine panels by the State Coordinator of West Bengal. The team consisted of
   people who have vast and varied experiences of working on a specific set of land governance
   indicators in the State. The expert investigators conducted secondary research for their
   respective indicators and compiled relevant background studies (organized by indicators) and
   made them available to the panellists who ranked the indicators.
   Details of the findings from the secondary research by the Expert Investigators are presented in
   the background reports of each panel (as annexure). Initial ranking of the dimensions of each
   panel by the expert investigator followed by analysis and verification by panels of experts have
   been detailed in the assessment part of this report. Based on the findings from this exercise, a

   23 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
  synthesis report has been prepared which draws a conclusion from the study, spells out the
  strength and weakness of the state and prescribes policy recommendations for the state for
  better land governance in the future.



IV.   Methodology
  The entire LGAF process has been guided by a framework of land governance indicators that
  cover five thematic areas and relate to a basic principle of governance. There are 27 “land
  governance indicators” (LGI).Each indicator is further broken down into a number of
  “dimensions” with pre-coded statements that draw on global experience (on a scale from A to
  D). There are in total 116 dimensions in the LGAF.

  Nine expert panels organized by subject ranked the dimensions by selecting an appropriate
  answer among the list of pre-coded answers. The panel deliberations were based on preparatory
  data gathered and analysis by the expert investigator. In the final row, each panel provided
  policy recommendations following the.

  There are nine panels as listed below. All expert investigators were invited for panel nine. This
  panel finalized the tenure typology and institutional map, and supported preparation of the first
  draft of the policy matrix.

  Panel 1       Land Tenure Recognition
  Panel 2       Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations
  Panel 3       Urban Land Use, Planning, and Development
  Panel 4       Public Land Management
  Panel 5       Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Private Investors
  Panel 6       Public Provision of Land Information: Registry and Cadastre
  Panel 7       Land Valuation and Taxation
  Panel 8       Dispute Resolution
  Panel 9       Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies

  The steps followed for LGAF implementation in West Bengal can be summarized as follows:

      (i) Selection and contracting of the state coordinator. For West Bengal, the State Director
          of Landesa was engaged through the organization as state coordinator (October 2013)

      (ii) Inception Phase conducted by state coordinator– October 2013
               Framework review (indicators/ dimensions) and review of definitions used
               Resource planning;
               Identification expert investigators and panel composition
               Preparation of land tenure typology and institutional map of land agencies.

  The Expert Investigators with in-depth subject knowledge, substantial experience were
  identified from various fields. Panellists were identified from a diverse field of expertise with
  sound subject knowledge. These individuals included senior technical officials, NGO
  representatives, civil society and academics. Each panel has 4 to a maximum of 8 members

      (iii)Panel Background Reports (expert investigators and state coordinator) – October 2013
           – February 2014
               Collection of detailed qualitative and quantitative background information;
                  expert analysis
               Preparation of briefing note for each of the nine panel

  24 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        (iv) Panels discussions – February 2014 – April 2014
                 Panels sessions with specialists from different backgrounds who rank
                    dimensions;
                 Aide memoires are prepared after each panel

        (v) Draft Report (State Coordinator) - April 2014
                LGAF report
                Score card
                Policy matrix
                Review of report

        vi)Technical Validation Workshop and Policy Dialogue (state coordinator) – June 2014
                Validation of findings, rankings, policy matrix
                Discussion of action points
                Develop plan for follow-up action

The State Coordinator took every possible step for having government buy-in in the process. He
maintained close collaboration with the designated State Nodal Officer (Director of Land
Records & Surveys) all through the process for support and guidance.

Organizing the Panel Sessions

(i)        Once the panellists were identified and informed about their selection, depending on
           their availability the dates were finalized for discussions. In case of three panels there
           were more than one discussion sessions.
(ii)       All panellists were given the panel LGAF briefing note, background note on the context
           and dimension analysis at least five days prior to meeting.
(iii)      The panel sessions were moderated by State Coordinator. Landesa office staff assistances
           was used to organize the panels and for taking notes.
(iv)       The discussions started with an introduction of the LGAF objective and way of working.
           The second part of the session provided panellists with a comprehensive overview of the
           indicators and dimensions.
(v)        The analysis and assessment started with an introduction to the indicator and the results
           of the background analysis. Subsequently each of the dimensions was analysed one by
           one. Participants presented ranking followed by deliberations consensus on final
           ranking, and formulating policy recommendation.

The Draft Report and Policy Matrix

A synthesized draft report has been prepared by the State Coordinator to summarize the LGAF
indicator and dimension findings and policy recommendations. Policy recommendations from
the panel deliberations are formulated into a clear policy matrix. The policy recommendations
from the panel deliberations and other investigations are to be formulated into a clear policy
matrix that sets out policy recommendations in a form that can be readily communicated to
policy makers and other key stakeholders.

A state-level technical validation workshop will be organized to present and discuss the results
of the LGAF process with a technical group to: i) assure consistency of the results; ii) promote
integration of results through interaction between the different LGAF content areas; iii) discuss
and prioritize areas for policy reform; iv) propose next steps to provide sustainability to the
LGAF process. This is planned in the month of June 2014.



25 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Participants to the workshop will include a select number of panellists, complemented by public
officials and land experts brought from civil society organizations (academia, NGOs, private
sector organizations, practitioners in the land sector). To maintain the technical nature of the
workshop, invited participants should be selected for their knowledge and expertise in the land
sector.

Quality Assurance

The State Coordinator has been supported and whenever needed guided by a Technical Advisory
Group (TAG) at national level consisting of panel wise experts. The TAG maintained close
relationship with the SC and all the background notes and dimension analyses for each panel
developed by the EIs were reviewed by the TAG experts. The TAG Coordinator also ensured that
the LGAF was implemented in a standardized way to guarantee consistency and comparability.

.




26 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
V.   General State Context
 West Bengal state is located at the Latitude 23° 00' N and Longitude 87° 00' E. The state is
 situated on the eastern part of India, stretching from the Himalayas in the north to the Bay of
 Bengal in the south. The state has a total area of 88,752 square kilo meters (34,267 sq. mi). It is
 bounded by Sikkim and Bhutan on the north, by Nepal on the North West, by Bangladesh and
 Assam on the east, by Bihar, Jharkhand and Orissa on the west and south-west and by Bay of
 Bengal on the south. The northern part of the state is a hilly region. The narrow Terai region
 separates this region from the plains, which in turn transitions into the Ganges delta towards
 the south. The Rarh region intervenes between the Ganges delta in the east and the western
 plateau and high lands. A small coastal region is on the extreme south, while the Sundarbans
 mangrove forests form geographical area at the Ganges delta. It is the 4th largest state in terms of
 population having a total population of 91, 347,736 and population density of 1,029/sq.km. The
 state is 13th in terms of area and is divided into 19 districts. The capital city is Kolkata. The table
 below gives key demographic indicators and their comparison.

 Regional differences are visible in the climate. In the western plateau region, rainfall is low and
 variations in temperature are more common; maritime influence in the coastal region makes the
 climate here moderate and pleasant. The summer temperatures in the state ranges between
 26 °C (79 °F) and 40 °C (104 °F) while the winter temperatures range from 13 °C (55 °F) to 19 °C
 (66 °F). The rainy season stretches from July to the end of September. During this period, the
 South-West Monsoons pick up moisture from the Bay of Bengal and blow over the state. Most of
 the annual average rainfall of 175 cm about 125 cm occurs during this period. Heavy rainfall of
 above 250 cm is observed in the Darjeeling, Jalpaiguri and Cooch Behar district.

       Sr. No   Indicators                               Unit              West Bengal         India
         01     Geographical Area                    Lakh Sq. Km              0.88            32.87
         02     Population                              Crore                 9.13            121.02
         03     Decadal Growth Rate                   Percentage             13.93             17.64
         04     Density of Population             Population/Sq. KM          1029               382
         05     Urban to total Population             Percentage             31.89             31.16
         06     Sex Ratio                        Females/1000 Males           947               940
         07     Literacy Rate                         Percentage             77.08            74.04
       Source: Census India, 2011

 The state has been experiencing a steady economic growth. When India has grown by 6.48
 percent, West Bengal has grown by 6.55 percent as per Central Statistical Organization (CSO)
 report published on 18th August, 2012. Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP growth in West
 Bengal was higher than the National Average for 2011-12. Growth rate in National Average of
 GDP at Current Prices in 2011-12 was 15.02%, while Growth Rate in GDP in West Bengal for the
 same period was 15.87%. Growth rate in National Average of GD Pat Constant Prices in 2011-12
 was 6.48%, while Growth Rate in GDP in West Bengal for the same period was 6.55%. Similarly,
 the growth rate in Per Capita Net Domestic Product at Current Prices for 2011-12 for West
 Bengal was 14.86% as against the National Average of 13.64% during the same period.




 27 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                 Particular                               Unit          2009-10       2010-11      2011-12
Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP)                        Rs.
                                                          Crore
Constant (2004-05) Prices                                               296843        317785       340234
Current Prices                                                          405547        473890       549876
Economic Growth Rate as per GSDP                         Percent
Constant Prices                                                           8.0           7.2             6.5
Current Prices                                                            16.6          17.1           15.8
Per Capita Income                                           Rs.
Constant Price (2004-05)                                                 30372         32228           34229
Current Price                                                            41837         48536           55864
Source: Economic Review


Land Issue in West Bengal

The land situation in West Bengal is marked by three major characteristics, a) Very high
population density, and adverse land man ratio, compared to much of the rest of India, b) Large
scale successful and enduring land reform by way of land redistribution to the landless and
registering the sharecroppers as tillers on government records, and c) Very large population of
marginal and small farmers and landless labourers, as well as urban landless (Source
Agricultural Survey of India 2011).
As per the latest (2011) Agricultural Census findings, the state has 82.16% marginal farmers (up
to one ha), 13.76% of small farmer (between 1-2 ha), total number of operational holding is
71,23,000 and total arable land is 55,10,000 ha out of total area of 88,87,540 ha.
Thanks to successful land reforms, strong local governance institutions, and adaption of green
revolution technologies, West Bengal has seen high growth in agricultural production for nearly
two decades which is now on the wane giving rise to a new set of challenges on land governance.
The table shown below will depict the augmentation in growth of food production in the state.


                                    Food Grain Yield in West Bengal
                          Sl. No.       Year           Quantity (Kg per hectare)
                              1         1961                     1072
                             2          1965                      1117
                             3           1971                    1224
                             4          1975                     1182
                              5         1981                     1358
                             6          1985                     1538
                              7         1991                     1735
                             8          1995                     2077
                             9          2001                     2231
                            10          2005                      2511
                          Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Govt. of India

Land governance in West Bengal has four most remarkable features: a) government’s enduring
commitment to pro-poor land reform, b) excellent progress on updation and digitization of land
records, and c) presence of strong and capable land administration down to grass roots level, d)
well-articulated laws and procedures of land governance except a few emerging areas like
environmental issues. However, there are some areas where further improvements are possible
and doable, as this assessment would show.
A few overarching land governance issues are:


28 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       Despite appropriate laws, the culture and practice of ignoring women’s land rights issue
        has not received policy focus as it deserves and hence remains unchanged. This could be
        possibly attributed to traditional and customary practices prevalent in rural society. The
        belief is that steps to ensure land rights for women has the potential of not only
        unlocking a number of social and economic barriers of development but achieving wider
        social equity also.
       From the efficiency perspective, dynamic land use plans and proactive initiatives from
        various departments, local self-governments for better public land management will help
        bring improved land governance.
       From the transparency perspective, there is scope to improve public participation and
        other transparency measures in various land governance indicators.

Land Governance:

Land governance refers to institutional and legal systems and procedures on ownership, use and
transaction of land. The purpose of land governance is to ensure that the institutions, legal
frameworks, and process & procedures follow the principles of equity, efficiency, transparency
and accountability as well as positively contribute to economic and social development, and
environmental sustainability.

Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) is an important tool in the time for ensuring
proper management of land. It captures the existing legal and institutional scenario of land
governance on the basis of above principles, and points out where further action is necessary.
Land governance assessment framework for West Bengal is no exception.

The LGAF is organized in the prescribed format given by the World Bank to ensure
comparability among states and countries. The inception report being the first document in this
assessment is presented below. It may be mentioned that this is a draft report which will be
refined subsequently through further research and panel discussions.

LAND TENURE TYPOLOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL MAPPING, WEST BENGAL

Historical background of Bengal’s land tenure system

The British East India Company received from Shah Alam, the Mughal Emperor, and the firman
of the Dewani of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa in 1776. In other words, the right to collect land
revenue and to conduct civil administration was conferred on the Company. After a long period
of trial and error in the matter of settlement of revenue with the zamindars land was settled for a
term of five years. As it did not work, it was replaced by the year to year settlement by auction. It
failed. Then the land was settled for 10 years known as decennial settlement.

Finally, Lord Cornwallis, after a lot of strident debate in India and the British Parliament,
introduced the feudal pattern of land tenure system in the above three provinces by converting
the decennial settlement into permanent settlement by Permanent Settlement Regulation I of
1793.

The feudal system of land tenure system introduced by Lord Cornwallis was nothing but a
continuation of the system introduced by Murshid Quli Khan. However, Cornwallis made a
mistake of giving proprietory right to the zamindars who were hitherto mere collectors of
revenue by depriving the cultivators who were hitherto virtually enjoying the peasant-
proprietorship.

The baneful consequences of Permanent Settlement on the rural society of the province are well
known. There was indiscriminate enhancement of rent, eviction etc. coupled with inhuman
29 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
torture upon the raiyats and the peasantry. As a means of mitigating the sufferings, the raiyats
were conferred with occupancy right through the Rent Act of 1859. Matters having not improved
much, the Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885 were passed, giving marginal relief to the raiyats. To
address the issue once for all, the government constituted a Land Revenue Commission presided
over by Sir Fancis Floud. The Commission, in 1940, made the revolutionary recommendation
that all rent-receiving interests in the land tenure system should be abolished and the tiller of
the soil brought directly under the state. Due to outbreak of war no further action on the
Commission’s report could be taken except constituting a committee called Bengal
Administrative Reforms Committee. The committee accepted the views of the Floud
Commission. But further action on the recommendations had to await India’s Independence in
1947.

The Legal Framework

In the debate on the rights to property in the Constituent Assembly it was decided to abolish
zamindary and impose a ceiling on agricultural land. The Constitution of India having adopted
the doctrine of eminent domain made provisions for acquisition of estates and all pre-existing
rights therein.

In the post-Independence era the first Act to be enacted in the domain of land tenure was the
Bargadar’s Act, 1950. This Act for the first time provided for specifying the share of produce
between a share-cropper and his landlord, and restricted eviction of bargadars. The West Bengal
Land Reforms Act 1955 incorporated many of its provisions, and thus the Bargadar’s Act 1950
was repealed.

Then came two reform Acts, namely the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 and the West
Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 were enacted. These two Acts taken together provided the legal
frame work for carrying out agrarian reforms, reforms in tenure and tenancy structure, revenue
administration, land management, preparation of land register [record-of-rights] etc.

Main stream raiyati-tenure:

West Bengal as a constituent state of the Union of India was curved in 1947 out of the then
province of Bengal. The state, therefore, inherited all Acts relating to regulation of land tenures,
revenue administration etc. from the mother province.
In 1885 the British Government passed the landmark Bengal Tenancy Act which divided all
those who held lands into two classes – landlords and tenants. The proprietors including
government were the landlords and those who held land under them were tenants. The tenants
were divided into different classes, the tenure pattern thus stood as under:

                                     Land Tenure Pattern
                                          (Pre-reform)
                        State Government / Collector [on behalf of the state]

      State

                     Proprietor
                                        Tenure Holder

                                                              Under
                                                              Tenure
                                                              Holders              Rayat


                                                            Holder                                Under Rayat

30 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The government used to settle huge tracts of land with the proprietors in lieu of revenue. They,
in their turn, would let out the lands at their disposal to a number of tenure holders in lieu of
rent. If necessary, they could retain a part of the land for their own use. This process was carried
downward till the person at the bottom of the ladder (under-raiyat) was reached. The land
holders between him and the state were intermediaries in the chain.

Under the EA Act, zamindary and all other rent receiving interests were abolished with effect
from 15.04.1955, and a ceiling was also imposed. Those who retained land within the ceiling
limit became tenants directly under the state. Thus the erstwhile proprietor and under-raiyat at
the lowest rung were brought on the same platform – tenants under the state, now called
raiyats. The changed scenario is shown in the diagram below:

                                        Land Tenure Pattern



Pre-reform structure                                                  Post-reform structure


Government (state)                                                        Government (state)



 Proprietor



Tenure – holder



Under tenure – holder



   Raiyat                                                                      Raiyat




Under-raiyat

As a result of this structural change, the status of proprietors, tenure holders etc. were relegated
and the status of under-raiyats rose to that of a raiyat. Now under the LR Act whoever holds
land for any purpose whatsoever is a raiyat whose right is heritable and transferrable.

In West Bengal, there is extensive incidence of another category of rural tenures held by
cultivators who are known as share-croppers or crop sharers. In local parlance they are known
by various names but the most commonly used term is Bargadar. A share cropper is a person
who cultivates the land of another person on condition of delivering a share of the produce to
the latter. The share cropper has the right of cultivation. He is often referred to as a pseudo
31 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
tenant or an informal tenant. For the purpose of this report we will treat him as a holder of
tenure which, for all intents and purposes, he is.

Categorization of new classes of post reform raiyti-tenures:

In addition to the raiyati-tenures some other forms of tenures have been created in course of
time. Such tenures are categorized as under: -

1.     Category 1                 through distribution of Government lands to the landless and the near
                                  landless under the West Bengal land Reforms Act, 1955.[Sec.49(1)]
2.     Category 2                 Occupiers of private land satisfying certain conditions, under the W.B.
                                  Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourers’, Artisans and
                                  fisherman Act, 1975 [Sec.7(i)]
3.     Category 3                 Sharecroppers occupying vested land under certain circumstances (WBLR
                                  Act) [Sec.14s] have become raiyats
4.     Category 4                 Non-agricultural tenants and under tenants through amendment of the
                                  W.B.L.R. Act.[Sec.3A(1)] have become raiyats
5.     Category 5                 Through delivery of documents of title in respect of forest land to the
                                  eligible forest dwellers under the Forest Protection Act, 1980.
6.     Category 6 (regularizing   Squatters on government land in urban and semi-urban areas by the
       the squatters)             Refugee, Relief and Rehabilitation Department of the state Government.

The squatters under the first two categories have been declared as raiyats without the right to
transfer their land. The rights of those coming under categories 5 and 6 have been stated in the
respective documents of settlement.

Building up of Land Tenure Typology:

Consequent upon the abolition of rent-receiving interests on land West Bengal’s land tenure
system has become very simple. All tenants called raiyats hold land directly under the state.
This is irrespective of whether the land is agricultural or non-agriculture in character or
otherwise and whether the holder of the land is an individual or an institution etc.

The law does not permit any raiyat to induct any tenant under him. In other words, sub-
infeudation is strictly prohibited. These facts have to be taken account while building up the
Land Tenure Typology of the state.




32 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
33 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
TYPOLOGY OF TENURE SITUATIONS
   Tenure Type           Area Population                          Legal recognition and                                  Overlaps and potential issues
                                                                       Characteristics
Raiyati– tenure                NA             Legal recognition: All tenures are legally recognized.
[main stream]                                                                                                       On transfer of tenures through sale
 (Rural)                                      Transferability: Transferable without any restriction. There       succession etc. the successors-in-interest do
                                              are certain conditions in regard to use: agricultural land to be   not always take interest in getting their names
                                              used for the purpose of agriculture only, cannot be kept fallow    mutated in the record-of-rights. This
                                              for more than three consecutive years. Cannot be let out,          document is relied upon by the administration
                                              breach will make the land or part thereof, excluding               for identifying beneficiaries for various social
                                              homestead, liable for vesting in the state. Raiyats belonging to   welfare schemes and in connection with
                                              ST cannot transfer to non-tribal without permission.               acquisition of land and payment of
                                                                                                                 compensation. Government should take
                                               Recording :                                                       proactive measures to keep the records
                                              All tenures with important attributes are recorded in the          updated.
                                              record-of-rights which have a presumptive value of
                                              correctness in the eye of law.
   Raiyati tenure      Area –                  Landless and land-poor receiving vested land as a measure of      The beneficiaries are known as    pattadars.
    (Category 1)       425,982 Ha              agrarian reforms accorded the status of raiyat [U/s 49(1) of      Although all of them have received patta
      [Rural]                                  WBLR Act]                                                         (document of title), the names of more than
                       31.36 lakh                                                                                seven lakh pattadars have not yet been
                                                                                                                 recorded in the RoRs which is primarily a
                                              * Legal recognition : Institution created by law, hence            document of possession. Both the document
                                              recognized                                                         of title and possession are necessary for
                                              Recording: same as in the case of mainstream raiyats.              availing of benefits under various kinds of
                                                                                                                 development schemes.
                                              * Transferability: Transfer not
                                              permissible except by
                                              a simple mortgage of
                                              the land with some selected categories of banks for taking
                                              loan for development of the land, agriculture etc.
Raiyati tenure                                * Legal recognition: a creature of West Bengal Land Reforms        If land owned by a raiyat in excess of ceiling
                                NA            Act, 1955 (Sec 14S)                                                area, cultivated by a bargadar vests in the
(Category 2)                                                                                                     state and the bargadar becomes a raiyat
  [Rural]                                     * All other characteristics are the same as for a mainstream       (total land ownership up to 0.4047 Ha
                                              raiyat.




34 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
   Tenure Type           Area Population                           Legal recognition and                                 Overlaps and potential issues
                                                                       Characteristics
Raiyati tenure         7883.80 Ha              Under the provisions of The West Bengal Acquisition of            Private land where any occupier has been in
                       3.27 lakh               Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourers, Artisans and           possession of any land (agricultural or non-
(Category 3)                                   Fishermen Act, 1975                                               agricultural where there is a homestead) on
                                               * Legal recognition: a creature of law hence recognized.          26th of June 1975, such land up to 0.0334 ha,
[Rural & semi-                                 * Recording: same as in the case of a raiyati-tenure [main        shall stand acquired by the State Government
urban]                                         stream].                                                          and shall thereupon stand transferred to and
                                               * Transferability: limited right; may transfer by a simple        vest absolutely in favour of such occupier who
                                               mortgage for development of land.                                 will hold it as a raiyat
                                               Legal recognition: this category of raiyats was created by an     The non-agricultural tenants, under tenants
Raiyati tenure                                 amendment to the W.B.L.R. Act, 1955 (Section 3A)                  were not brought within the purview of WBEA
                                                                                                                 Act, 1953. Subsequently by an amendment of
(Category 4)                                                                                                     WBLR Act in 1981, such tenants were treated
 [Urban, semi-                                                                                                   as raiyats
urban & rural]         NA
Tenure on forest       Individual – 30,879     Characteristics: right of transfer restricted                     The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional
land                   and community –         Legal recognition: All tenures are legally recognized.            Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights)
(Category 5)           312                                                                                       Act, 2006 gives rights to the marginal and
Rural/ Forest                                  Transferability: Transferable without any restriction. There      tribal communities on the forestland on which
                       Area – 4958 Ha          are certain conditions in regard to use: Land to be used for      they were traditionally dependent. It provides
                                               the purpose of agriculture only, cannot be kept fallow for        for the restitution of deprived forest rights,
                                               more than three consecutive years. Cannot be let out except       including both individual rights to cultivated
                                               for special grounds: breach will make the land or part thereof,   land in forestland and community rights over
                                               excluding homestead, liable for vesting in the state.             common property resources.

                                               Recording :

                                               All tenures with important attributes are recorded in the Land
                                               Register i.e. record-of-rights which have a presumptive value
                                               in the eye of law.
Tenure of squatters                            Raiyati tenure accorded by the then Refugee, Relief and
on government land                             Rehabilitation Dept.
[Category 6]                    NA
Urban, semi-urban
& rural                                        Legal recognition :
                                               *recognized by law.
                                               recording :
                                               *recorded in land records.

35 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
   Tenure Type           Area Population                           Legal recognition and                             Overlaps and potential issues
                                                                      Characteristics
Share cropping         4.53 lakh Ha           Legal recognition:                                             Sharecroppers enjoy the right to cultivate land
Tenure                 15.21 lakh                                                                            which is a kind of occupancy right
                                              Recognized by law (West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955),
[Rural]                                       recorded
                                              in the land register i.e. record-of-rights:

                                              Right of share cropping is heritable, but not transferable.
                                              Share croppers enjoy right to cultivate the land and receive
                                              share of the produce quantum of which laid down in WBLR
                                              Act, 1955. Sharecropper enjoys security of tenure till it is
                                              terminated in accordance with law
A tenure called                               Legal recognition:                                             Vesting of interests of landlords with effect
ThikaTenency under                            *legally recognized                                            from 18.01.1982 (Sec 4). They hold land
Kolkata Thika                                 Characteristics:                                               directly under the state.
Tenancy                         NA            *heritable                                                     Area of operation – first 100 wards of Kolkata
(Acquisition and                                Sec.6(3)                                                     Municipal Corporation and 40 wards of
Regulation) Act,                              *transferable interest among heirs and co-sharers              Howrah Municipal Corporation
2001                                          *letting out of structure is permitted
                                              *govt. may resume land in public interest
                                              Sec. 7(3)


Raiyati tenure                                Tenants and under-tenants under the Non Agriculture            These deemed raiyats enjoy all rights of a
                                              Tenancy act, 1949 given raiyati status by amendment of         mainstream raiyat
                                NA            WBLR Act, 1955 [Sec 3A(1)]
                                              Transferable and heritable




36 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Settlement / Lease / License regime

Tenure Type                    Area Population                    Legal recognition and                       Overlaps and potential issues
                                                                  Characteristics

Settlement of govt. land                      NA                  * legally recognized                        Land for non-agricultural purposes shall
for non-agricultural                                              * lease deed registration compulsory        ordinarily be settled on long-term leases
purposes under the                                                * lease period ordinarily 30 or 99 years,   by the Collector with prior approval of
provisions of WBLR Act                                            with options for successive renewals        the L&LR dept.
& Rules and W.B. Land &                                           * heritable
Land Reforms Manual,                                              * Transfer only with the permission of
1991 [Section 49(5), Rule                                         Collector.
20A(6) and Rule 215
onwards of the manual].
Lease of Tea Garden            Total number of tea gardens        * lease period thirty years                 After determination of the quantum of
lands                          329                                                                            required land for a tea-garden u/s 6(3)
(Schedule F                    Involving area of 168478 ha        * renewable                                 of the EA Act, the government granted
 [Rule 4] of West Bengal                                                                                      lease on terms and conditions contained
Estate Acquisition Rules                                          * lease hold interest heritable             in schedule F appended to rule 4(A) of
1954)                                                                                                         the EA Rules, 1954
                                                                  * transfer with the permission of
                                                                  Collector
Lease of land by                              NA                  Legal recognition:
irrigation & PWD                                                   at best as an occupier
Department of the state                                            not transferable
                                                                   not heritable

lease of coal field lands                     NA                  Legal recognition :                         Restricted rights of two types
                                                                   recognized                                   a) for land use
                                                                   recorded in record-of-rights                 b) for mining
                                                                   heritable with permission of
                                                                     government
                                                                   transferable with government
                                                                     permission

37 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                                   Customary tenure-like occupancy situations
Tenure Type                        Area population                      Legal recognition & Characteristic      Overlap and potential issues
Unauthorised occupancy of             NA                           Legal recognition:
government land                                                    *not recognized
                                                                   *not recorded
                                                                   *Evictable under the Public Land (Eviction
                                                                   of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1976
Occupation of private land with                 NA                 Legal recognition:                           Informally recognized and recorded in RoR
leave or license                                                   *informally recognized                       of the owner as permissive possession
                                                                   Recording:
                                                                   *recorded in the record-of-rights as an
                                                                   occupier with leave




38 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                    INSTITUTIONAL MAPPING

The state is the absolute owner of all lands within the geographical boundaries of West Bengal.
The Department of Land and Land Reforms acts as the custodian of these lands on behalf of the
state. There are, however, lands at the disposal of other departments of the government. These
lands are used, maintained and managed by the respective departments. In the event the lands
at the disposal of any department are found to be in excess of its requirement, the department
has to return these lands to the Land and Land Reforms department on requisition.

There are several government departments and agencies who are involved in land governance In
West Bengal. The involvement of these agencies is of varying degrees. The Institutional map
below will reveal the scenario:




39 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                             INSTITUTIONAL MAP: Land Agencies of West Bengal

           Institution                 Type of land resources                         Responsibility/Mandate                         Overlap with other
                                                                                                                                        institutions
Department of Land and Land            All lands                        The department plays a pivotal role in the land and
Reforms                                                                  revenue administration of the state. Its main functions
                                                                         and duties are :
                                                                         i. formulation of policy;
                                                                         ii. making of laws and
                                                                         iii. Implementation of the above.
                                                                      Its domain of activities include land reforms, preparation
                                                                         of Cadastral and topographical maps, determination and
                                                                         collection of land revenue, land acquisition etc.
                                                                      Some of the Acts administered by the department like the
                                                                         West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 and the West               --
                                                                         Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 are crucial for
                                                                         management and regulation of land in rural areas. Acts
                                                                         relating to urban areas administered by the department
                                                                         are also very important in the sphere of urban
                                                                         governance.
                                                                      The department performs its functions through the
                                                                         Collectors of districts in some matters while
                                                                         implementation of two major Acts is done through the
                                                                         DLRS which has its unit down to the gram panchayat
                                                                         level.
Panchayat and Rural Development        Small water areas and          Management of water areas up to 5 acres and
Department                             lands pertaining to certain       management of interests like huts and bazaars and
                                       interests.                                                                                             --
                                                                         assessment and collection of property tax by the gram
                                                                         Panchayat.
Fishery Department                     Water bodies and areas         Pisciculture
                                       like tanks etc.                Leasing out the water areas to fishermen’s Co-operatives.              --
                                                                      Development of the water areas
Urban Local Bodies                     Crematorium, burial           The ULBs maintain the lands as classified in column 2          L&LR Department,
                                       ground, dumping ground                                                                       Local Self Governments




40 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
           Institution                 Type of land resources                          Responsibility/Mandate                           Overlap with other
                                                                                                                                            institutions
Forest Department                      Forest lands in reserved,     Afforestation and tree planting, increasing forest cover in the   Backward Classes
                                       protected and unclassed       state, enhancement of productivity of the forest lands,           Welfare department.
                                       state forests                 securing people’s participation in forest management,
                                                                     biodiversity conservation and issue of land patta to eligible
                                                                     forest dwellers.


Backward       Classes      Welfare                                  Implementation of Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional          Department of Forest,
Department                                                           Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 in       Land and Land Reforms
                                                                     respect of rights of the Scheduled Tribes forest dwellers on      and Panchayat & Rural
                                                                     forest land.                                                      Development
                                                                                                                                       Department
Irrigation Department                  Government lands at the       Putting up embankments to protect lands being engulfed by         Land & Land Reforms
                                       disposal of the Irrigation    rivers, leasing out water areas for short period to augment       department
                                       Department                    state revenue.

Public Works Department                Government lands at the       Leasing out roadside lands for short periods
                                       disposal of PWD
                                                                                                                                                --
Refugee, Relief & Rehabilitation       Lands at the disposal of      Issue of documents of title to eligible persons
Department                             the department
                                                                                                                                                --
Commerce and Industries                Lands pertaining coal         Issue of licenses for mining activities
Department                             mines
                                                                                                                                                --
Kolkata Metropolitan Development                                     Providing industrial infrastructure for planned development
Authority (KMDA)                                    --                                                                                          --

West Bengal Housing Board              Infrastructure     creation   Planning, development of urban infrastructure in KMDA area
                                       and housing                                                                                              --
Department of Urban Development           Land for housing             To provide housing for people of different income groups
                                          Planned     townships         at comparatively low cost;
                                           and housing estates          Promotion of urban development by setting up several                   --
                                                                         development authorities spread over the entire state like
                                                                         Siliguri-Jalpaiguri Development Authority, Asansol-
                                                                         Durgapur Development authority etc.




41 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
VI.       Assessment

  Panel 1           Land Tenure Recognition

  A system of tenure explains how people, communities and others gain access to land, forests,
  and fisheries, and those are regulated by societies. These tenure systems determine who can use
  what resources, for how long and on and under what conditions. Such systems may be based
  either on written policies and laws or unwritten customs and practices.

  Panel 1 deals with the land tenure recognition of various types of tenures enjoyed by the raiyats,
  bargadars, patta holders, lease holders, tenants etc. It also focuses on the issues of rights of
  women, forest dwellers, tribes and so on. The Expert Investigator assigned for this panel has
  critically examined how far the rights are recognized by legislations and enforced in practice.
  He has also incorporated the inputs, suggestions and recommendations which came out from
  the panel discussions.

  Dimension Analysis

            Indicators

          1. Recognition of a continuum of rights: the law recognizes a range of rights held by
             individuals (incl. secondary rights of tenants. sharecroppers, women etc.)

          2. Respect for and enforcement of rights

                            Land Governance Indicator 1
                            Recognition of a continuum of rights: the law recognizes a range of
  Panel       LGI    Dim.
                            rights held by individuals (incl. secondary rights of tenants,
                            sharecroppers, women etc.)
      1         1      1    a) Individuals' rural land tenure rights are legally recognized
                            A: Existing legal framework recognizes and protects rights held by more than
                            90% of the rural population
                            B: Existing legal framework recognizes and protects rights held by 70% - 90% of
                            the rural population
                            C: Existing legal framework recognizes and protects rights held by 50% -70% of
                            the rural population
                            D: Existing legal framework recognizes and protects rights held by less than 50%
                            of the rural population
  Analysis:

  Recognition of rural land tenure rights in West Bengal which was a part of the old Bengal
  Presidency has been a continuous process spread over a long length of time. The pre-1885 [B.T.
  Act] regulations and Acts did mention the holders of different categories of rural land tenures
  but did not recognize these customary tenures. The Rent Act of 1859 went so far as to grant
  these customary holders of tenure mostly raiyats the right of occupancy.



  42 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The BT Act, 1885 for the first time recognized the different categories of customary tenures and
provided definition for each. This Act conferred several rights upon the raiyats. Finally, the
WBLR Act has comprehensively laid down the rights and duties of a raiyat (background note).

All typologies for rural including urban, semi urban etc. tenures have been identified and shown
in the table with description in the back ground note. Some of the holders of tenures identified
and appearing in the table bear the nomenclature “raiyat” while others are not technically
riayats but hold tenures. But these are distinguishable by their attributes like the class of land
comprising the tenure, heritability, transferability etc.

There is practically no obstacle to recognizing the rights on rural tenure. New rural tenures are
in a constant process of creation and recognition through operation of various laws. Recognition
of the illegal occupiers of unassessed lands by granting them tenurial rights through issue of
patta or otherwise is an issue which has many dimensions as discussed in the background note.
There is no category in the state with informal rights but with legal rights.

The Bengal Tenancy Act was significantly silent as to the status of a bargadar. While the right of
barga cultivation was recognized, by a retrogate step in 1928, providing a definition and at the
same time declaring that a bargadar is not a tenant.

In W.B. Bargadars Act, 1950 and the WBLR Act, 1955 many rights have been granted and
safeguards provided to the bargadars. Moreover, the right of cultivation by a bargadar having
been made heritable such rights stands fully secure. Since conferment of tenancy rights on
bargadar does not fit with the scheme of the WBLR Act which categorically prohibits creation of
any form of tenancy by a raiyat and recognizes only one landlord – the state, the lawmakers
wisely provided for an alternative way to make the bargadar not a tenant but the owner of the
land. Section 21C was inserted in the Act in 1981 for constitution of Land Corporation. A
bargadar may take loan from the corporation to buy the land he cultivates from the owner of
the land.

Policy recommendations: The state government may consider implementation of the
provisions of section 21C by constituting Land Corporations

Data Source:

      1. Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885.
      2. West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955

Data Reliability: High
                          Land Governance Indicator 1
                          Recognition of a continuum of rights: the law recognizes a range
Panel     LGI    Dim.
                          of rights held by individuals (incl. secondary rights of tenants,
                          sharecroppers, women etc.)
  1        1        1     b) Individuals' rural land tenure rights are protected in practice
                          A: Existing legal framework recognizes and protects rights held by more than
                          90% of the rural population
                          B: Existing legal framework recognizes and protects rights held by 70% - 90%
                          of the rural population
                          C: Existing legal framework recognizes and protects rights held by 50% -70%
                          of the rural population
                          D: Existing legal framework recognizes and protects rights held by less than
                          50% of the rural population
Analysis:


43 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The rights granted by the relevant Acts are protected in practice. The laws of the land provide
remedial measures against interference with lawful exercise of the rights. Also, if necessary, the
local administration including the police administration and the local panchayats afford
necessary protection.

As regards share cropping a study [2003] made by SIPRD, Kalyani shows that 19.09 % of the
bargadars who provide inputs for cultivation do not deliver any share of the produce to the land
owner. In other words, the land owners are deprived of their lawful share of the produce. There
is, however, legal forum where the landlord’s right to receive his share may be enforced [sec 18,
WBLR Act] Many land owners, mostly absentee owners, do not take the trouble of moving the
forum and have reconciled themselves to the situation.

Data Source: West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955

Data Reliability: High

                         Land Governance Indicator 1
                         Recognition of a continuum of rights: the law recognizes a range
Panel     LGI    Dim.
                         of rights held by individuals (incl. secondary rights of tenants,
                         sharecroppers, women etc.)
  1         1      2     Customary tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in practice.
                         A: There is legal recognition and effective protection of all customary rights
                         B: There is legal recognition of all customary rights but these are only partly
                         protected in practice
                         C: There is partly recognition and effective protection of customary rights

                         D: Customary rights are not legally recognized and not protected in practice
Analysis:

Two customary non-forest rights are rather pronounced are:

      (a) Any right of way or other easement attached to the land comprising the tenure.
      (b) Fishing right which is also an easement right.

The above two rights are recognized by law.

The customary easement right as at (a) above is recorded in the R-O-R in terms of rule 23(g),
WBLR Rules, 1965. The fishing right as at (b) is recorded as a legacy of B.T. Act settlement.
Other customary rights of the nature of easement over cremation ground, grave yard etc. are
also recorded in the R-O-R under the above rule. The above rights are protected in practice.

A customary practice rather widespread in rural Bengal is occupation of private land with or
without the owner’s permission. Both these situations used to be recorded in the R -O-R. But
with the progress of L.R. Settlement such recording has been discontinued by virtue of a
government order.

Another important customary right is the forest right of Forest dwelling Schedule Tribes and
other traditional forest dwellers. By virtue of sec 3(1) of the Recognition of Forest (Rights) Act,
2006 right of ownership, access to collect, use and dispose of minor non-timber forest produce
which has been customarily collected has been declared as the forest rights of the forest dwelling
STs and other traditional forest dwellers. This is in addition to some other rights recognized as
forest rights. An important step in enforcing customary tenure rights is mapping/ survey of the
boundaries of land held under customary tenure and the recording of right holder.


44 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
In regard to (a) and (b) above no problem arising out of exercise of these rights has been
identified. As regards forest rights some minor functional problems came in the way in course of
issue of land pattas to the eligible forest dwellers. These were mostly resolved at the local level.

There are some customary rights which are not legally recognized like, the use of paddy fields as
grazing ground during lean season, use of vacant land for drying of fish. Protection of these
customary practices not legally recognized, may be under question.

However, legal recognition of customary systems has not resulted in contradiction with rights
protected by the Constitution (ranking changed from A to C in consultation with EI and panellist

Data Source:

         West Bengal Land Reform Rules, 1965
         RoR prepared in the Bengal Tenancy Act settlement
         CSOs working in the field on relevant issues

Data Reliability: High

                          Land Governance Indicator 1
                          Recognition of a continuum of rights: the law recognizes a range
Panel      LGI   Dim.
                          of rights held by individuals (incl. secondary rights of tenants,
                          sharecroppers, women etc.)
                         Indigenous rights to land and forest are legally recognized and
  1         1      3
                         protected in practice.
                         A: Recognition and effective protection of all indigenous rights
                         B: Recognition of indigenous rights but only partly protected
                         C: Partly Recognition of indigenous rights, which are protected
                         D: Indigenous rights are not recognized and not protected
Analysis:

As commonly understood “indigenous rights” might be a sub -category of “customary rights” –
generally undocumented rights held by “original” or very long-term occupants of that land, often
associated with less density of population and shifting cultivation, and/ or the prominence of
forestland. Indigenous rights to land for non-forest areas are recognized and protected in
practice. Such rights are also recorded in the R-O-R during settlement operations. Chapter IIA
of the WBLR Act deals with the provisions imposing restrictions on alienation of land by STs.

The Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act,
2006 has brought about great change in the management of state owned forest. This Act
provides for recognition of many of the traditional rights enjoyed by the dwellers in regard to
non-timber forest produce like collection of dry leaves, dry branches, fruits etc.

Explicit and clear provisions have been made to recognize the rights over land, forests, and other
natural resources.

An important provision in the Act is to deliver land pattas to the forest dwellers for occupation
covering a period of 75 years or more. Till December 2013, 31000 individual and 312 community
pattas have been issued. But the important step in ensuring customary tenure rights of
survey/boundary demarcation of land under such tenure is not done.

The Rules framed under the FRA provide for recording the patta rights in the R-O-R. But all
forest villages being non-revenue villages those have been excluded from the survey and
settlement operations [B.T. Act, E.A. Act, L.R. Act]. Resultantly, there is neither any cadastral
map nor any R-O-R for these villages. But recording is absolutely necessary to infuse in the

45 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
minds of the beneficiaries a sense of security of tenure. This issue needs immediate attention of
the departments of Forests and Land and Land Reforms.

In a meeting convened later the CSOs working in the field felt that recognition of all rights for
the indigenous people depending on forest for living and livelihood is not comprehensive, but
agreed that whatever rights are recognised, these are protected. So, they opined for changing the
ranking from “B” to “C”. One CSO representative mentioned that the indigenous people have to
sell the forest produce to the department or government agency only. Here also the rights are
not fully recognised. There are large numbers of ST population who are yet to procure the ST
caste certificate and are unable to avail the benefits under FRA 2006 (ranking changed from B
to C).

Data Source:

       Backward Classes Welfare Department, Govt. of West Bengal
       Recognition of Forest Rights Act, 2006
       Directorate of Land Records and Surveys

Data Reliability:

Policy Recommendation:

Cadastral maps plotting the pieces of land given to the forest-dwellers under the FRA 2006 and
the record of rights prepared on the basis of such maps will arm the beneficiaries with the
essential documents by virtue of which the beneficiaries will be able to exercise their rights
recognized under the Act. The state government should, therefore, seriously consider
undertaking survey and settlement of the related forest villages concerned.
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 1
                           Recognition of a continuum of rights: the law recognizes a range
                           of rights held by individuals (incl. secondary rights of tenants,
                           sharecroppers, women etc.)
   1        1       4      Urban land tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in practice.
                           A: Existing legal framework recognizes rights held by more than 90% of the
                           urban population
                           B: Existing legal framework recognizes rights held by 70% - 90% of the urban
                           population
                           C: Existing legal framework recognizes rights held by 50% -70% of the urban
                           population
                           D: Existing legal framework recognizes rights held by less than 50% of the
                           urban population


Analysis:

Whoever holds any description of land in the urban areas covered by the WBLR Act is a raiyat.
Non-agricultural tenants and under-tenants governed by the W.B. Non-Agricultural Tenancy
Act, 1949 became raiyats with effect from 09.09.1980 in terms of section 3A of the WBLR Act.
Details of different categories of urban raiyats recognized by different Acts are available in the
tenure typology. In a word, the rural and urban households owning lands as raiyats stand on
the same footing as far as the rights are concerned, because of the definition of land meaning
land of every description under the WBLR Act.

Thika tenants existing within the city of Kolkata (comprising first 100 wards of KMC) and the
Howrah Municipal area (comprising the first 40 wards of HMC) took lands on monthly or yearly

46 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
rent and made constructions without concrete roof thereon. They were virtually tenants at will
and could be evicted any time. The Calcutta Thika Tenancy Act, 1949 sought to curb this
eviction. The Act of 1981 bearing the same name abolished landlordism by acquiring the
interests of landlords and brought the thika tenants directly under the state and made their
interests secure. The W.B. Thika Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 2001 has made their
rights more secure. The flat owners coming under the W.B. Apartment Ownership Act, 1972 and
Cooperative Housing Societies Act, 2006 hold proportionate share of lands. Properties [flats
etc.] under these Acts are heritable and transferable.

Apart from the ordinary laws of the land, there are in-built dispensations in the relevant Acts for
protection of the rights granted by them. Those rights are protected in practice.

Data Source:          1. West Bengal Land Reform Act, 1955
                       2. West Bengal Thika Tenancy Act, 2001

Data Reliability: High
                           Land Governance Indicator 2
 Panel     LGI    Dim.
                           Respect for and enforcement of rights
    1       2        1     Accessible opportunities for tenure individualization exist.
                           A: The law provides opportunities for those holding land under customary,
                           group, or collective tenure to fully or partially individualize land rights if they
                           so desire. Procedures for doing so are affordable, clearly specified, safeguarded,
                           and are observed in practice.
                           B: The law provides opportunities for those holding land under customary,
                           group, or collective tenures to fully or partially individualize land rights if they
                           so desire. Procedures to do so are affordable and include basic safeguards
                           against abuse.
                           C: The law provides opportunities for those holding land under customary,
                           group, or collective tenures to fully or partially individualize land rights if they
                           so desire. Procedures are not affordable or clear, leading to discretion in their
                           application.
                           D: Although there is demand, the law provides no opportunities for those
                           holding land under customary, group, or collective tenures to fully or partially
                           individualize land rights.

Analysis:

As regards customary tenures these were recorded either singly or jointly during the BT Act
settlement. In course of first revision of the records under the WBEA Act the same procedure
was followed. During the current revision under the WBLR Act all joint tenures have been split
according to share of each co-sharer and a single R-O-R [khatian] assigned to each tenure
holder for each village. Therefore, as regards customary tenures, those are already
individualized.

As regards individualization for collective and group tenures for forest land, the law does not
permit any such individualization at the will of any tenure holder. He may come out of the
group, but in that case he will have to forgo his tenurial rights. The number of collective or group
tenures is not available. However, two categories of such tenures which are common are group
tenures on forest land and housing cooperatives. Rights in respect of such tenures are
recognized by the relevant laws.

The W. B. Apartment Ownership Act, 1972 provides for ownership of individual apartment
which are both transferable and heritable.

47 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Individualization wherever permissible, has to go through the process of registration and
mutation.

Data Source:
   1. Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885 RoR
   2. West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act, 1953 RoR
   3. West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 RoR
   4. West Bengal Apartment Ownership Act, 1972
   5. West Bengal Co-operative Housing Societies Act, 2006

Data Reliability: High
Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 2
                         Respect for and enforcement of rights
  1        2       2     Individual land in rural areas is recorded and mapped.
                         A: More than 90% of individual land in rural areas is formally recorded and
                         mapped.
                         B: Between 70% and 90% of individual land in rural areas is formally
                         recorded and mapped.
                         C: Between 50% and 70% of individual land in rural areas is formally
                         recorded and mapped.
                         D: Less than 50% of individual land in rural areas is formally recorded and
                         mapped.


Analysis:

The first step in enforcing individual rights is the recording of boundaries. Cadastral survey and
preparation of land register i.e. R-O-R were first carried out in the whole state [then a part of
Bengal Presidency] under the B.T. Act (Chap X). During that operation all plots of land
comprised in tenure, whether individual or joint, were surveyed, numbered and a map of the
mouza [village] prepared. Thereafter R-O-Rs in respect of all such tenures were prepared
showing therein all incidences of the tenure like status, rent payable etc. These maps and
records were revised under the Estate Acquisition Act, 1953 (Chap V). During the current
revision under the WBLR Act (chap VII A) all tenures are individual tenures. Joint tenures that
are not legally partitioned were split up according to the respective share of the co-sharers and
each such co-sharer was assigned one R-O-R [khatian] for each village following the principle of
“one man, one khatian]”.

Records and maps are falling out of date mainly because changes due to death of the owner,
transfer of land etc. are not being regularly incorporated in the records. The number of mutation
cases awaiting disposal in the whole state is 479810 [Aug 2013] and is increasing every day.
Records of rights are therefore, not up to date. Another gap lies in registration of individual
tenure of land.

Definition of land may be inclusive, but in the RoRs plots stand classified according to use.
Nobody has taken account of how much is comprised in homestead and how much is put to
farming only. Moreover, the use of land plots keeps on changing.

Data Source: Monthly progress report [December, 2013] of the Directorate of Land Records
and Surveys.

Data Reliability: As information is from Cadastral maps and Record of rights it is highly
reliable.

48 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
 Panel     LGI    Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 2
                           Respect for and enforcement of rights
    1       2       3     Individual land in urban areas is recorded and mapped.
                          A: More than 90% of individual land in urban areas is formally recorded and
                          mapped.
                          B: Between 70% and 90% of individual land in urban areas is formally recorded
                          and mapped.
                          C: Between 50% and 70% of individual land in urban areas are formally
                          recorded and mapped.
                          D: Less than 50% of individual land in urban areas is formally recorded and
                          mapped.
Analysis:

All urban areas of the state except the areas comprised in the first 100 wards of KMC came
under the purview of all the tenancy laws starting from the B.T. Act to WBLR Act. The lands
falling within the urban areas were, at the first instance, mapped and the related revenue
records [RoR] prepared under the B.T. Act. Those have been successively revised under the
WBEA Act and the W.B.L.R. Act.

The first hundred wards (1-100) of Kolkata Municipal Corporation comprise the entire area of
old Calcutta. R.W. Smart had prepared (1903 – 1914) cadastral maps of these areas on a very
large scale. Holding register was prepared by the Calcutta Municipality [as it was then called] on
the basis of those maps for tax administration.

It will be seen from the above that the highly built up areas comprising old Calcutta does not
have a set of cadastral maps in the true sense of the term, much less any revenue records. The
Kolkata Land-Revenue Act, 2003 provides for preparation of maps and records of these
hundred wards under the provisions of the WBLR Act which has not so far been extended to old
Calcutta. However, KMC for the purpose of assessment holds inspection regularly and updates
its register.

Individual properties in all urban areas except Calcutta have been mapped and recorded. But
those are badly out-of-date. There is also wide gap in registration of individual urban land
tenures.

Group housing schemes in the areas beyond the first 100 wards of KMC which existed from
before revision have been mapped and records prepared. In most cases, the mapping of the
group housing schemes was confined to the periphery of the housing complex. Due to lack of
reliable data the percentage shown in ranking was agreed purely as an assessment (ranking
changed from B to C in consultation with EI and panellist)

Data Source: Relevant Acts and Rules

Data Reliability: High

Policy recommendation: The state government may consider mapping and preparation of r-
o-r in respect of different categories of housing complexes, either government or private, and
assign this task appropriate priority.
 Panel     LGI    Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 2
                           Respect for and enforcement of rights
    1       2        4     The number of illegal land sales is low.
                           A: Few, if any, illegal transactions occur in practice and mechanisms to
                           unambiguously identify illegal sales exist and are applied routinely.


49 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                           B: The number of illegal land transactions is low and some are unambiguously
                           identified on a routine basis.
                           C: The number of illegal land transactions is high and some are unambiguously
                           identified on a routine basis.
                           D: The number of illegal land transactions is high and none are unambiguously
                           identified on a routine basis.


Analysis:

Illegal sales not violating any tenancy law or conditions at which government has granted lease
do not come within the purview of land governance. There are four areas in which illegal sales
take place.

      a) Rural area: sale of patta land is barred by law [sec 49(1A), WBLR]. But sale of patta lands
         is taking place everywhere in the state. A study made by the State Institute of Panchayats
         and Rural Development Kalyani revealed that over the decades about 2.73% of the patta
         holders had sold their lands.

      b) Urban area: In Salt Lake City, a satellite township of Kolkata, long-term lease of land was
         given to a large number of families for residential purposes. Certain restrictions were
         imposed on the transferability of the lease hold lands. Despite these restrictions a
         significant number of illegal transfers have taken place in a roundabout way through
         crafty designs. To deal with this problem the Urban Development Dept. has since
         changed the rules. Transfer is permissible (in Salt Lake City) now with the approval of
         the department on payment of Rs.5.00 lakhs for each cottha of land.

Other two areas where such illegal transfer of land is taking place:

    c) Transfer of land by a raiyat in contravention of sec 5(1) of the W.B.L.R. Act which
        requires him to transfer his land by an instrument which must be registered. But in
        practice transfers are being made through unregistered deeds which are being acted
        upon. This practice is widespread in rural West Bengal.
    d) Transfers made by tribal raiyats in contravention of provisions in sec 14C of the WBLR
        Act which states that transfer of land to a non-tribal can be made only for some specified
        purposes from the appropriate authority
Also a very high percentage of land transfers in rural areas are not registered thus rendering the
sales as illegal (ranking changed from B to C in consultation with the EI).

Policy Recommendations:

Laws provide for penal actions against illegal transactions. Such actions are taken when such
transactions come to the notice of the authority. However, more proactive measures are called
for to prevent illegal transactions. Government may consider appropriate steps to curb this.

Government might consider the feasibility of putting in place some sort of dispensation at local
level with representation from the departments of Backward Classes Welfare, L and LR, and
panchayats and Rural Development tasked with monitoring of identification of illegal transfers
and remedial measures taken by the appropriate authorities.
Panel     LGI    Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 2
                         Respect for and enforcement of rights
  1         2      5     The number of illegal lease transactions is low.
                         A: Existing legal restrictions on land leases if any, are clearly identified, widely
                         accepted and fully complied with.

50 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                         B: Existing legal restrictions on land leases, if any, are clearly identified,
                         justified and accepted by all parts of society, but not fully understood by land
                         users, so that compliance is partial.
                         C: Existing legal restrictions on land leases are clearly identified but not fully
                         justified or accepted by land users, so that compliance is partial.
                         D: Existing legal restrictions on land leases are routinely neglected.
Analysis:

Restriction on land leases have been imposed by Sec 4(4) of the WBLR Act which states that if a
raiyat lets out his land such land excluding the homestead is liable to vest in the state.

By a recent amendment of the Act a raiyat has been permitted to let out the whole or part of his
land for the purposes of establishment of an industrial park, industrial hub or industrial estate
etc. [proviso to clause (d) of sec 4(4), WBLR Act].

This relaxation has been made to make way for private investment in the construction of hubs,
parks, estates etc. Those who will acquire land and construct such parks, hubs etc., will not
themselves utilize all the spaces. They will have to attract others to come to such parks, hubs etc.
That is why this relaxation to enable them to lease out to the small holders.

However, the justification for such prohibition is to pre-empt the emergence of a feudal pattern
of land tenure system which was abolished during tenancy reforms in the state. It cannot be
claimed that these legal provisions regarding restrictions have been widely accepted particularly
in the rural areas. Despite the restrictions incidences of concealed tenancies are being noticed.
The consideration is mostly a fixed amount of money for a fixed crop or a fixed period of
cultivation.

Data Source:

         West Bengal Land Reform Act, 1955

Data Reliability: High

Policy Recommendation: The state government may consider undertaking an in-depth
study of the problem to find out its actual nature, geographical, spread etc. so that if necessary,
an appropriate change in law may be considered.

Panel      LGI   Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 2
                         Respect for and enforcement of rights
  1         2      6     Women's property rights are recorded.
                         A: More than 45% of land recorded to physical persons is recorded in
                         the name of women either individually or jointly.
                         B: Between 35% and 45% of land recorded to physical persons is
                         recorded in the name of women either individually or jointly.
                         C: Between 15% and 35% of land recorded to physical persons is
                         recorded in the name of women either individually or jointly.
                         D: Less than 15% of land recorded to physical persons is recorded in the
                         name of women either individually or jointly.



51 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Analysis:

The right of succession is governed by the persons. Muslim personal law gives right to women
though not equal according faraj done by a recognized authority recognized in Muslim law.
Moreover, Muslim women also get land on their marriage. Hence, names of muslim women
stand well recorded right from the time RoRs were prepared under the BT Act taken up from the
last decade of the 20th Century.

Hindu personal law in this part of the country did not give property rights to Hindu women
before the Hindu Women’s Rights to Property Act, 1937. Before the provisions of the Act could
be enforced preparation of the RoRs under the BT Act was almost over. Moreover, this Act had
some inherent defects and hence was not enforced in right earnest. Hence, the names of women
successors were not recorded in the RoRs. The landmark event with regard to Hindu women’s
right to property is the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. This Act gave equal rights to women
successor. However, before the implications of this Act could be fully understood the revision of
RoRs under the WBEA Act 1953 was over. Moreover, to carry out the purposes of the Act it was
necessary to obtain the position of ownership of land as on 15 th April 1955 or 16th April 1956 –
the dates of vesting under the Act. Naturally no attempt was made to record the names of
women who became the owners of property by dint of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.

Revision of RoR was taken up under the WBLR Act, 1955 from 1975 onwards. Unfortunately the
names of women successors were not recorded due to unchanged mind-set of men and women
in a male-dominated society. Recording the names of women in the RoR could not be availed of
due to numerous reasons. Some of those are enumerated below:

            1. Reluctance of the male co-sharers to declare the names of female co-sharers to
               the revenue officials during record writing.
            2. Unwillingness of the women to come forward to record their names.
            3. A sense of false pride in the mind-set of women in surrendering their right on
               paternal property.
            4. Apprehension of embitterment of relationship with near and dear ones, and
            5. Lack of empowerment

Data Source:

       SIPRD study report [2003]
       WBLR Act, 1955

Data Reliability: High

Policy Recommendation:

(1) By way of empowering women through endowment of land assets priority should have been
given in the matter of distribution of land as in the case of members of the STs and SCs. For this
purpose sec 49(1) of the WBLR Act, 1955 may be amendment.

(2) Women owners of land may be exempted from paying land revenue irrespective of the
amount of land possessed. This proposal if accepted will require amendment of the WBLR Act.

Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 2
                           Respect for and enforcement of rights
                           Women's property rights to land are equal to those by men both in law
   1        2       7
                           and in practice.
                           A: Women's property rights are equal to those by men both across and
                           within generations both in law and in practice.
52 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                           B: Equality of women's property rights to those by men is established by
                           law and followed in practice most of the time.
                           C: Equality of women's property rights to those by men is established by
                           law, but there are considerable limitations to exercising such rights in
                           practice.
                           D: Equality of women's property rights to those by men is not
                           established by law.

Analysis:

The legal position regarding equality of women’s property rights to those by men is as under:
Hindu women: Equal in terms of Sections 8, 9 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
Indian Christian women: Equal in terms of Sec 37 of the Indian Successions Act, 1937.
Muslim women: Unequal as per Muslim Sariati laws.

In the case of Muslim women the Sariati law itself prescribes inequality in rights to property
between men and women. Despite the legal prescription of equality in respect of the other two
communities there has always been a lag between the legal dispensation and practice. In spite of
the growing awareness among women about their lawful rights and pro-active role of the
women’s organizations in promoting women empowerment the lag persists though on a reduced
scale.

Data Source:

         Hindu Succession Act, 1956
         Indian Succession Act, 1937
         Muslim Sariati Laws

Data Reliability: High

Panel 2: Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations

Panel 2 deals with the rights of rural people over forest and common lands. It also encompasses
existing formal regulations on rural land use in the state. The Expert Investigator assigned for
this panel has critically examined how far the rights of rural people over forest and common
lands are recognized by legislations and enforced in practice. He has also incorporated the
inputs, suggestions and recommendations which came out from the panel discussions.

Indicators
   1. Rights to forest and common lands
   2. Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
                          Land Governance Indicator 3
Panel      LGI    Dim.
                          Rights to forest and common lands
                          Forests and common lands are clearly identified in law and responsibility
  2         1       1
                          for use is clearly assigned.
                          A: Forests and common lands are clearly identified and responsibility for
                          land use is unambiguous assigned.
                          B: Forests and common lands are clearly identified, responsibility for
                          land use is clearly identified but implementation is ambiguous.
                          C: Forests and common lands are not clearly identified; but
                          responsibility for land use is clearly assigned.
                          D: Forests and common lands are not clearly identified and
                          responsibility for land use is not defined.

53 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Analysis:

Responsibility of forest land use is legally not very well defined. Though the management of
forest land is with the Forest officials under the Indian Forest Act 1927 and Forest Conservation
Act 1980, the right to use on the basis of Joint Forest Management resolution of State
Government and FRA 2006 has brought in some grey areas with respect to people's rights and
active participation in management of forest land. Moreover, though the Forest lands are clearly
identified on R.S. maps, demarcation on ground has not been made in all cases. Especially in
case of vested common land adjoining the notified but degraded forest land, absence of
demarcation on ground gives rise to disputes between the local population and the forest
officials (ranking has been changed from B to C in consultation with EI and CSOs working in the
field).

Policy Recommendation:

      1. Records need to be updated.
      2. Gap in information available between L&LR Department and Forest Department needs
         to be bridged.
      3. Mechanism should be developed / practical guideline should be prepared so that L&LR
         Department and Forest Department work in tandem.
Panel     LGI    Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 3
                         Rights to forest and common lands
  2         1      2     Rural group rights are formally recognized and can be enforced.
                         A: The tenure of most groups in rural areas is formally recognized and clear
                         regulations regarding groups’ internal organization and legal representation
                         exist and can be enforced.
                         B: The tenure of most groups in rural areas is not formally recognized but
                         groups can gain legal representation under other laws (e.g. corporate law).
                         C: The tenure of most groups in rural areas is formally recognized but ways
                         for them to gain legal representation are not regulated.
                         D: The tenure of most groups in rural areas is not formally recognized.
Analysis:

The usufructory benefits of NTFP (non-timber forest produce) to the JFMC member groups
from forest areas are outlined in the Govt. resolutions, but the same are not supported by any
legal backing. The benefit sharing with user groups again depends on the administrative
machinery of Forest department. Moreover, the user groups under JFMC, in many cases,
exclude part of the local villagers and there is no legal mechanism to enforce right of all the
users to be part of the user group. Some lands in rural areas may be used by several groups for a
specific purpose (fish drying in Sundarban area, grazing etc.) and at different moments
throughout the year. These user rights are not recognized by law (ranking changed from C to D
in consultation with EI, panellist and CSO working in ground).

Data Source: CSOs who are working on FRA in the field

Data Reliability: good

Policy Recommendation:

      1. Provision should be made in FRA to incorporate the system of JFMC.
      2. Scope of ‘community rights’ to be widened up to include other forest dwellers along with
         ST.



54 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 3
                           Rights to forest and common lands
                           Users’ rights to key natural resources on land (incl. fisheries) are legally
   2        1       3
                           recognized and protected in practice.
                           A: Users’ rights to key natural resources are legally recognized and
                           consistently and effectively protected in practice throughout.
                           B: Users’ rights to key natural resources are legally recognized but only some
                           are effectively protected in practice or enforcement is difficult and takes a
                           long time.
                           C: Users' rights to key natural resources are not legally recognized but enjoy
                           de facto protection in virtually all cases.
                           D: Users' rights to key natural resources are not legally recognized and often
                           not protected in practice.
Analysis:

Except for the Govt Resolution on JFM, users' rights on NTFP are not legally protected unless
patta has been given to the individual or community under FRA 2006. Similarly, in case of
Sundarbans, local fishermen used to enjoy customary fishing rights in the Sundarbans Rivers
within Reserved Forest boundary. However, no such right has been recognized under FRA
2006.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:

Policy Recommendation: Synergy is required for provisioning JFMC under FRA.
                          Land Governance Indicator 3
Panel    LGI     Dim.
                          Rights to forest and common lands
                          Multiple rights over common land and natural resources on these lands can
  2        1       4
                          legally coexist.
                          A: Co-existence of multiple rights is possible by law, respected in practice,
                          and any disputes that may arise are swiftly resolved.
                          B: Co-existence is possible by law and respected in practice but mechanisms
                          to resolve disputes are often inadequate.
                          C: Co-existence is possible by law but rarely respected in practice.
                          D: Co-existence is not possible by law.


Analysis:

In pursuance of The West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953, all the private/ zamindary lands
recorded as forest in the land records, had vested in the State Govt. and were subsequently
transferred to Forest Dept. and notified as Protected Forests under the IFA, 1927. Under Indian
Forest Act, 1927, right of management of Govt. notified Forest land rests with forest officials.
Forest Conservation Act, 1980 also puts restriction on use of forest land for non-forestry
purpose. However, under FRA 2006, user groups/ community can have legal right on Forest
land with regard to shelter/ livelihood and also on collection of NTFP from the Forest land. But,
in practice, right of individuals/ community vis-à-vis Govt. is considered as mutually exclusive
of each other in case of any dispute, the final decision is taken by Forest Department
unilaterally, without effectively resolving the dispute rationally through some independent
authority.

Data Source: Forest department


55 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 3
                         Rights to forest and common lands
                         Multiple rights over the same plot of land and its resources (e.g. trees) can
  2        1       5
                         legally coexist.
                         A: Co-existence of multiple rights is legally possible, respected in practice, and
                         any disputes that may arise are swiftly resolved.
                         B: Co-existence is legally possible and respected in practice but mechanisms
                         to resolve disputes are often inadequate.
                         C: Co-existence is legally possible but rarely respected in practice.
                         D: Co-existence is not legally possible.

Analysis:

Under Indian Forest Act, 1927, right of management of Forest land rests with forest officials.
Under FRA 2006, user groups/ community can have legal right on Forest land with regard to
shelter/ livelihood and also on NTFP from the Forest land. However, in practice, right of one is
considered as exclusive of other and mutual respect for each other's rights hardly exists. There is
also no conscious effort to strike a balance between the two sets of rights. But, in practice, right
of individuals/ community vis-à-vis Govt. is considered as mutually exclusive of each other and
in case of any dispute, the final decision is taken by Forest Department unilaterally, without
effectively resolving the dispute rationally through some independent authority.

         LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 3
Panel                    Rights to forest and common lands
                         Multiple rights over land and mining/ other sub-soil resources located on the
  2        1       6
                         same plot can legally coexist.
                         A: Co-existence of land and mining rights is possible by law, respected in
                         practice, and any disputes that may arise are swiftly resolved.
                         B: Co-existence of land and mining rights is possible by law and respected in
                         practice but mechanisms to resolve disputes are often inadequate.
                         C: Co-existence is possible by law but rarely respected in practice.
                         D: Co-existence is not possible by law; mining rights override land rights.

Analysis:

Mining on forest land is considered as non-forestry activity under the Forest Conservation Act,
1980. For mining rights, the forest land is transferred to mining authorities with prior approval
of Ministry of Environment & Forests and almost all coal mines are open-cast in West Bengal.
Hence, the community rights of collection of NTFP on Forest land have to automatically cease
for technical reasons, if the forest land is diverted for mining purpose. However, as per FRA
2006, clearance of Gram Sabha is mandatory, with respect to existing rights of ST under the
FRA, 2006, before the proposal for transfer of Forest land for mining purpose is approved by
Central Govt.

Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 3
                         Rights to forest and common lands
  2        1       7     Accessible opportunities exist for mapping and recording of group rights.
                         A: The law provides opportunities for those holding land under customary,
                         group, or collective tenure as a group to record and map these rights if they so
                         desire. Procedures for doing so are affordable, clearly specified, safeguarded,
                         and are observed in practice.
                         B: The law provides opportunities for those holding group land under
                         customary, group, or collective tenures to record and map these rights if they
                         so desire. Procedures to do so are affordable and include basic safeguards
56 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                          against abuse.

                          C: The law provides opportunities for those holding group land under
                          customary, group, or collective tenures to record and map land rights if they
                          so desire. Procedures are not affordable or clear, leading to discretion in their
                          application.
                          D: Although there is demand, the law provides no opportunities for that
                          holding group land under customary, group, or collective tenures to record
                          and map land rights.

Analysis:

All the forest land, for which community forest rights / patta have been distributed, had been
notionally demarcated on the ground, prior to vesting of rights under FRA 2006. However,
correct maps of all such land demarcated on the ground, could not be generated due to shortage
of manpower and lack of initiatives to use GPS technologies by some of the DFOs. This may lead
to disputes in future between the forest officials and the land right holders, due to lack of clarity
of the land under possession. There is an urgent need to rectify the situation through a time-
bound programme. The field experiences shared by the CSOs working on this issue that the
formalities associated with application for patta allocation to customary, group or collective
tenures are not understood well by the people eligible and there needs to be awareness
generation drives. Also the disposal of applications is done without showing proper reasons
leaving scope for discretion of the disposing authorities. The ranking has been changed from “B”
to “C” in consultation with EI and CSOs, panellist.

Data Source: Forest department and CSOs working in the field

Policy Recommendation: Recording and mapping of the rights of the groups who are
holding land under customary, group, or collective tenures should be made mandatory.

Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 3
                           Rights to forest and common lands
   2        1       8      Boundary demarcation of communal land.
                           A: More than 70% of the area under communal and/or indigenous land has
                           boundaries demarcated and surveyed and associated claims recorded.
                           B: 40-70% of the area under communal and/or indigenous land has
                           boundaries demarcated and surveyed and associated claims recorded.
                           C: 10-40% of the area under communal and/or indigenous land has
                           boundaries demarcated and surveyed and associated claims recorded.
                           D: Less than 10% of the area under communal and/or indigenous land has
                           boundaries demarcated and surveyed and associated claims recorded.

Analysis:

At the time of processing of applications, under FRA 2006, some of the land had been
demarcated on ground and boundary pillars erected. This was particularly true for the registered
forest villages in North Bengal where the applicants live in groups. However, in case of
individual applications, especially in South Bengal districts, such demarcation on ground, as to
be reflected through correctly drawn map attached to the ownership papers, is lacking. The
ranking is D.


57 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                          Land Governance Indicator 4
Panel    LGI     Dim.
                          Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
  2        2        1     Restrictions regarding rural land use are justified and enforced.
                          A: Regulations regarding restrictions on rural land use effectively serve public
                          purpose and are enforced.
                          B: Regulations regarding restrictions on rural land use effectively serve public
                          purpose but enforcement is weak.
                          C: Regulations often do not effectively serve public purpose and enforcement
                          is difficult.
                          D: Regulations rarely effectively serve public purpose, but can be enforced.

Analysis:

The W.B. L.R. Act severely restricts use of land. The relevant provisions are:

Sec 4A: Deals with restrictions on the right of raiyats on land use in the three hilly subdivisions
of Darjeeling district. The Collector may decide the form of cultivation to be adopted by raiyat
or prohibit him from cutting more than one tree from his holding except with the previous
permission of the Collector.

Sec 4B:    Requires every raiyat to maintain and preserve his land. This section prohibits a
raiyat from changing the character of the land or from converting the land for any purpose
other than the purpose for which it was settled except with the previous order of Collector
allowing such conversion [ sec 4C, ibid].

It will appear from the above that in case of the hilly subdivisions of Darjeeling the regulatory
role of the Collector is intended to prevent landslides, erosion etc. The provisions are necessary
and justified.

The main purpose behind sec 4B was to prevent indiscriminate conversion of agri land into non-
agricultural land because the use of agricultural land for raising crops was considered to be the
most important use in the state.

Another legal provision with respect to felling of trees on private land, raised under Social
Forestry program, under W.B (protection and conservation of trees in non-forest areas) Act,
2006 puts severe restriction on the choice of optimum land use by the private land owners. The
land-owners normally plant trees under Social Forestry programs, either to harvest it at the time
of financial need, or to put the non-arable land under best productive utilization. The primary
objective of the Act is to prevent large scale felling of trees leading to reduction in green cover.
Though the Non-forest tree Act, 2006 has provision to allow felling, subject to certain
conditions, the bureaucratic red-tapism sometimes complicates the process for the applicant
and leads to corruption. The Act allows felling of a maximum of three trees per year without
prior permission. But there is a need to further simplify the process so that the land owners are
not de-motivated to plant trees leading to failure of popular social forestry program.

Different Development Authorities like the Durgapur-Asansol Development Authority, Haldia
Development Authority etc. created under the provisions of the Town and Country Planning Act
are authorized to restrict change of land use in specified areas falling within the area for which a
development plan has been drawn up.

Policy Recommendation: The government has to revisit the subject on the use of land.
Building of infrastructure, setting up of industries and planned urbanization are the essential
requirements of the day. The reason for imposing restrictions in the early eighties of the last
century no longer holds good. It’s time the restrictions were relaxed in a judicious way
58 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 4
                           Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
                           Restrictions on rural land transferability effectively serve public policy
   2        2       2
                           objectives.
                           A: There are a series of regulations that for the most part serve public purpose
                           and that are enforced.
                           B: There are a series of regulations that are for the most part serving pubic
                           purpose but that are not enforced.
                           C: There are a series of regulations that are generally not serving a public
                           purpose but are not enforced.
                           D: There are a series of regulations that are generally not serving public
                           purpose and are enforced.

Analysis:

Restrictions on rural land transferability have been imposed by several Acts, namely WBLR Act
[Secs 49(1A), 14C] - Sec 49(1A) applies to the patta holders and sec 14C to the members of
scheduled tribes. Restrictions have also been imposed by the Homestead Act [sec 10(1)].

A patta holder is a beneficiary of distributive land reforms and any unfettered right of transfer
patta land will defeat the very purpose of distributive land reform. Similarly, an unrestricted
right of transfer of land, if available to a member of the Scheduled Tribe to a non-tribal, will
encourage alienation of land. Also, a beneficiary under the Homestead Act is given land to
provide him a secure shelter. Transfer of the land by him unless restricted will defeat the very
purpose of the Act and go against the public policy of socio-economic development of the poorer
section of the society. Enforcement level of these legal provisions is rather low and numerous
cases are found where the patta-holders and members of ST community have transferred the
land in contravention to provisions of WBLR Act (ranking changed while reviewing with EI and
panellists from A to B).

Data Source: no data available, assessment by field experience
Policy Recommendation:

Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 4
                         Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
                         Rural land use plans are elaborated/changed via public process and resulting
  2        2       3
                         burdens are shared.
                         A: Public input is required and sought in preparing and amending rural land
                         use plans (incl. rezoning) and relevant decisions are arrived at in a
                         transparent and public process.
                         B: Public input is required and sought in preparing and amending rural land
                         use plans (incl. rezoning) but decisions are arrived at in a non-transparent
                         process.
                         C: Public input is required and sought in preparing and amending land use
                         plans but comments are not reflected in the finalization of land use plans.
                         D: Public input is not required and/or sought in preparing and amending land
                         use plans.

Analysis:

Land use refers to human activities that takes place on or make use of land, e.g., residential,
commercial, industrial etc. The challenge for land use planning is to achieve concurrently the
objectives of protecting and consolidating agriculture, diversifying agricultural production and
enhancing rural development and moving towards infrastructure and industrial development.
District land sue plans are being developed for all districts of the state. For amending land use
59 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
plans local level discussions are facilitated through the involvement of local administration and
panchayatiraj institutions, but there is ambiguity in incorporation of local inputs in the
finalization or amending land use plans (ranking changed from A to C in consultation with EI
and panellists).

Policy Recommendation:

Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 4
                         Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
                         Rural lands, the use of which is changed, are swiftly transferred to the
  2        2       4
                         destined use.
                         A: More than 70% of the land that has had a change in land use assignment in
                         the past 3 years has changed to the destined use (e.g. forest, pastures,
                         wetlands, national parks etc.).
                         B: Between 50% and 70% of the land that has had a change in land use
                         assignment in the past 3 years has changed to the destined use (e.g. forest,
                         pastures, wetlands, national parks etc.).
                         C: Between 30% and 50% of the land that has had a change in land use
                         assignment in the past 3 years has changed to the destined use (e.g. forest,
                         pastures, wetlands, national parks etc.).
                         D: Less than 30% of the land that has had a change in land use assignment in
                         the past 3 years has changed to the destined use (e.g. forest, pastures,
                         wetlands, national parks etc.).

Analysis:

Rural lands the use of which is changed cannot be always swiftly transferred to the destined use.
First, it takes time to decide how best a land may be utilized for public good. Once a decision is
arrived through public process actual execution depends on numerous factors like availability of
funds, technical assistance etc., whenever necessary.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:
Policy Recommendation:

Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 4
                         Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
                         Rezoning of rural land use follows a public process that safeguards existing
  2        2       5
                         rights.
                         A: Processes for rezoning are public and clear with effective mechanisms in
                         place to safeguard existing rights and compensation in case of loss in areas
                         where land use is to be restricted.
                         B: Processes for rezoning are public and clear but mechanisms to safeguard
                         existing rights are not fully effective.
                         C: Processes for rezoning are not public but care is taken to safeguard existing
                         rights in virtually all cases.
                         D: Rezoning processes are not public process and rights are ignored or not
                         properly or promptly compensated in the majority of cases.

Analysis:

Processes for rezoning of rural land use, as in case of notifications under Indian Forest Act, 1927
or Wildlife protection Act, 1972 are well documented and are accessible by public. But there is
mostly one-sided action on the part of Forest department to implement the processes, with little
60 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
effort to ensure that the rights of the affected people are fully taken care of. There is an elaborate
mechanism under IFA, 1927, to finally notify a Forest as Protected or Reserved, after settlement
of all rights. But for most of the Protected Forests in South Bengal, notifications were used
without fulfilling the prior needs, which resulted into conflict between the people and forest
officials in the early sixties and seventies (ranking changed from A to B in consultation with EI
and other stakeholders).

Data Source: Forest department and CSOs
Policy Recommendation:

Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 4
                         Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
                         For protected rural land use (forest, pastures, wetlands, national parks etc.)
  2        2       6
                         plans correspond to actual use.
                         A: The share of land set aside for specific use that is used for a non-specified
                         purpose in contravention of existing regulations is less than 10%.
                         B: The share of land set aside for specific use that is used for a non-specified
                         purpose in contravention of existing regulations is between 10% and 30%.
                         C: The share of land set aside for specific use that is used for a non-specified
                         purpose in contravention of existing regulations is between 30% and 50%.
                         D: The share of land set aside for specific use that is used for a non-specified
                         purpose in contravention of existing regulations is greater than 50%.

Analysis:

The management of forest land and National Parks are controlled by Forest Department and no
alternate land use is permitted except for prior approval of Min of Environment & Forests, GOI
and National Board of Wildlife (for National Parks/ Sanctuaries). The same holds true for those
wetland notified as Forest under IFA/ Wild Life Protection Act. However, in case of wetland
situated on Govt. vested land or in private sector, there are often illegal diversions of same for
construction/ Real Estate purposes especially in the towns. Management of such wetland and
pasture are mostly neglected and only when there is a protest from civil society, the land use
diversion is stopped temporarily. There are also cases of unholy nexus between Govt. officials,
Panchayat officials and the unscrupulous promoters towards such illegal land-use changes.
There is no data available for making a fair assessment of the dimension ranking, but an
estimation of contravention of existing regulations between 10-30% is considered appropriate
(ranking changed from A to B following consultation with EI and stakeholders/ panellists).

Data Source: Forest department, no data available on violation of regulations

Policy Recommendation: Synergy is required for provisioning JFMC under FRA.

Panel 3: Urban Land Use, Planning, and Development

Indicators
This panel has been allotted the following indicators
1. (LGI 4) Restrictions on rights: land rights are not conditional on adherence to
   unrealistic standards.
2. (LGI 7) Transparency of land use restrictions: changes in land use and management
   regulations are made in a transparent fashion and provide significant benefits for society in
   general rather than just for specific groups.

61 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
3. (LGI8) Efficiency in the urban land use planning process: land use plans are
   current, implemented, do not drive people into informality, and cope with urban growth.
4. (LGI 9)Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land uses:
   development permits are granted promptly and based on reasonable requirements.
5. (LGI 10)Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas


                                Land Governance Indicator 4
   Panel         LGI    Dim.    Restrictions on rights: land rights are not conditional on
                                adherence to unrealistic standards
                                Restrictions on urban land ownership/transfer effectively serve public
        3         1       1
                                policy objectives.
                                A: There are a series of regulations that are for the most part serving
                                public purpose and that are enforced.
                                B: There is a series of regulations that are for the most part serve public
                                purpose but enforcement is deficient.
                                C: There are a series of regulations that are generally not serving public
                                purpose but are not enforced.
                                D: There are a series of regulations that are generally not serving public
                                purpose and are enforced.


Analysis
Land tenure is defined as the mode by which land is held or owned, or the set of relationships
among people concerning land or its products. These relationships may be obtained by law (de
jure) or by custom, use or occupation (de facto). The form of tenure determines how strong or
weak the claims, rights and entitlements are in relation to land. Individual land title is only one
form of land tenure, and not necessarily the only way of ensuring security of tenure.
Issue:-Rapid increase in population and fast dwindling land supply
Legislations:-
           West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 wherein under section 4C restrictions have been
            imposed on the raiyat for change of area, character or use of land in both rural and urban
            areas.
           Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 which ensures equitable distribution of
            land in urban agglomeration and restricts haphazard land use in the urban areas.
           West Bengal Town and Country (Planning and Development) Act, 1979
           West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993
           Indian Registration Act of 1908: provides for registration of deeds (for any land
            transaction), which establishes public record of transactions but not validity of
            transactions. It does not require to verify the history of land ownerships from the seller,
            thus weakening protection mechanism for the buyers as this makes the land title
            ‘presumptive’ and not ‘conclusive’.

The Acts and Regulations above explain the restrictions on urban land ownership and/or
transfer but enforcement of those acts/regulations is definitely deficient.

Data Source: West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, West Bengal Town and Country (Development
and Planning act, 1979, Urban Land Ceiling and Registration Act, 1976, West Bengal Land
Reforms Act, 1955.


62 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Data reliability: high

Policy Recommendation:

If the cities are to continue to be efficient platforms for future economic growth and to
accommodate the rising demands for land for habitation of the burgeoning urban population in
the decades to come in a sustainable manner, radical reformation is required within the present
land management system and their administration to accomplish the transition of organised
urban development. Now there is a series of legislations/regulations that are for the most part
serve public purpose but enforcement is deficient. While reformation in the system and
administration is recommended, the Government also should reap the benefits of the existing
relevant legal framework through a process of proper enforcement.
   Panel        LGI        Dim.   Land Governance Indicator 4
                                  Restrictions on rights: land rights are not conditional on
                                  adherence to unrealistic standards
                                  Restrictions on urban land use (disaster risk) effectively serve public
        3          1         2
                                  policy objectives.
                                  A: There are a series of regulations that are for the most part serving
                                  public purpose and that are enforced.
                                  B: There are a series of regulations that are for the most part serving
                                  public purpose but that are not enforced.
                                  C: There are a series of regulations that are generally not serving public
                                  purpose but are not enforced.
                                  D: There are a series of regulations that are generally not serving public
                                  purpose and are enforced.


Analysis
Observations:-

           The average urban density of population in West Bengal in all the decades are ten times
            more than the overall density and it is quite high in relation to space.
           Unplanned growth of fringe areas and peri-urban regions.
           For every decadal increase in population there is no increase in the area of towns
            suggesting lack of spatial planning of towns.
           Forced urbanization in the form of New Towns during the last three decades, which are
            merely “Bed Room Towns”, have been inducted only to harness urban growth.
           MFMG (Metropolitan Fringe and Megacity Governance) has not updated reforms for
            many years that have led to unscientific, uneconomic and unsustainable utilization of
            land.
           Unplanned growth in fringe urban areas leads to urban sprawl and consequent increased
            disaster risk.
           Unplanned urban growth resulting in hazardous industrial plants existing with informal
            congested settlements.

Issues:-
There are a number of hindering factors to combat those above mentioned challenges. These
may be categorized as follows:
    a) Legal & Institutional Barriers
               o       Conflicting legal dictums in different acts i.e. overlapping of powers & confusion
                       of power jurisdiction.
63 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
            o   Planning never gets importance as it gives no immediate tangible output
            o   Shortage of qualified town planners
            o   Lack of coordinated effort between departments
            o   Lack of involvement of public in decision making
            o   Failure to incorporate the issues of disaster management in DDP due to lack of
                GIS data
    b) Political & Cultural Barriers
    c) Technological Barriers: site availability, engineering details and technical performance,
       lack of key skills and expertise
    d) Financial Barriers.
Data Source: Various Acts and legislations
Data Reliability: High
Policy recommendation:
There is a lack of adequate policy-framing to address the several barriers which affect
implementation of land use plans although the legal framework is exhaustive.
                           Land Governance Indicator 7
                           Transparency of land use restrictions: changes in land use and
Panel     LGI     Dim.     management regulations are made in a transparent fashion and
                           provide significant benefits for society in general rather than just
                           for specific groups.
                           Process of urban expansion/infrastructure development process is transparent
   3        2       1
                           and respects existing rights.
                           A: Information on planned urban expansion and infrastructure development is
                           publicly available with sufficient anticipation and a process is in place to deal
                           with land rights by those affected that corresponds to internationally recognized
                           standards.
                           B: Information on planned urban expansion and infrastructure development is
                           publicly available with sufficient anticipation and a systematic process to deal
                           with land rights by those affected in a way that is not fully in line with
                           international standards.
                           C: Information on planned urban expansion and infrastructure development is
                           publicly available with sufficient anticipation but the way in which land rights
                           by those affected are dealt with is largely ad hoc.
                           D: Information on planned urban expansion and infrastructure development is
                           not publicly available.
Analysis

In the 1980s, there was a need for decentralization of planning and development activities which
were to be met by decentralized institutional structure of municipal governance. This
empowered local bodies with power and responsibilities to deal with urban problems through
legislative provisions. Some of the important measures which were taken in this regard are:

       Setting up of the West Bengal Urban Development Strategy committee in
        1979 to monitor and strategize state wide urban development.
       Enactment of Town and Country (Planning and Development) Act in 1979:
        Obligated preparation of Existing Land Use maps and Registers (ELUMR) and Land
        Use of Development Control Plans (LUDCP) for areas under Calcutta Metropolitan
        Development Authority (CMDA)

64 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       Setting up of Municipal Finance Commission in 1979
       Setting up of Central Valuation Board to curb under-valuation of properties in
        municipal areas
       Enactment of Municipal Corporation Acts since 1980s that Acts provided for a
        cabinet form of local government for civic administration, with a Mayor-in-Council set
        up.
       Amendment of Bengal Municipal Act of 1932 and enactment of new W.B.
        Municipal Act in 1993 for cabinet system of government with Chairman-in-Council set
        up
       Creation of Parastatal bodies (Development Authorities) and demarcation of planning
        areas

In the 1990s, due to 73rd and 74th Amendments of the Constitution of India, W.B. District
Planning Committee Act 1994, and W.B. Metropolitan Planning Committee Act 1994 along with
the W.B. District Planning Committee Rules 1994 was enacted for decentralized spatial and
socio-economic Planning.

The 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments ushered in major changes in urban planning
process. It created mandate for participation of people in the planning process paving the way
for a transparent system of urban expansion/development respecting existing rights.

In line with the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments, as mentioned in the background note,
the state government introduced the Kolkata Urban Services for the Poor (KUSP), a multi-sector
urban reforms program, by creating Change Management Unit (CMU) with DFID funding in the
year 1999. It involved all concerned public institutions dealing with urban development and
management in the preparation of Draft Development Plan in a participatory manner. It
resulted in successful completion of DDP in 40 ULBs involving all stakeholders which also
extended up to 126 Municipalities in the State in 2005. DDP embraces all aspects of
development including socio-economic development of weaker section, infrastructural
development of slum areas, housing facilities for vulnerable section, land use plan,
environmental management, and disaster risk reduction plan and so on. But unfortunately, this
model could not be sustained.

Data Source: Various Acts and legislations, DDP manual, study as referred conducted by the
Administrative Training Institute, Kolkata

Data Reliability: High

Policy Recommendation:

While a policy of decentralized planning exists in the state since early eighties of the last
century, it seldom gets implemented. DFID assisted KUSP program has helped sketching an
outline of how decentralized planning could be prepared with adequate public input. At a
certain point of time all the ULBs in the state prepared Draft Development Plans for respective
areas including LUDCPs and LUMRs through a participatory planning process. But
unfortunately, this model could not be sustained. It is recommended that the KUSP model
should be introduced strictly to provide significant benefits for society in general. While there
are mandates in the Acts for preparation of such plans, the process of controlling the land use
and its enforcement is not sufficiently explicit in the legal framework.
   Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 7
                              Transparency of land use restrictions: changes in land use and
                              management regulations are made in a transparent fashion and
                              provide significant benefits for society in general rather than just
                              for specific groups.

65 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                             Changes in urban land use plans are based on a clear public process and input
     3        2        2
                             by all stakeholders.
                             A: Public input is sought in preparing and amending land use plans and these
                             responses are explicitly referenced in the report prepared by the official body
                             responsible for preparing the new plans. This report is publicly accessible.
                             B: Public input is sought in preparing and amending land use plans and the
                             public responses are used by the official body responsible for finalizing the
                             new plans, but the process for doing this is unclear or the report is not
                             publicly accessible.
                             C: Public input is sought in preparing and amending land use plans but the
                             public comments are largely ignored in the finalization of the land use plans.
                             D: Public input is not sought in preparing and amending land use plans.


Analysis:

In West Bengal land Use plans are prepared by the Urban Local Bodies, under Department of
Municipal Affairs and by the Development Authorities under Urban Development Departments.

As per the mandate of the section 297 of the West Bengal Municipal Act 1993 (WBM ACT 1993)
ULBs prepare Draft Development Plan (DDP), which prescribes existing land use pattern and
future land use control of the ULB area. But the process of controlling the Land use is not very
clear. The WBM ACT 1993 also gives scope for revision and modification of the DDP not more
than once in every three years. Also the WBM ACT 1993 is silent about the process of
preparation of DDP and public participation in preparation of DDP. However the ULBS through
KUSP initiatives have prepared their DDPs through participatory planning process, involving
citizens from scratches to final shape of DDP. To make such participation mandatory, in
planning process and amendment of plan preparation process the State Government needs to
amend the WBBM ACT 1993 accordingly.

The Development Authorities (DA) and Planning Authorities (PA) of this State prepares existing
Land Use Map and Register (LUMR) under section 28 of the West Bengal Town & Country
(Planning & Development) Act 1979 (WBT&CP Act 1979) and also prepares Land Use
Development Control Plan (LUDCP) under section 31 of the WBT&CP Act 1979 to control the
future development of the planning area. The WBT&CP Act 1979 also gives scope for
amendment of the LUDCP under section 40 of the Act. Public validation of the LUMR prepared
under section 28 is being ensured by the section 29 of the WBT&CP Act 1979. The LUMR are
kept accessible for general public for a period of 30 days through public notice and newspaper
publication, inviting objections from public and the objections are being heard by a designated
officer of the Authority. Eventually the Authority makes such modification in LUMR as per the
report of the designated officer.

Similarly, for LUDCP also the WBT&CP Act 1979 gives mandate for going for public validation
under section 36 of the Act. The draft LUDCP is being kept accessible for general public through
public notice and newspaper publication for a period of 60 days for inspection and inviting
objections from public. A 3 (three) member committee is being formed by the Authority for
hearing the objections. The authority may make such modifications in the LUDCP as suggested
by the report of the 3 member committee as it consider proper and submit it to the State
Government for approval.

So it is clear from the above that for the LUMRs and LUDCPs being prepared by Development
and Planning Authorities constituted under the WBT&CP Act 1979 have specific mandate for
going for public validation and giving regards to the public opinions. But for DDPs being
prepared by ULB don’t have such legal mandate. Also DDP prepared by the ULBs through KUSP
had undergone a thorough participatory planning process, which is not being exercised by the

66 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Planning / Development Authorities at the time of preparation of LUDCP. So degree of public
participation is less in preparation of LUDCPs, thus ownership of plan is obviously less. There is
deficiency in the process of incorporating inputs/suggestion received from the people.

Data Source: Various Acts and legislations, DDP manual, study as referred conducted by the
Administrative Training Institute, Kolkata

Data Reliability: High

It is recommended that the KUSP model should be introduced strictly to provide significant
benefits for society in general.
 Panel        LGI    Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 7
                              Transparency of land use restrictions: changes in land use and
                              management regulations are made in a transparent fashion and
                              provide significant benefits for society in general rather than just
                              for specific groups.
                              Changes in assigned urban land use are swiftly followed by actual land use
    3          2        3
                              change.
                              A: More than 70% of the land that has had a change in land use assignment in
                              the past 3 years has changed to the destined use.
                              B: Between 50% and 70% of the land that has had a change in land use
                              assignment in the past 3 years has changed to the destined use.
                              C: Between 30% and 50% of the land that has had a change in land use
                              assignment in the past 3 years has changed to the destined use.
                              D: Less than 30% of the land that has had a change in land use assignment in
                              the past 3 years has changed to the destined use.


Analysis:

It is very difficult to ascertain, as we don’t have any system and procedure to arrest the dynamic
changes of Land use in urban areas of the West Bengal. We generally do not follow the regular
updation of Urban Land Use and creation of database to record the changes in use in Urban
Areas. Processes of giving Building Plan approval is not linked with Land Use prescriptions and
permission. In some cases Land Use prescription of LUDCP of Planning and Development
Authorities do not match with the prescription of the DDPs of ULBs. Though Development
Authorities keeps records for development permissions but the same record is not being
managed spatially on a regular basis. In the panel discussion a fair assessment of 50-70% of
land use change in past 3 years to the destined use was agreed (ranking B).

Thus it is very difficult to give the status of Land Use Change data both in numerical value and
represent the same spatially, unless we introduce a new process of keeping the record of land
use changes through GIS method dynamically.

Data Source & Data reliability: No data is available

Policy Recommendation:

This is another problem of urban development administration as it is very difficult to ascertain
or to arrest the dynamic change of land use in urban areas of West Bengal. Generally the regular
updating of urban land use and creation of data base to record the changes in use is not
followed. Processes of sanctioning building plans are not linked with land use prescriptions and
permissions. The Government in the Urban Development Department should ensure either
through amendment of Act and/or regulations a process of keeping the record land use changes
through GIS which is not there right now.

67 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                           Land Governance Indicator 8
                           Efficiency in the urban land use planning process: land use plans
Panel    LGI      Dim.
                           are current, implemented, do not drive people into informality, and
                           cope with urban growth.
                           Policy to ensure delivery of low-cost housing and services exists and is
  3        3        1
                           progressively implemented.
                           A: A policy for low cost housing and services and effective instruments to
                           implement it exists so that there is a clear trajectory to provide adequate shelter
                           for all.
                           B: A policy for low cost housing and services exists but implementation is not
                           always effective. As a result, the number of those with inadequate shelter
                           declines but still remains high.
                           C: There is a policy for low cost housing and services but implementation has
                           major gaps so that the number of those with inadequate shelter actually
                           increases.
                           D: There is no policy for low-cost housing and services and no provisions that
                           would require private developers to cater to the lower end of the housing
                           market.


Analysis
There are a number of central government schemes and programmes which provide for
integrated slum development as well as housing development for the poor. JNNURM has the
provision for housing and infrastructure development in slum settlements through two
components – (a) Integrated Housing and Slum development Programme (IHSDP) and (b)
Basic Services to Urban Poor (BSUP). In addition to that, the government has recently launched
a centrally sponsored scheme called Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) with the goal of helping the urban
poor living in slums gain appropriate housing and addressing the processes by which slums are
created and reproduced.
West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993 mandates Municipal Councils to identify and declare slum
areas and carry out improvements in them. But, because of various reasons, this mandate has
not worked well. It is also noteworthy to mention that lack of tenure for slum dwellers that lead
to difficulties in implementation of several government schemes. However, attempts have been
made to evolve a policy for providing secured land tenure to urban poor belonging to EWS but
the process of policy developing is still underway. Recently, to implement the RAY programme a
positive initiative has been taken to bring out exact status of slums in the urban areas.
There is a notification of the Urban Development Department (Notification No.1448/T&CP/C-
2/3A-2/2011 dated 20th July, 2011), which speaks about the mandatory provisions for
Economically Weaker Section (EWS) and Lower Income Group (LIG) families of population
residing within planning areas covered under the West Bengal Town & Country (Planning &
Development) Act 1979, housing and sub-division of land and plot. So any developer intending
for housing project and land/plot sub-division of stipulated sizes and quantum applying for
development permission under section 46 of the West Bengal Town & Country (Planning &
Development) Act 1979 has to abide by the notification mandate and keep minimum stipulated
provision of EWS and LIG housing and land/plot. Thus by such notification it is being
experienced that the stock of housing for EWS and LIG is gradually being increasing.

It is important and required to look in to the matter of affordability of EWS and LIG population
for low-cost housing and also for affordable rental housing, which are not being explored yet.
Here affordability is key word. Mere increasing of stock will not cater to the target population, if
these are not affordable to them.

Data source: Urban Development Department

Data reliability: High
68 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                         Land Governance Indicator 8
                         Efficiency in the urban land use planning process: land use plans are
Panel     LGI    Dim.
                         current, implemented, do not drive people into informality, and cope
                         with urban growth.
  3        3       2     Land use planning effectively guides urban spatial expansion in the largest city.
                         A: In the largest city, urban spatial expansion is guided effectively by a hierarchy of
                         regional/detailed land use plans that are updated regularly, with land use intensity
                         being matched with carrying capacity of infrastructure.
                         B: In the largest city, while a hierarchy of regional/detailed land use plans is
                         specified by law, in practice urban spatial expansion is guided by the provision of
                         infrastructure without full implementation of the land use plans.
                         C: In the largest city, while a hierarchy of regional/detailed land use plans is
                         specified by law, in practice urban spatial expansion occurs in an ad hoc manner
                         with infrastructure provided some time after urbanization.
                         D: In the largest city, a hierarchy of regional/detailed land use plans may or may not
                         be specified by law and in practice urban spatial expansion occurs in an ad hoc
                         manner with little if any infrastructure provided recently
Analysis:

Kolkata Metropolitan Planning Area (KMA) has two 2 Municipal Corporation (KMC & HMC)
and 39 other Municipalities which are preparing their Land Use Plans individually without
keeping the overall regional context in mind. So the land use control of the overall KMA is not
very effective as a whole. Here, Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority (KMDA) can play
a pivotal role to prepare a comprehensive Land Use Plan for the entire KMA, considering the
carrying capacity of the infrastructure of entire KMA region and taking inputs from all ULBs
within its jurisdiction and then the ULBs may prepare their Land Use Plan keeping in
conformity with the overall Land Use Plan of the KMA region. Such integrated approach is
highly required for effective spatial expansion of the largest city, which is not appropriately
there in the current system.

Data Source & Data reliability:
Policy Recommendation:
KMDA is an institution which can act as a leader in bringing about an integrated approach for
effective spatial expansion of the largest city which is not appropriately there in the current
system. The Government should examine the gaps and if necessary create a legal backup to
ensure such integration.
Panel     LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 8
                          Efficiency in the urban land use planning process: land use plans are
                          current, implemented, do not drive people into informality, and cope
                          with urban growth.
      3    3        3     Land use planning effectively guides urban development in the four next largest cities.
                          A: In the four major cities urban development is guided effectively by a hierarchy of
                          regional/detailed land use plans that are regularly updated, with land use intensity
                          being matched with carrying capacity of infrastructure.
                          B: In the four major cities, while a hierarchy of regional/detailed land use plans is
                          specified by law, in practice urban development is guided by the provision of
                          infrastructure which implements only a part of the land use plans.
                          C: In the four major cities in the country, while a hierarchy of regional/detailed land
                          use plans is specified by law, in practice urban development occurs in an ad hoc
                          manner with infrastructure provided some time after urbanization.
                          D: In the four major cities in the country a hierarchy of regional/detailed land use
                          plans may or may not be specified by law and in practice urban development occurs in
                          an ad hoc manner with little if any infrastructure provided.

69 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Analysis:

Durgapur & Asansol falls within the Asansol Durgapur Development Authority jurisdiction,
Haldia falls under Haldia Development Authority jurisdiction and Siliguri falls within Siliguri
Jalpaiguri Development Authority jurisdiction. In these areas there are some degree of co-
ordination between the ULBs and Development Authorities, which somehow helps in planned
urban development to some extent. But if the overall regional level land use plan prepared by
development authorities is being followed by ULBs, it may boost planned urban development in
a more effective way. So there should be two way process of flow of information and inputs for
land use plan preparation for sustainable urban development in the region keeping carrying
capacity of the infrastructure of the existing cities in mind and to reduce ad-hoc planning to the
present trend of urbanization pressure.

Data Source & Data reliability:

Policy Recommendation:

The gaps and lapses and lack of integrated approach as mentioned earlier are also the key
factors to be addressed here too.

Panel     LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 8
                          Efficiency in the urban land use planning process: land use plans are
                          current, implemented, do not drive people into informality, and cope
                          with urban growth.
   3       3        4     Planning processes are able to cope with urban growth.
                          A: In the largest city, the urban planning process/authority is able to cope with
                          the increasing demand for serviced units/land as evidenced by the fact that
                          almost all new dwellings are formal.
                          B: In the largest city, the urban planning process/authority is able to cope to
                          some extent with the increasing demand for serviced units/land as evidenced by
                          the fact that most new dwellings are formal.
                          C: In the largest city, the urban planning process/authority is struggling to cope
                          with the increasing demand for serviced units/land as evidenced by the fact that
                          most new dwellings are informal.
                          D: In the largest city, the urban planning process/authority cannot cope with the
                          increasing demand for serviced units/land as evidenced by the fact that almost all
                          new dwellings are informal.

Analysis:

In West Bengal, land use and development of lands is exercised under West Bengal Town and
Country (Planning and Development) Act, 1979 in the urban areas. Under this Act, land use
planning is mandatory to effectively control urban development in all the cities, areas under
Development Authorities and Planning Areas formed by the State Government. Moreover,
under Sec 113 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993(amended in 2007), it has become
mandatory for all the municipalities to prepare land use plans while formulating development
plans for the areas concerned. Under the WBT&CP Act, 1979 Land Use Development Control
Plans (LUDCP) are prepared for the planning areas. In the state of West Bengal the Municipal
Authorities have been empowered to regulate land use and construction of buildings. In section
63 of chapter VI ibid indicates the obligatory functions of the Municipalities. In sub section (3)
of said section 63 the matter has been dealt with elaborately. It is also worthy to mention that
the municipal authorities in this state are empowered to regulate the building activities through
an elaborate chapter XIV of the said act and the West Bengal Municipal (Building) Rules,2007
framed there under and to prepare detailed plan, inter alia, the land use plan under chapter XIX

70 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
of the said act. It may also be mentioned that such power has been vested with the municipal
authorities of this state much before enactment of the 74th constitutional amendment Act.

Data Source &Data reliability: Same as Dimension 1

Policy recommendation:

The problems explained in this dimension relate to the planning processes prevalent in the
state. There are attempts to combat the hitherto haphazard system but lot more reforms and
governance would be required to achieve the desired standard. The suggested recommendations
in the earlier dimensions would also be relevant here.
                                Land Governance Indicator 9
                                Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land uses:
Panel        LGI     Dim.
                                development permits are granted promptly and based on
                                reasonable requirements.
                                Provisions for residential building permits are appropriate, affordable and
   3            4        1
                                complied with.
                                A: Requirements to obtain a building permit are technically justified,
                                affordable, and complied with.
                                B: Requirements to obtain a building permit are technically justified and
                                affordable but only partly complied with.
                                C: Requirements to obtain a building permit are technically justified but not
                                affordable for (and not complied by) the majority of those affected.
                                D: Requirements to obtain a building permit are over-engineered technically
                                and not affordable.


Analysis

         West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993 draws out the regulations for obtaining building permit
          which are appropriate and affordable and are complied with in most cases.
         KUSP has initiated modernization of urban governance with the building permits being
          given decision within 3 months.
         Citizens Charter has enabled the Municipal Authorities to deliver services in time


Policy Recommendation:

The legal provisions for residential building permits appear to be appropriate and affordable,
since time tested, but more vigilance would be required to ensure a corruption free system.
Panel      LGI      Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 9
                             Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land uses:
                             development permits are granted promptly and based on reasonable
                             requirements.
                             A building permit for a residential dwelling can be obtained quickly and at a low
  3         4        2
                             cost.
                             A: All applications for building permits receive a decision within 3 months.
                             B: All applications for building permits receive a decision within 6 months.
                             C: All applications for building permits receive a decision within 12 months.
                             D: All applications for building permits receive a decision after a period
                             exceeding 12 months.

Analysis:

71 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993 and Building Rules, 2007 provide regulations for
        building plan which are appropriate and affordable (Rs. 500/- for first 30 sq. metre and
        thereafter for every 10 sq. metre Rs. 75/-) and are complied with in most cases.
       KUSP has initiated modernization of urban governance with the building permits being
        given decision within 3 months.
       All the ULBs introduced Citizens Charter under KUSP initiatives which had clear
        mandates about the formalities for applying to obtain building permits and the
        maximum period within which (within 90 days) the decision is to be taken. Recently,
        West Bengal Rights to Public Service Act, 2013 has come up which is giving result and
        satisfactory response. The decision on issuance of building permit is given within three
        months

Data Source & Data reliability: Same as Dimension 1

Policy Recommendation:
KUSP guidelines were clear regarding the Citizens Charter. Recently, West Bengal Rights to
Public Service Act, 2013 has come up which is expected to produce results and satisfactory
response. Here also the Government should be vigilant to ensure corruption free system.
                           Land Governance Indicator10
Panel     LGI     Dim.
                           Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
   3        5        1     Formalization of urban residential housing is feasible and affordable.
                           A: The requirements for formalizing housing in urban areas are clear, straight-
                           forward, affordable and implemented consistently in a transparent manner.
                           B: The requirements for formalizing housing in urban areas are clear, straight-
                           forward, and affordable but are not implemented consistently in a transparent
                           manner.
                           C: The requirements for formalizing housing in urban areas are neither clear,
                           straight-forward, or affordable but many applicants from informal areas are
                           managing to satisfy the requirements.
                           D: The requirements for formalizing housing in urban areas are such that
                           formalization is deemed very difficult.


Analysis:

Issue of formalizing housing in urban areas is often compromised in terms of according priority.
There is as such no legal provision, neither any policy for formalizing housing in urban areas.
The requirements are not clear, determined arbitrarily and at times are unaffordable. There are
inherent mind-set issues like lack of awareness on and keeping away from legal framework. The
reasons are listed:

       Lack of awareness generation on legal framework sometimes hinders the process of
        formalization especially for the poor.
       Transparency is affected by vested interests
       Formalization cost is high and may not be affordable for all
       Restrictions on rights also become a bottleneck in straightforward implementation


Policy recommendation:


72 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
To the extent permissible awareness generation on the provisions of formalizing housing in
urban areas and incentives for ending informality may be considered. A policy framing in this
regard is recommended to address this important issue. (Ranking changed from B to C following
review by the EI and panellists).

                           Land Governance Indicator 10
Panel     LGI     Dim.
                           Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
                           In cities with informal tenure, a viable strategy exists for tenure security,
   3        5       2
                           infrastructure, and housing.
                           A: Existing regulations do not provide incentives for new informal occupations
                           and a strategy exists to regularize land rights and provide services to existing
                           informal occupants.
                           B: A strategy exists to regularize land rights and provide services to existing
                           informal occupants but existing regulations provide incentives for new informal
                           occupations.
                           C: Strategies to deal with urban informality exist but focus only on either land or
                           services but not both.
                           D: There is neither process nor strategy to implement it.



Analysis:

Security of tenure for urban poor continues to be a vexed issue. Experts advocate that tenural
security, together with an enabling role of the government with reference to provision of housing
finance, would go a long way in mitigating the housing problem in cities and assist urban poor,
over time, to gradually improve their housing and living condition. The UN-HABITAT
generalizes the most common tenure systems which include freehold, leases, provisional or
conditional tenure and group tenure arrangements. Further importance is given to security of
tenure by including as one of the objectives of JNNURM. West Bengal government does not
have a policy, as yet, for granting tenure to slum dwellers or for housing the urban poor. Such
policies can be helpful in focusing attention to the problem, developing a commitment and
providing a framework for action. In Kolkata most of the bastis are on land held by individuals
or thika tenants. The Basti Improvement Program funded by the World Bank was implemented
in these localities involving conversion of service latrines, connection of water taps, surface
drainage facility, construction and widening of roads, street lighting etc. resulting in improved
living condition in bastis (Ramaswamy V, 2008). Those who occupy rooms in small areas either
under individual owners or thika tenants enjoy rights as tenants under the Premises Tenancy
act, 1997. Hence the target group here are the unauthorized occupiers who somehow manage to
live by constructing jhupris on government lands – both central and state.

It was proposed in the KUSP preparatory studies that the respective ULBs should take the lead
role in improving tenure security of the poor. This proposal was discussed in detail and in a
participatory approach with ULBs, CMU, districts and state level officials. There was general
agreement that ULBs will have to take the lead role because of the following reasons:

    o   ULBs have local knowledge and are close to people, therefore in a better position to
        develop responsive solutions
    o   ULBs are not able to go ahead with BSUP projects in spite of the money being available
        because the land tenure situation has not been sorted out. Since these are the
        responsibility of ULBs they have to do something urgently
    o   In spite of their high rank many slums cannot be adequately provided with services
        through KUSP funds because they are on land over which they have no rights. If ULBs
        have to really be pro-poor, they have to find solutions to the tenure problem.

73 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    o   ULBs cannot be fully successful in their mandate to maintain environmental health and
        provide citizen services unless slums become eligible for investment
    o   The people consider insecure tenure as one of the reasons for poverty and vulnerability
        and ULBs have to address this if they have to undertake poverty alleviation.
    o   ULBs are losing a lot of revenue because they cannot recover tax or levy charges on
        illegal occupants.

At the same time there is apprehension that ULBs are not in a position to do much by them
because

    o   They do not have much say in land matters, which is looked after by the State
        Government. In any case most of the slums with tenure problems are on state
        government service land, railways and private land owners.
    o   The ULB information base on land ownership and tenure is poor and there is lack of
        urgency to develop a public land database
    o   ULBs are not well aware of possibilities and alternatives
    o   Land market pressures can create problems
    o   If slum dwellers are given tenure documents they may sell the land and go somewhere
        else

For last three years, some attempts have been made to evolve a policy for providing secured land
tenure to urban poor belonging to EWS, occupying government land but no firm policy is there
to eradicate the problem of informality. Recently, to implement the Rajiv AwasYojana (RAY)
Program, a positive initiative has been taken to conduct a survey as per the RAY guidelines
which are gradually bringing out the exact status of slums in the urban area. The survey (urban
statistics and HR assessment survey - USHA) has been completed in the KMA area.

Policy recommendation:

A policy decision of urban informal tenure is long pending. Along with the policy a viable
strategy should be in place to address the issue
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 10
                           Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
                           A condominium regime allows effective management and recording of urban
   3        5       3
                           property.
                           A: Common property under condominiums is recognized and the law has
                           clear provisions for management and publicity of relevant records that are
                           followed in practice.
                           B: Common property under condominiums is recognized and the law has
                           clear provisions for management and publicity of relevant records but these
                           are not always followed in practice.
                           C: Common property under condominiums is recognized but the law lacks
                           clear (or regulations) for management and publicity of relevant records.
                           D: Common property under condominiums is not recognized.


Analysis:

       The law has clear provisions for management and publicity of relevant records under the
        West Bengal Apartment Ownership Act, 1972. Yet the management still remains very
        poor.



74 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       The Registration department acts quickly to get the land and the individual flats
        registered. Other related departments are still to come forward for quick recording
        resulting in a barrier to commendable management.
Policy recommendation:
The law has clear provisions for management and publicity of relevant records under the West
Bengal Apartment Ownership Act, 1972 but the management still remains very poor.
Enforcement of the relevant Act along with coordination of different departments would result
in removing the barrier to commendable management.

Panel 4 Public Land Management

Indicators
1. Identification of public land and clear management: public land ownership is clearly defined,
    effectively serves the public purpose, is inventoried, under clear management responsibilities,
    and relevant information is publicly accessible.
2. Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition processes: the state acquires land for public
    interest only and this is done efficiently.
3. Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedures: acquisition procedures are clear and
    transparent and fair compensation is paid expeditiously.

                          Land Governance Indicator 10
                          Identification of public land and clear management: public land
Panel    LGI     Dim.     ownership is clearly defined, effectively serves the public purpose,
                          is inventoried, under clear management responsibilities, and
                          relevant information is publicly accessible.
                          Criteria for public land ownership are clearly defined and assigned to the right
4        1       1
                          level of government.
                          A: Public land ownership is justified by provision of public goods and effectively
                          and transparently managed at the appropriate level of government.
                          B: Public land ownership is justified by provision of public goods at the most
                          appropriate level of government but management may be discretionary.
                          C: Public land ownership is justified by provision of public goods but
                          management responsibility is often at the wrong level of government.
                          D: Public land ownership is not serving the public interest by the cost effective
                          provision of public goods.

Analysis:

In West Bengal public land comprises, a) lands at the disposal of the L&LR Department, b)
lands at the disposal of other departments such as, Irrigation, PWD etc.

Lands at (a) are distributed in public purpose in accordance with the principles laid down in
section 49 of the WBLR Act, 1955 and procedure prescribed under the Rules thereunder. Lands
at (b) are used and managed in public purpose in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the respective department.

Public lands at the disposal of all the departments of state government are presumed to be used
for public good and managed effectively in accordance with law. But in actual practice the
management of public lands by different departments and agencies is witnessed by lack of
proper identification, unplanned/ improper use and measures for keeping the land
encroachment free is not cared for much. The level of Lands held by government companies and
corporations, municipalities, panchayat bodies are also public lands and are used for public
good in accordance with law of the respective organization.

75 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Management of land entails such activities as protection of land from encroachment, removal of
encroachment, if any, settlement / leasing out of land. There is specific division of functions and
responsibilities in regard to management of land among the different levels of hierarchy but may
be discretionary at times. While specifying the responsibilities the principle of “subsidiarity” is
strictly adhered to. (Ranking changed from A to B following review by the EI and panellists).

Data Source:

Data Reliability:
Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 10
                         Identification of public land and clear management: public land
                         ownership is clearly defined, effectively serves the public
                         purpose,      is     inventoried,        under     clear    management
                         responsibilities, and relevant information is publicly accessible.
4        1       2       There is a complete recording of public land.
                         A: More than 90% of public land is clearly identified on the ground and on
                         maps.
                         B: Between 60% and 90% of public land is clearly identified on the ground
                         and on maps.
                         C: Between 30% and 60% of public land is clearly identified on the ground
                         and on maps.
                         D: Less than 30% of public land is clearly identified on the ground or on
                         maps.

Analysis:

During survey and settlement operation all public lands, like all private lands, are surveyed and
mapped in the village map with assignment of plot numbers. The lands are entered in the r-o-r
of the government department, municipality or the public institution to which the lands belong.
The recording is complete in the sense that all particulars regarding plot number, area,
classification are entered in the r-o-r.

The lands may not always be identifiable on the ground for various reasons like change of
topography, encroachment etc. In such cases they may be marked on the ground with the help of
these maps.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:

Policy recommendations: A comprehensive ground survey is required to be taken up jointly
by the L&LR department and other departments, local bodies in the field level to identify and
update the records of the public land along with present status. The government may take up
this exercise on war-footing as land at the control of the departments and local bodies are highly
vulnerable to encroachment. An up-to-date inventory of the lands settled with various
departments and local bodies by the L&LR department would facilitate a proper planning for
best options to utilize these resources.
Panel    LGI      Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 10
                           Identification of public land and clear management: public land
                           ownership is clearly defined, effectively serves the public
                           purpose,        is   inventoried,        under       clear      management
                           responsibilities, and relevant information is publicly accessible.
4        1        3        Information on public land is publicly accessible.
                           A: All the information in the public land inventory is accessible to the public.

76 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                           B: All the information in the public land inventory is accessible to the public,
                           but information for some types of public land (land used by the military,
                           security services, etc.) is not available for justifiable reasons.
                           C: All the information in the public land inventory is only available for a
                           limited set of public property and there is little or no justification why
                           records are not accessible.
                           D: No information in the public land inventory is accessible to the public.

Analysis:

All information on public land is available in the RoR of the deptt. / institution owning the land.
Complete information of these lands is available from the office of Block Land and Land Reform
officer [BLLRO] on application. Thanks to computation of RoR such information or a copy of
the RoR is ready available by accessing over the counter (OTC) services.

The concerned departments or institutions owning public lands are required to maintain their
separate Land Registers which in most of the cases are not done. Information on such public
lands is not available to the public on request and there is no justification offered for such non-
availability.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:
Panel    LGI     Dim.      Land Governance Indicator 10
                           Identification of public land and clear management: public land
                           ownership is clearly defined, effectively serves the public
                           purpose,        is     inventoried,        under     clear      management
                           responsibilities, and relevant information is publicly accessible.
                           The management responsibility for different types of public land is
4        1       4
                           unambiguously assigned.
                           A: The management responsibility for different types of public land is
                           unambiguously assigned to serve objectives of equity and efficiency and this
                           is implemented by properly equipped institutions.
                           B: The management responsibility for different types of public land is
                           unambiguously assigned but this is not always consistent with objectives of
                           equity and efficiency or institutions are not always properly equipped so that
                           sometimes these are not achieved.
                           C: There is ambiguity in the assignment of management responsibility or
                           capability for different types of public land and/or major gaps in the extent to
                           which equity and efficiency are often not attained in practice.
                           D: Ambiguity in management responsibility/ability for key public land makes
                           it near impossible to manage these equitably and efficiently.

Analysis:

Rule 28A of the West Bengal Land Reforms Rules, 1965 clearly mentions that all lands and all
interests therein belonging to the state government shall be managed by the Collector of the
district under whose jurisdiction the lands are situated provided that the state government may
entrust the management of land belonging to it to a local body or an authority constituted by or
under any law on such terms and conditions to be decided by the government.

For the purpose of management, land may be categorized as under:

    1) Agricultural land
    2) Non-agricultural land
    3) Water areas
77 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    4) Forests
    5) Sairati interests like hats, bazars, Ferries etc.

Lands at (1) and (2) have either been distributed among the landless and land-poor, or leased
out, or transferred to other departments. Water areas [item (3)] have been mostly assigned to
departments of fishery and irrigation and waterways who are equipped technically or otherwise
to manage these lands serving the objectives of equity and efficiency. Small water bodies have
been handed over to the panchayats for management. As regards forest lands forests
department is the only option for assignment having regard to its technical expertise.

With regard to items at (3), (4) and (5), water areas upto 5 acres, ferries, fisheries has been
handed over to the panchayat institutions except the following:

    a)   Ferries and fisheries within municipal areas
    b)   Water areas above 5 acres
    c)   Riverine fisheries
    d)   Part-vested water areas
    e)   Ferries declared as public ferries under the Bengal Ferries Act, 1885, and
    f)   Where the panchayat cannot conveniently manage the same

Ownership of such lands coming within (1) to (5) remains with the government. The local bodies
(panchayats and ULBs) are sometimes not equipped for managing the precious resources at
their disposal. (Ranking changed from A to B following discussion with EI and panellists)

Data Source:

Data Reliability:
Panel     LGI    Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 10
                          Identification of public land and clear management: public land
                          ownership is clearly defined, effectively serves the public purpose,
                          is inventoried, under clear management responsibilities, and
                          relevant information is publicly accessible.
                          Responsible public institutions have sufficient resources for their land
4         1      5
                          management responsibilities.
                          A: There are adequate financial and human resources available to ensure
                          responsible management of public lands (integrated cadastral maps and filled
                          positions).
                          B: There are some constraints in the financial and/or human resource capacity
                          but the system makes most effective use of available resources in managing
                          public lands adequately.
                          C: There are significant constraints in the financial and/or human resource
                          capacity but the system makes effective use of limited available resources, with
                          limited impact on managing public lands.
                          D: There are either significantly inadequate resources or marked inefficient
                          organizational capacity leading to little or no management of public lands.

Analysis:

In respect of lands and interests the management of which has not been handed over, the
Collector of the district looks after the management. A Collector has all the financial and human
resources to manage the same. However, the municipalities and panchayats are not always
adequately equipped to ensure effective management in respect of lands handed over to them.

78 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Data Source:

Data Reliability:
Panel      LGI       Dim.       Land Governance Indicator 10
                                Identification of public land and clear management: public land
                                ownership is clearly defined, effectively serves the public
                                purpose,        is      inventoried,       under       clear      management
                                responsibilities, and relevant information is publicly accessible.
                                All essential information on public land allocations to private interests is
4          1         6
                                publicly accessible.
                                A: Key information for public land allocations (the locality and area of the
                                land allocation, the parties involved and the financial terms of the allocation)
                                is recorded and publicly accessible.
                                B: Key information for public land allocations (the locality and area of the
                                land allocations, the parties involved and the financial terms of the allocation
                                ) is only partially recorded but is publicly accessible; or the key information is
                                recorded but only partially accessible.
                                C: Key information for public land allocations (the locality and area of the
                                land allocations, the parties involved and the financial terms of the
                                allocation) is recorded or partially recorded but is not publicly accessible.
                                D: There is no recorded information on public land allocations.

Analysis:

Settlement of land at the disposal of government is made under section 49 of the WBLR Act and
Rule 20A (6) of the WBLR Rules, 1965. Rules 215 – 245 of the W.B. land and Land Reforms
Manual, 1991 prescribes the procedure for settlement of non-agricultural land on long and short
term basis. Rule 224(i) of the above Manual provides for due publicity of the settlement
proposal.

After the settlement is made with the eligible person or institutions etc. details of the settlement
are entered in a register which can be accessed by the members of the public on request.

Allocation of govt. land involving large areas is made by the government particularly to private
industries ordinarily through negotiations as to the terms and conditions of the allocation. Such
allocations are regulated by Rule 20A (6) of the W.B.L.R Rules. All essential information in
regard to such allocation is not ordinarily publicly accessible.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:
                                Land Governance Indicator 11
                                Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition processes: the
Panel      LGI        Dim.
                                state acquires land for public interest only and this is done
                                efficiently
4          2         1          There is minimal transfer of acquired land to private interests. 2
                                A: Less than 10% of land acquired in the past 3 years is used for private
                                purposes.

2
 In some countries in the process of urban expansion privately land held maybe acquired before land use planning is implemented
and then sold/returned to previous owners in a different form. This is not to be considered for ranking this dimension. Transfer of
acquired land to private interests is excluded.
79 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                            B: Between 10% and 30% of land acquired in the past 3 years is used for
                            private purposes.
                            C: Between 30% and 50% of land acquired in the past 3 years is used for
                            private purposes.
                            D: More than 50% of land acquired in the past 3 years is used for private
                            purposes.

Analysis:

Lands are acquired under the Acquisition Act to meet both private and public purposes. Over
the last three years Govt. of West Bengal has hardly acquired any land for private purpose in
tune with the declared policy of not acquiring land from unwilling farmers.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:
Panel     LGI     Dim.      Land Governance Indicator 11
                            Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition processes: the
                            state acquires land for public interest only and this is done
                            efficiently
4         2       2         Acquired land is transferred to destined use in a timely manner.
                            A: More than 70% of the land that has been acquired in the past 3 years has
                            been transferred to its destined use.
                            B: Between 50% and 70% of the land that has been acquired in the past 3
                            years has been transferred to its destined use.
                            C: Between 30% and 50% of the land that has been acquired in the past 3
                            years has been transferred to its destined use.
                            D: Less than 30% of the land that has been acquired in the past 3 years has
                            been transferred to its destined use.

Analysis:

Generally acquired land is transferred to destined use in a timely manner. But sometimes delay
occurs for various unforeseen reasons. Land acquisition worthy of mention has not been done in
West Bengal over the last three years. But before that during the period 2008-2010, a total of
about 7600 acres of land has been acquired by the government (requisitioning body WBIDC)
and out of that about 60% of land has been transferred to its destined use.
           Name                 Product/ services            Location                   Area in acres
    Bengal Aerotropolis             Aviation             Durgapur - Asansol              1818 acres
           project
     Raghunathpur steel       Iron and steel, cement   Raghunathpur, Purulia        3100 acres (approx.)
    and allied industrial             power
            park
    Vidyasagar industrial        Engineering and              Kharagpur,               1246.05 acres
            park                  manufacturing
        Rishi Bankim              Multi-product         Naihati, North 24 Pgs           163.38 acres
       industrial park
     Panagarh industrial         Engineering and         Panagarh, Burdwan               1458 acres
            park                  manufacturing

Data Source: WBIDC

Data Reliability: High


80 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panel    LGI      Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 11
                           Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition processes: the
                           state acquires land for public interest only and this is done
                           efficiently
                           The threat of land acquisition does not lead to pre-emptive action by private
4        2        3
                           parties.
                           A: None at all.
                           B: Some.
                           C: A lot.
                           D: A lot and regressive.

Analysis:

No case has so far been identified where any private party has taken any pre-emptive action
through competent Court or otherwise to avert acquisition of its land.
                           Land Governance Indicator 12
                           Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedures:
Panel    LGI      Dim.
                           acquisition procedures are clear and transparent and fair
                           compensation is paid expeditiously.
                           Compensation is provided for the acquisition of all rights regardless of their
4        3        1
                           recording status.
                           A: Fair compensation, in kind or in cash, that allows maintenance of
                           previous social and economic status, is paid to all those with rights in
                           acquired land (ownership, use, access rights etc.) regardless of the recording
                           status.
                           B: Compensation, in kind or in cash, is paid, however the level of
                           compensation where rights are not recorded does not allow for maintenance
                           of social and economic status.
                           C: Compensation, in kind or in cash, is paid for some unrecorded rights
                           (such as possession, occupation etc.), however those with other unrecorded
                           rights (which may include grazing, access, gathering forest products etc.) are
                           usually not paid.
                           D: No compensation is paid to those with unrecorded rights of use,
                           occupancy or otherwise.

Analysis:

Compensation is paid to the owners of the land recorded or not recorded. In West Bengal
provisions have been made to pay some compensation (though not at the same rate applicable
for the land owners) to the share-croppers also. Since in the eye of the law there is no distinction
between the recorded sharecropper and unrecorded ones. Compensation is paid after verifying
on the spot who actually cultivates the land.

A recorded/ or unrecorded bargadar on the land acquired is also eligible for compensation
though on a much reduced scale. However, by virtue of an executive order (2006) of the L&LR
department, some compensation is paid even to agricultural labourers who worked on the
acquired agricultural lands

Data Source:

Data Reliability:
Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 12
                         Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedures:
                         acquisition procedures are clear and transparent and fair
                         compensation is paid expeditiously.
81 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
4        3       2       Land use change resulting in selective loss of rights there is compensated for.
                         A: Where people lose rights as a result of land use change outside the
                         acquisition process, compensation in cash or in kind is paid so that these
                         people have comparable assets and can continue to maintain prior social and
                         economic status.
                         B: Where people lose rights as a result of land use change outside the
                         acquisition process, compensation in cash or in kind are paid so that these
                         people have comparable assets but cannot continue to maintain prior social
                         and economic status.
                         C: Where people lose rights as a result of land use change outside the
                         acquisition process, compensation in cash or in kind are paid such that these
                         people do not have comparable assets and cannot continue to maintain prior
                         social and economic status.
                         D: Where people lose rights as a result of land use change outside the
                         acquisition process, compensation is not paid.

Analysis:

Generally speaking transfer of ownership takes place before the land use changes. When
agricultural land is used for setting up of an industry the industrialist purchases the land from
farmers by paying the market price. Thus the farmers are compensated. Again, if any such land
is cultivated by a sharecropper (then some compensation is paid to the sharecropper as notified
by the government in 2006 by an administrative order. Some compensation is paid to the
agricultural labourers also who had been earning wages from the land. But no compensation is
paid where people lose rights as a result of land use change outside the acquisition process.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:
Panel    LGI      Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 12
                           Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedures: acquisition
                           procedures are clear and transparent and fair compensation is
                           paid expeditiously.
4        3        3        Acquired owners are compensated promptly.
                           A: More than 90% of acquired land owners receive compensation within one
                           year.
                           B: Between 70% and 90% of acquired land owners receive compensation
                           within one year.
                           C: Between 50% and 70% of acquired land owners receive compensation
                           within one year.
                           D: Less than 50% of acquired land owners receive compensation within one
                           year.


Analysis:

Government of West Bengal by an executive order 1701-LA/3M dated 06.06.2006 by
supersession of all provisions of LA Manual, 1991 adopted the procedure of compensation which
contains the following clauses:

Clause 22 – the LA Collector shall take all efforts to complete payment of all award money to the
awardees as the case may be within a period not exceeding 30 days in case of 100 acres and 45
days in case of above 100 acres


82 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Clause 23 – possession can be taken only after payments are made

Sometimes there is a considerable time lag between acquisition and payment of compensation.
It is more often than not that questions arise about the ownership of land acquired. These
questions are resolved by field enquiry by the concerned officials. Defective and incomplete
documents produced by the persons interested also sometimes cause delay in payment.

We may have a look at a case where compensation payment in reality could be judged. In their
paper “Land acquisition and compensation in Singur: what really happened?” by Ghatak, Mitra,
Mookherjee and Nath (2012) the main findings are quoted below to provide a real situation
about the compensation offered –

    a) Government compensation was based on different kinds (classification) of land, and
       additional solatium of 30% plus allowance for irrigation, location of plot
    b) The researchers found that the above was close to market value as reported by the
       households, and above market values predicted on basis of past transactions
    c) The compensation announced by the government – Rs. 6,01,718/ acre for ‘Sali’, Rs.
       8,80,029/ acre for ‘sona’ and Rs. 18,04,431/ acre for ‘homestead’ land
    d) The study also states that many plots of land that used to be ‘Sali’ have been converted by
       owners to ‘sona’ overtime, but this change had not been noted in government records
       resulting lower compensation
    However, this was the position before the new Act of 2013 came into force.

Data Source: Land acquisition and compensation in Singur – paper by Ghatak, Mitra,
Mookherjee and Nath (2012)

Data Reliability:
Panel    LGI      Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 12
                           Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedures: acquisition
                           procedures are clear and transparent and fair compensation is
                           paid expeditiously.
4        3        4        There are independent and accessible avenues for appeal against acquisition.
                           A: Independent avenues to lodge a complaint against acquisition exist and are
                           easily accessible.
                           B: Independent avenues to lodge a complaint against acquisition exist but
                           there are access restrictions (i.e. only accessible by mid-income and wealthy).
                           C: Avenues to lodge a complaint against acquisition exist but are somewhat
                           independent and these may or may not be accessible to those affected.
                           D: Avenues to lodge a complaint against acquisition are not independent.

Analysis:

Since no acquisition of land has been made under the new Act of 2013, avenue of appeal as they
existed in the LA Act of 1894 are discussed here.

A person interested could object u/s 5-A to the acquisition for which preliminary notification
was made u/s 4, to the Collector who is under obligation to give an opportunity of being heard to
the objector and then send a report to the state government with his recommendation. The
decision of the state government is final. Since neither the Collector nor the state government
can be said to be an independent authority because it is on the decision of the state government
preliminary notification has been issued u/s 4, the forum cannot be said to be independent. The
only way to go to an independent authority is by way of approaching the High Court in a writ

83 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
petition which may not be affordable option for lower income group. (Ranking changed from A
to B following discussion with EI and panellists)



Panel    LGI      Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 12
                           Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedures: acquisition
                           procedures are clear and transparent and fair compensation is
                           paid expeditiously.
4        3        5        Timely decisions are made regarding complaints about acquisition.
                           A: A first instance decision has been reached for more than 80% of the
                           complaints about acquisition lodged during the last 3 years.
                           B: A first instance decision has been reached for between 50% and 80% of the
                           complaints about acquisition lodged during the last 3 years.
                           C: A first instance decision has been reached for between 30% and 50% of the
                           complaints about acquisition lodged during the last 3 years.
                           D: A first instance decision has been reached for less than 30% of the
                           complaints about acquisition lodged during the last 3 years.

Analysis:

Objections under section 5-A were expeditiously heard and disposed of by the Collector.




84 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panel 5: Transfer of large tracts of land to investors

Indicators
      1. Transfer of public land to private use follows a clear, transparent, and competitive
         process and payments are collected and audited (with the exception of transfers to
         improve equity such as land distribution and land for social housing).
      2. Private Investment Strategy
      3. Policy implementation is effective, consistent and transparent and involves local
         stakeholders.
      4. Contracts involving public land are public with agreements monitored and enforced.

                          Land Governance Indicator 13
                          Transfer of public land to private use follows a clear, transparent,
Panel    LGI     Dim.     and competitive process and payments are collected and audited
                          (with the exception of transfers to improve equity such as land
                          distribution and land for social housing).
  5        1        1     Public land transactions are conducted in an open transparent manner.
                          A: The share of public land disposed of in the past 3 years through sale or lease
                          through public auction or open tender process is greater than 90% (Except for
                          equity transfers).
                          B: The share of public land disposed of in the past 3 years through sale or lease
                          through public auction or open tender process is between 70% and 90%. (Except
                          for equity transfers).
                          C: The share of public land disposed of in the past 3 years through sale or lease
                          through public auction or open tender process is between 50% and 70%.
                          D: The share of public land disposed of in the past 3 years through sale or lease
                          through public auction or open tender process is less than 50%. (Except for
                          equity transfers).

Analysis:

Public land is transferred for non-agricultural purposes in terms of section 49(5) of the WBLR
Act and Rule 20A(6) made thereunder. Detailed procedure has been prescribed in chapter XV of
the W.B. Land and Land Reforms Manual, 1991. A recent order, No. 6686-LP/1A-18/2012,
dated 26/12/2012 of the department of L&LR now forms the basis of transfer of public land. The
order specifies that lands for non-agricultural purposes shall ordinarily be settled on long-
term leases for a period not exceeding 99 years and on expiration of the period the tenant is
entitled for successive renewals for the same period. Land meant for commercial use shall
invariably be auctioned to the highest bidder for which adequate publicity should be given
including through internet.

To maintain an open and transparent manner of such settlements, the Collector/ District Land
& Land Reforms Officer shall identify suitable plots of land and advertise the land inviting
applications for long-term settlement. Applications from interested persons for such settlements
are also considered [Rule 220 of W.B. L&LR Manual 1991]. On receiving applications in
response to the advertisement for settlement of lands, the Collector/ DLLRO send his
recommendation to the department through the Commissioner. For more than one application
received for the same land, the selection of the applicant is made on merit considering the
background and financial position of the applicant vis-à-vis the purpose for which settlement is
sought. Public land at the disposal of government has been settled on long-term leases in the

85 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
last three years mostly (estimated 70%) with interested applicants by observing the public
auction/ laid down procedure of the L&LR Department. Even the provisions of drawal of lots in
public can be resorted to if a number of plots are offered in a location at the same time. In case
of more than one applicant the reason for selection of a prospective lessee should be explained
in the settlement proposal along with a copy of the advertisement. There are provisions for
relaxations for economically weaker sections of the population.

As per the provisions of the government order dated 26.12.2012, for project leading to industrial
development, the highest price need not be the main criteria nor should auction be the only
mode of allotment. The department or the entity (WBIDC etc.) shall prepare and publish a list of
its land assets. It may also indicate the kind of industrial development it is seeking (big,
medium, knowledge based, non-polluting etc.) along with tentative price which may be
determined on the basis of acquisition price, cost of capital, development charges and premium
as applicable. This information should be freely available in the public domain for at least one
month before. The Government owned corporations like WBIDC, WBIIDC WBSIDC and
WBMMDC responsible for development of industries, infrastructures for industries,
development of small industries and mines and minerals respectively having land at their
disposal follow an open and transparent method when settle land with investors for the
respective purposes. The availability of land is advertised in newspapers and in their respective
websites with details of land and terms and purpose of settlement inviting expression of interest
and allotment of land is made to those who fulfil the criteria specified in the notice in a fair and
impartial manner.

With a view to modernizing infrastructure facilities and creating industrial growth centres,
Government of West Bengal has identified suitable areas and gone ahead with land acquisition.
The principles of participation and appropriate compensation for the land losing community
were observed for such acquisition which mostly happened after 2008 (post-Singur). WBIDC is
developing sector specific and multi-product industrial parks in the state in the acquired areas.
An overview of the large projects:

        Name                 Product/ services            Location                   Area in acres
Bengal Aerotropolis              Aviation             Durgapur - Asansol              1818 acres
project
Raghunathpur steel            Iron and steel,            Raghunathpur,           3100 acres (approx.)
and allied industrial         cement power                  Purulia
park
Vidyasagar industrial        Engineering and               Kharagpur,                1246.05 acres
park                          manufacturing
Rishi Bankim                  Multi-product            Naihati, North 24             163.38 acres
industrial park                                              Pgs
Panagarh industrial          Engineering and          Panagarh, Burdwan               1458 acres
park                          manufacturing

In all the above cases the ‘Requiring Body’ was WBIDC after necessary clearance from the
government and observing all the steps and procedure laid down in this respect following
submission of a joint venture proposal or expression of interest from the anchor investor. On the
basis of the detailed project report (DPR) submitted by the anchor investor and with the
approval of the government land acquisition was done by the Collector on behalf of WBIDC. In
most of these joint venture cases about 30-50% of the lands acquired are given on long-term
settlement as per agreed terms and conditions to the anchor investor. About50-70% of the land
acquired for these joint ventures was subsequently publicly auctioned for distribution among
other willing private investors for setting up of industrial units. Transparency is maintained for
such settlements.

86 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Data source:

         West Bengal L&LR Act, 1955
         West Bengal Land Reforms Rules 1965
         West Bengal Land and Land Reforms Manual 1991
         West Bengal L & LR, Land Policy Branch Order No. 6686-LP/1A-18/2012.
         WBIDC

Data reliability: As data are mostly from Laws and Rules, data are considered to be highly
reliable.
Panel      LGI   Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 13
                         Transfer of public land to private use follows a clear, transparent,
                         and competitive process and payments are collected and audited
                         (with the exception of transfers to improve equity such as land
                         distribution and land for social housing).
  5         1      2     Payments for public leases are collected.
                         A: More than 90% of the total agreed payments are collected from private
                         parties on the lease of public lands.
                         B: Between 70% and 90% of total the agreed payments are collected from
                         private parties on the lease of public lands.
                         C: Between 50% and 70% of the total agreed payments are collected from
                         private parties on the lease of public lands.
                         D: Less than 50% of the total agreed payments are collected from private
                         parties on the lease of public lands.

Analysis:

Payments for long-term leases of 30 years comprise of two components – yearly rent at 4% of
the market value and salami charged at 10 times the rent equalling forty percent of the market
price. When the lease is granted for 99 years salami is fixed at 95% and yearly rent at 0.3 times
of market value of land. The department of L&LR may reduce the rent and salami payable for a
land if it is satisfied that the land will be used to serve a public purpose or a charitable purpose.
Yearly rent so fixed shall be paid according to the Bengali year and shall fall due on the last day
of the Bengali year. The rent may either be paid by a lessee to the Bhumi Sahayak (BS) available
at village revenue office or direct to a treasury by cash or postal money order. The BS shall give a
signed receipt immediately in the prescribed form against the payment received. In case of a
payment made direct to a treasury by cash or by money order, the accountant will send a copy of
the challan to the BLLRO office where the BS will account for the payment received [Rule 223,
235, 236 of W.B.L&LR Manual 1991]. The details of payments collected for three years for public
leases are given below.




87 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
             Period                 2008-09                   2009-10                   2010-11

      Quantum of land            476.2929 acre             976.2403 acre             751.3239 acre
      sanctioned on long-
      term lease

      Amount on account           Rs. 56,39,110            Rs. 42,68,082             Rs. 59,11,548
      of annual rent (Rs)

      Amount on account        Rs. 132,62,42,261         Rs. 19,76,48,448          Rs. 21,35,50,401
      of salami/transfer
      value (Rs)

      Total amount              Rs. 133,18,81,371        Rs. 20,19,16,530          Rs. 21,94,61,949
      involved (Rs)
                             Source: Department of L&LR, Govt. of West Bengal

The lease amount is deposited in the concerned Treasury unless the government decides
otherwise.

In addition to above the pricing policy for allotment of land in industrial parks is done in
accordance with a separate order. The pricing policy is uniform and arrived at in such a manner
that it covers cost of land and cost of development of such land. In these cases also the payment
for lease are collected and deposited in government account.

Data source:

         West Bengal L&LR Manual, 1991.
         Department of L&LR
         West Bengal Industrial Development Corporation website link:
          http://wbidc.com/images/pdf/Pricing_Policy_WBIDC.pdf

Data Reliability: High
Panel      LGI   Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 13
                          Transfer of public land to private use follows a clear, transparent,
                          and competitive process and payments are collected and audited
                          (with the exception of transfers to improve equity such as land
                          distribution and land for social housing).
  5         1         3   Public land is transacted at market prices unless guided by equity objectives.
                          A: All types of public land are generally divested at market prices in a
                          transparent process irrespective of the investor’s status (e.g. domestic or
                          foreign).
                          B: Public land is generally divested at market prices in a transparent process,
                          but this only applies to a particular type of investor (e.g. domestic only or
                          foreign only).
                          C: Only some types of public land are generally divested at market prices in a
                          transparent process irrespective of the investor’s status (e.g. domestic or
                          foreign).
                          D: Public land is rarely or never divested at market prices in a transparent
                          process.


88 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Analysis:

Transfer of large tracts of land to investors in the form of settlement / lease is done u/s 49(5) of
the LR act and rule 20A(6) of the W.B. Land reforms Rules, 1965 on terms and conditions set
forth in the formats appended to the Manual of 1991.

Ordinarily, fixation of terms and conditions including premium is preceded by negotiations
between the government and the would-be settlee / lessee. In determining the premium and
other lease terms factors like location of the land to be settled, the purpose of the settlement,
suitability of the land for the lease purpose, prevailing price of land in the locality etc. are taken
into account. In the process, the premium exceeds the market price of the land in some cases of
transaction.

The order of L&LR Department (Dec 2012) states that land settled for private use should be
based on market prices. The earlier order specifies that for transfer of land from government to
private entities should be based on the recent sale prices of land of similar type as obtained from
the Registration Office. However, since such transactions often do not reflect true price as prices
are under quoted to evade cost of registration. To rectify this, the current order recommends
land allotment should be through an open and transparent auction process. To reduce
malpractices fixation of reserve price is not allowed before the quotation is received. However,
there are provisions for relaxations to accommodate weaker sections of the society (equity
issues) or other social objectives.

All the costs involved in acquisition of government land where payment has to be made by
awards in favour of the collector shall be borne by the Requiring Body as a part of land
acquisition cost and the Land acquisition Collector should include these elements while
preparing the estimate of cost for acquisition (G.O. No 1701 LA dated 6 June 2006). So, all the
public land transactions irrespective of the status of the investor’s status are carried out in a
transparent manner. Pricing of land, the process of settlement and collection of payments are
duly audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG).

Data Source: L&LR Department

Data Reliability:
Panel     LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 13
                          Transfer of public land to private use follows a clear, transparent,
                          and competitive process and payments are collected and audited
                          (with the exception of transfers to improve equity such as land
                          distribution and land for social housing).
   5        1       4     The public captures benefits arising from changes in permitted land use.
                          A: Mechanisms to allow the public to capture significant share of the gains
                          from changing land use are regularly used and applied transparently, based on
                          clear regulation.
                          B: Mechanisms to allow the public to capture significant share of the gains
                          from changing land use are not always used, although generally applied
                          transparently.
                          C: Mechanisms to allow the public to capture significant share of the gains
                          from changing land use are rarely used and applied in a discretionary manner.
                          D: Mechanisms to allow the public to capture significant share of the gains
                          from changing land use are not used.


Analysis:
89 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
When public land is transferred to other government department or to some organization for
provision of public goods, such as construction of power plant, then in general the benefits
accrue to all members of the public. However, if the transfer takes place for some use which is
more private in nature, such as setting up of industrial units, then benefits accrue to existing
residents in the form of ancillary industries or services that come up in the area. However, if
land is acquired for the purpose of provision of public goods or for private use then private costs
to the existing residents who lose land may exceed the benefits. It may not always be possible to
compensate for the future income of them. In general the process is of compensation accruing to
land losers is transparent, but hidden fiscal benefits to the entities who are allotted are not
transparent.

There is also no mechanism in practice to quantify the benefits as a whole, only tangible benefits
are captured in the reports.

Data Source: print and electronic media reporting

Data Reliability:

Policy recommendations: Considering absence of any mechanism to quantify the short-term
and long-term benefits that will accrue to the public, an independent benefit assessment system
needs to be put in place.
Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 13
                         Transfer of public land to private use follows a clear, transparent,
                         and competitive process and payments are collected and audited
                         (with the exception of transfers to improve equity such as land
                         distribution and land for social housing).
                         Policy to improve equity in asset access and use by the poor exists, is
  5        1       5
                         implemented effectively and monitored.
                         A: Policy is in place to improve access to and productive use of assets by poor
                         and marginalized groups, is applied in practice and effective
                         B: Policy is in place to improve access to and productive use of assets by poor
                         and marginalized groups, is applied in practice, but is not effective
                         C: Policy is in place to improve access to and productive use of assets by poor
                         and marginalized groups but is not enforced
                         D: No policy in place to improve access to and productive use of assets by poor
                         and marginalized groups.


Analysis:
In recent times large tracts of land transfers to private entities have incorporated arrangements
for benefits of newly built assets to accrue to the poor and marginalized sections of the
population. This has particularly been made part of government policy in case of land transfers/
settlement from acquired land. For land holders, landless labourers or bargadars are entitled to
benefits if they are displaced because of acquisition in the form of one-time cash receipts as well
as a part coming in the form of annuities generated from funds deposited with financial
institutions of the choice of the beneficiaries. Financial costs for such benefit are generally borne
by the organization which receives the land. However, it has not been very effective in many
cases because often the beneficiaries do not have legal rights. Bargadars are often not properly
registered; informal arrangements of land sharing among the members of family are the main
reasons.
The state government policy (G.O. No. 1706 LA dated 6 June 2006) on mandatory RR package
for below poverty line (BPL) families in this regards is:

90 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
For any industrial development project, the evicted families by way of land acquisition should be
resettled in the nearest vicinity, as far as possible
      a) For LA project in an ULB or proposed industrial township area, allotment of two cuttah
         of plot of land to each evicted family, or free allotment of a constructed flat in the line of
         government housing projects for poor (in this case the mandatory cash assistance is not
         provided as prescribed for evicted BPL families)
      b) For LA project in rural areas, the evicted BPL families will get two cuttah of plot of land
         per family or a constructed IAY house (mandatory cash assistance is not provided)
      c) The requiring body shall have the rights and privilege to offer any better package above
         or in lieu of the mandatory cash assistance.
Data Source: The Government Order of the LA Branch of L&LR Department and West Bengal
Industrial Development Corporation Policy Document on Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Policy
Data Reliability: High

                          Land Governance Indicator 14
Panel      LGI    Dim.
                          Private investment strategy
                          Land to be made available to investors is identified transparently and publicly,
  5         2       1
                          in agreement with right holders.
                          A: A policy to clearly identify land that can be made available to investors exists
                          and has been arrived at based on comprehensive assessment of land potential,
                          community consultation that is free and informed and reached an agreement,
                          and is applied in more than 90% of identified cases.
                          B: A policy to identify land that can be made available to investors exists, based
                          on ad hoc assessment of land potential but with community consultation and
                          agreement, and is applied in more than 90% of identified cases.
                          C: A policy to identify land that can be made available to investors exists, based
                          on ad hoc assessment of land potential and limited consultation with
                          communities and is applied in more than 90% of identified cases.
                          D: There is no policy in place to identify land to be made available to investors
                          so that any transfers are based on ad-hoc investor demands.


Analysis:

The land allotment order issued by the L&LR Department, dated 26.12.2012 clearly states the
policy of land transfer to investors. The L&LR Manual, 1991 is amended in this respect.
However, the Government of West Bengal after the Singur episode involved the local community
for acquisition of land for Durgapur Aerotroplois and for industrial parks at Panagarh,
Raghunathpur, Kharagpur and Naihati in the matter of selection of sites and fixing
compensation package.

Information available for the case of land acquisition during 2008-2010 at Andal, Burdwan
district for the joint venture airport project with Bengal Aerotroplois, indicates that initial
requirement of 4000 acres land was later brought down to 1818 acres in consultation with the
local community and stakeholders. There were 19 meetings held with the local community
covering all aspects of land acquisition including area to be acquired, underutilized land
identification and mapping, negotiation of land compensation etc. which helped in minimizing
potential disputes and differences.

Data Source:

         West Bengal Land and Land Reforms Manual 1991
91 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
         West Bengal L & LR, Land Policy Branch Order No. 6686-LP/1A-18/2012
         Bengal Aerotroplolis Projects Ltd management

Data reliability: High

Panel      LGI   Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 14
                         Private investment strategy
                         Investments are selected based on economic, socio-cultural and
  5         2      2
                         environmental impacts in an open process
                         A: Process is in place that properly considers both national and local benefits
                         and is adhered to. Benefit sharing mechanism are in place
                         B: Process is in place that considers only national benefits, but that is adhered
                         to. No local benefit sharing in place
                         C: Process is in place but many investments go ahead that are either not
                         according to the policy or despite unfavourable outcomes.
                         D: No process in place.

Analysis:

Though L&LR Manual, 1991 has no such provision for the above, West Bengal Industrial
Development Corporation has been doing this since last 5-6 years post-Singur incident. This has
often been emphasized by WBIDC and Commerce and Industry Department. In fact, while
selecting the sites for setting up an Airport City at Andal and Industrial Parks at Panagarh,
Naihati, Khargpur and Raghunathpur WBIDC held several rounds of consultations with the
local people of the respective area having stake (including right holders) in the acquisition and
reaching consensus as regards acquisition of land, compensation to be paid to the land losers,
benefit-sharing and the projects to be set up.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:
Panel      LGI   Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 14
                         Private investment strategy
                         Public institutions transferring land to investors are clearly identified and
  5         2      3
                         regularly audited
                         A: Institutions to make decisions are clearly identified and have the
                         necessary capacity (incl. resources for field verification) and strong
                         incentives in ensuring socially beneficial outcomes in a way that minimizes
                         transaction costs.
                         B: Institutions to make decisions are clearly identified and have the
                         necessary capacity (incl. resources for field verification) and strong
                         incentives in ensuring socially beneficial outcomes but processes may be
                         complex and difficult for investors.
                         C: Institutions to make decisions are clearly identified but lack either
                         capacity or incentives in ensuring socially beneficial outcomes or their
                         decisions are not always implemented.
                         D: Institutions are not clearly identified


Analysis:

L&LR Department is the administrative department for transfer of land. Other than the L&LR
Department, public institutions (acting as requiring body) who transfer land to investors are
WBIDC, WBIIDC and WBSIDC and they have the capacity and expertise to handle land transfer
to private investors for joint ventures. Annual West Bengal L & LR, Land Policy Branch Order

92 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
No. 6686-LP/1A-18/2012 states that the District Collector has to take sanction from the L&LR
Department prior to any transfer of public land whether already under the management of the
department or whether to be acquired. An intergovernmental committee under the Chief
Secretary would take final decision on transfer of land. It also states that every department has
to frame its own rule consistent with the said decision for issuing letter of intent under the
jurisdiction of that department.

In WBIDC there is a Five-man Committee consisting of technical experts from various fields to
scrutinize and assess the actual land requirement, water source, viability (technical and social)
aspects of any proposal for setting of an industry. This committee also ensures that all the
necessary requirements have been taken care of in the detailed project report including social
benefits to the land losers, local community etc.

Data Source: West Bengal Land Policy Branch Order No. 6686-LP/1A-18/2012 and WBIDC

Data Reliability: High
Panel     LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 14
                          Private investment strategy
                          Public bodies transferring land to investors share information and coordinate
   5        2       4
                          to minimize and resolve overlaps (including sub-soil).
                          A: A policy is in place for effective inter-ministerial and coordination to ensure
                          that decisions on land use and land rights are well coordinated across sectors,
                          and is applied effectively.
                          B: There is effective coordination to solve competing land use, although no
                          policy is in place for effective inter-ministerial and coordination to ensure that
                          decisions on land use and land rights are well coordinated across sectors.
                          C: No policy is in place but some decisions on land use and land rights are
                          coordinated across sectors.
                          D: No policy is in place and decisions on land use and land rights are not
                          coordinated across sectors.


Analysis:
The Land Reforms Manual of 1991 delineates appropriate policies in respect of identification
and information sharing of land that will be transferred to private bodies. This is supplemented
by the latest government order which clearly states that an interdepartmental committee will be
formed to take final decisions regarding land allotment after careful scrutiny at all levels
including the L&LR department (which has the foremost importance in giving the approval for
land allotment to start with). The order states that each department will frame its own policy in
this respect consistent with the general land allotment policy of the government. But there are
issues when the acquisition involves overlapping areas concerning both central and state
government.

In cases where the investor proposes to purchase land beyond the ceiling limit for setting up
some project, he is required to submit a detail project report (DPR) to the concerned
department and to get the project report approved and then L&LR Department will grant
permission to acquire and to hold the ceiling surplus land to the investor u/s 14Y of the WBLR
Act..

Data Source:

       West Bengal L & LR, Land Policy Branch Order No. 6686-LP/1A-18/2012.

       WBLR Act, 1955


93 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Data Reliability: High

Policy recommendation: There is no avenue for coordination between central and state
governments when large scale acquisition of land is involved leaving scope for disputes being
arisen which may take a long time for reconciliation. The surface right transfer is dealt with by
the state while sub-soil rights (say coal mine) are considered by central government. Some
formal mechanism like identifying a nodal agency from both state and central government for
compliance and reconciliation might be considered.
Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 14
                         Private investment strategy
                         Compliance with contractual obligations is regularly monitored and remedial
  5        2       5
                         action taken if needed.
                         A: There is regular monitoring of compliance and results are publicly available
                         and any gaps identified trigger effective remedial action.
                         B: There is regular monitoring of compliance, results are publicly available but
                         remedial action is taken only in some cases.
                         C: Monitoring of compliance is limited or only part of the results accessible to
                         the public
                         D: No monitoring or no publicity of results.


Analysis:
There are provisions in the latest land policy order or older act for non-compliance of the
provisions of the lease for land allotment. As a matter of fact the recent order clearly states that
all land will be allotted as lease hold right only, the lessee cannot mortgage the leasehold right.
There are also provisions if the contractual obligations are not satisfied. However, in case of
failure of such non-compliance it is a long drawn judicial process as is the characteristic feature
of Indian civil law. However, there is no provision for publicly available information on this
issue.
Data Source: West Bengal L & LR, Land Policy Branch Order No. 6686-LP/1A-18/2012.
Data Reliability: High
Panel     LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 14
                          Private investment strategy
                          Safeguards effectively reduce the risk of negative effects from large scale land-
   5        2       6
                          related investments.
                          A: Substantive application and disclosure of safeguards (EIA, SIA etc.) are in
                          line with global best practice, and mostly applied.
                          B: Substantive application of safeguards (EIA, SIA, etc.) is in line with global
                          best practice but only part of the information is disclosed.
                          C: Safeguards (EIA, SIA, etc.) are partly in line with global best practice

                          D: Safeguards do not exist or are applied only in an ad-hoc manner.


Analysis:

Safeguards related to environmental protection and compliance in respect of pollution control
are in place and in line with global practices.
The Environment Protection Act 1986 was legislated in India, which lays down the broad
framework of governance in this area. The Govt. of West Bengal’s policy is to strike a balance
between the needs of development and the preservation and conservation of environment and
natural resources. The Govt. of West Bengal’s Policy Statement made as far back as June 1995
seeks special emphasis and thrust on:
94 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       Control over pollution problems created by organized industries
       Control over water, air and noise pollution within permissible limits
       Protection of rivers, water bodies etc. from encroachment
       Preservation, protection and restoration of the coastal zone
       Improvement of the physical environment of cities and towns
       Promotion of bio diversity and preservation of forests and wild life
       Environmental impact assessments prior to location of industries, infrastructure and
        urban development
       Public private partnership and working relationships with societal organisations to
        generate awareness and active participation in environment protection
The West Bengal Pollution Control Board is the Statutory Authority, which is entrusted with the
responsibility of implementing environmental laws and regulations within the state. The West
Bengal Bio-Diversity Board advises the government on conservation of bio-diversity, sustainable
use of its components and equitable sharing of resources of biological resources.
Industries have been classified into certain categories keeping in mind the requirements of
environmental pollution. Ordinary and Special Red categories (highly polluting) cannot be set
up within Kolkata Metropolitan Area, and Orange categories (moderately polluting) not within
Kolkata or Howrah Municipal Areas but permissible within Industrial Estates within those
areas. Green category industries can be set up in any area subject to pollution and site
clearances. Apart from these there is an exempted category that can be set up in any area and
only requires local site clearance by the local body. The intending applicant has to obtain the
clearance from the West Bengal Pollution Control Board before the Registration certificate (RC)
is issued by the Director of Industries.
Data source: The Website of WBIDC
Data reliability: cent percent
Panel     LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 14
                          Private investment strategy
                          The scope for resettlement is clearly circumscribed and procedures exist to
   5        2       7
                          deal with it in line with best practice.
                          A: Substantive application of resettlement and rehabilitation policy that is in
                          line with global best practice.
                          B: Applied resettlement policy is partly in line with global best practice, and in
                          most cases applied
                          C: Resettlement policy exists, but is only in part of the cases applied.
                          D: Resettlement policy does not exist; if resettlement takes place than it is in
                          an ad-hoc manner.


Analysis:
The Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy document of WBIDC states several resettlement
policies in case of large scale land transfer. This includes compensation for income from land
based on past 3 years’ earnings – some upfront and part in the form of annuities from deposits
in financial institutions, residential construction in case of homestead land. Bargadars and
landless labourers are also given appropriate resettlement benefits. The government (G.O. No
1701 LA dated 6 June 2006) policy is that even patta allottees will get full compensation like a
free-hold raiyat. These measures when applied effectively have reduced the negative effects of
large scale land transfer.
Data Source: West Bengal Industrial Development Corporation Policy Document on
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy available in WBIDC website and GO referred to
Data Reliability: High

95 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                          Land Governance Indicator 15
Panel    LGI     Dim.     Policy implementation is effective, consistent and transparent
                          and involves local stakeholders.
                          Investors provide sufficient information to allow rigorous evaluation of
  5        3        1
                          proposed investments.
                          A: Investors' business plans (application materials) require sufficient
                          evidence of technical viability, community consultation, and availability of
                          resources to effectively identify project risk and viability and effectively
                          monitor progress.
                          B: Investors' business plans (application materials) require some evidence of
                          technical viability, community consultation, and availability of resources but
                          this is only sufficient to identify project risk ex ante.
                          C: Investors' business plans (application materials) require some evidence of
                          technical viability, community consultation, and availability of resources but
                          this is insufficient to effectively identify project risk ex ante.
                          D: Investors' business plans (application materials) is insufficient to assess
                          technical viability, community consultation, and availability of resources.


Analysis:

WBIDC website provides the procedure for applying for land from the government. The most
important criterion of the procedure is the submission of the detailed investment proposal
including DPR which could be called business plan. In practice the technical viability of the
business plan is judged by a Five-man Committee constituted by WBIDC comprising technical
experts from various fields. For the joint venture project at Andal with Bengal Aerotropolis, the
anchor investor had to comply with all the formalities in respect of justifying technical viability
and community consultation. The investor had to undertake a full research work to understand
the community behaviour and develop formula of compensation for right losers as well as the
community in general including the corporate social responsibility (CSR) policy. This has
happened in majority of cases for the industrial park joint ventures established with anchor
investors in other areas also, but there are instances where this was not done.

Data Source: WBIDC website (http://wbidc.com/images/pdf/Criteria_Assessment.pdf)

Data Reliability: High
Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 15
                         Policy implementation is effective, consistent and transparent
                         and involves local stakeholders.
                         Approval of investment plans follows a clear process with reasonable
  5        3       2
                         timelines.
                         A: All investment application related documents are reviewed according to a
                         uniform process and receive a response within 3 months of date of submission
                         B: All investment application related documents are reviewed according to a
                         uniform process and receive a response within 6 months of date of
                         submission
                         C: The review process for investment application related documents is not
                         uniform and stable over time; in most cases, investors receive a response
                         within 9 months of date submission
                         D: The review process for investment application related documents is not
                         uniform and stable over time, and in most cases a response is received after
                         more than 9 months from date of submission.


96 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Analysis:

The project appraisal document of WBIDC states that it takes one month to process. However,
in practice the time taken to review all the documents by maintaining a uniform process and
receive a response is within six months from date of submission.

Data Source: WBIDC

Data Reliability: High
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 15
                           Policy implementation is effective, consistent and transparent
                           and involves local stakeholders.
                           Right holders and investors negotiate freely and directly with full access to
   5        3       3
                           relevant information.
                           A: Those holding rights to land with potential for investment have incentives
                           and opportunities to obtain truthful information on the extent of their rights
                           (and the most effective ways to utilize them), and the true potential of their
                           resources.
                           B: Those holding rights to land with potential for investment have clearly
                           defined rights and incentives to properly negotiate but opportunities to obtain
                           relevant information and assistance at reasonable cost are limited.
                           C: Those holding rights to land with potential for investment have incentives
                           to properly negotiate but their rights are unclear or opportunities to obtain
                           relevant information or assistance do not exist.
                           D: Current users have limited or no rights.
Analysis:

There is scope for the investor and the right holders to negotiate on site selection of a project,
price of land, rehabilitation of land losers etc. when land is directly purchased or the land is
acquired by the operation of Act and both parties have access to relevant information Although
the LA Act, 1894 did not have any provision for negotiation on site selection but the West
Bengal Government by an Executive order made two committees named ‘site selection
committee’ and ‘screening committee’ comprising the people’s representatives of the area,
investor and concerned Govt. official including the Collector. The Land Acquisition Act of 1894,
had provision for consent Award whereby compensation could be fixed on agreement of the land
losers.
During the site selection visit there is always a scope for some information being provided to the
right holders. The practice over the last few years is that the right holders are asked to submit
petitions which are disposed of by sharing the information asked for in the petition.
Data Source: Management of Bengal Aerotrolpolis Project Ltd, L. A. Act, 1894 and orders of
L&LR Department
Data Reliability:

Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 15
                         Policy implementation is effective, consistent and transparent
                         and involves local stakeholders.
  5        3       4     Contractual provisions regarding benefit sharing are publicly disclosed.
                         A: Benefit sharing modalities are routinely included in relevant contractual
                         arrangements, and disclosed publicly. Existing right holders are recognized.
                         B: Modalities for benefit sharing are routinely included in relevant
                         contractual arrangements, but there is limited public disclosure.
                         C: Modalities for benefit sharing included in a significant share of relevant
                         contractual arrangements and affected parties are aware of these and of ways
97 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                         to enforce them even though there is limited public disclosure.

                         D: The majority of contractual arrangements do not include information on
                         benefit sharing


Analysis:
The rules in this respect do not bar the government to share the information. However, in order
to attract investment government often gives fiscal incentives to the investors which the
government may not like to make public for various reasons. So these are often not disclosed.
The present system of RTI Act is a mechanism for the public to access the information required.
Policy recommendation: The government may consider making the lease deed a public
document
                           Land Governance Indicator 16
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Contracts involving public land are public with agreements
                           monitored and enforced.
                           Information on spatial extent and duration of approved concessions is publicly
   5        4        1
                           available.
                           A: Comprehensive and consolidated information on spatial extent, duration,
                           and parties involved in concessions/leases is available publicly.
                           B: Spatial and temporal information is available to relevant government
                           institutions and made available routinely to interested private parties upon
                           request.
                           C: Spatial information and temporal information is available to relevant
                           government institutions but not accessible on a routine basis by private parties.
                           D: Comprehensive and consolidated information on spatial extent and duration
                           of concessions/leases is not readily available to government or different
                           departments rely on different sources of information.


Analysis:

The West Bengal Industrial Development Corporation provides various incentives (not
concessions) to the intending industry setting applicants. The incentives as defined in the
scheme called “The West Bengal State Support for Industries Scheme, 2013” notified by the
Commerce and Industries Department on 1st October 2013, as ‘financial support to be given to
the industrial units in the form of different types of subsidies which are to be decided solely by
the C&I department and cannot be considered as a matter of right.’ All the information related
to such incentives to be given to the industries is available in the website of WBIDC and publicly
available.

Data Source: WBIDC website

Data Reliability: High
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 16
                           Contracts involving public land are public with agreements
                           monitored and enforced.
                           Compliance with safeguards on concessions is monitored and enforced
   5        4       2
                           effectively and consistently.
                           A: Third-party monitoring of investors' (and the state's) compliance with
                           safeguards is routine and mechanisms to quickly and effectively reach
                           adherence in case of problems exist.
                           B: Third-party monitoring of investors' (and the state's) compliance with
                           safeguards is practiced in some cases but mechanisms to quickly and
                           effectively reach adherence in case of problems exist.

98 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                           C: There is little third-party monitoring of investors' compliance with
                           safeguards and mechanisms to quickly and effectively ensure adherence are
                           difficult to access for affected communities.
                           D: There is little third-party monitoring of investors' compliance with
                           safeguards and mechanisms to quickly and effectively ensure adherence are
                           virtually non-existent.

Analysis:

There is a prevailing system which is rigorously followed about third party monitoring of
investors’ compliance with safeguards and also for the state’s by way of annual Comptroller and
Auditor General (CAG) audit. But scope is left to improve compliance on audit observations. In
addition there is also periodical internal audit system in vogue for WBIDC.

Data Source: WBIDC

Data reliability: Moderate
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 16
                           Contracts involving public land are public with agreements
                           monitored and enforced.
                           Avenues to deal with non-compliance exist and obtain timely and fair
   5        4       3
                           decisions.
                           A: Third-party monitoring of investors' (and the state's) compliance with
                           contractual provisions is routine and mechanisms to quickly and effectively
                           reach arbitration in case of problems exist.
                           B: Third-party monitoring of investors' (and the state's) compliance with
                           contractual provisions is practiced in some cases but mechanisms to quickly
                           and effectively reach arbitration in case of problems exist.
                           C: There is little third-party monitoring of investors' compliance with
                           contractual provisions and mechanisms to quickly and effectively reach
                           arbitration are difficult to access for affected communities but work for
                           investors.
                           D: There is little third-party monitoring of investors' compliance with
                           contractual provisions and mechanisms to quickly and effectively reach
                           arbitration are virtually non-existent.

Analysis:

Again there is system of third party monitoring of investor’s compliance with contractual
provisions by way of CAG audit.

Data Source: WBIDC

Data Reliability: High

Panel 6:        Public Provision of Land Information: Registry and Cadastre

Indicators

    1. Mechanisms for recognition of rights
    2. Completeness of the land registry
    3. Reliability: registry information is updated and sufficient to make meaningful inferences
       on ownership.
    4. Cost-effectiveness & sustainability: land administration services are provided in cost-
       effective ways that are sustainable in the long term.

99 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
      5. Fees determined transparently to cover cost of service provision


                          Land Governance Indicator 17
Panel      LGI   Dim.
                          Mechanisms for recognition of rights
                          Land possession by the poor can be formalized in line with local norms in an
  6         1       1
                          efficient and transparent process.
                          A: There is a clear, practical process for the formal recognition of possession and
                          this process is implemented effectively, consistently and transparently.
                          B: There is a clear, practical process for the formal recognition of possession but
                          this process is not implemented effectively, consistently or transparently.
                          C: The process for the formal recognition of possession is not clear and is not
                          implemented effectively, consistently or transparently.
                          D: There is no process for formal recognition of possession.

Analysis:

In the state possession of land by individual or institution is normally recognized on the basis of
documents like registered deed of transfer, lease by government, rent receipts etc. But there are
specific provisions in the Acts, rules, government guide lines, government schemes for
formalization of land possession by poor without the documents normally insisted under various
provisions of Acts and rules.

Formalization of land possession by poor in Rural Areas

(a) West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955
Poor people possessing government land is formalized under section 49(1) of West Bengal
Land Reforms Act, 1955 read with sub rules (1) to (4) of rule 20A of the West Bengal LR Rules.
The maximum area of agricultural land that can be formalized with a poor person is one acre
provided the poor person together with the members of the family possesses less than 0.4047
hectare of land. In case of sharecropper half of the of the area of land cultivated by him is
considered to be the land owned by him and balance land after deducting the land so considered
to be owned by him from 0.4047 hectare is formalized. Cases of poor person having no
homestead land of his own and possessing homestead land at the disposal of the government are
also formalized under provisions mentioned above. The maximum area of home stead land that
can be formalized is 0.0335 hectare .However no land can be formalized under section 49(1)
with any person or with member of family of any such person who is engaged or employed in
any business trade, undertaking, manufacture, calling, service or industrial occupation. Before
formalization pre- distribution survey and enquiry is conducted by Revenue officer jointly with a
member of Bock level Panchayat Samity as (local self-government) nominated by Sabhapati
(Chairman) of Block level Panchayat Samity. In course of this survey following information are
collected: (a) date from which the poor person or family of the poor person is in possession (b)
the area of the land owned by person together with the land owned by the members of his family
(c) if the person or any member of his family cultivates any land as sharecropper if so area of
such land (d) if the person belongs to scheduled caste or scheduled tribe. On completion of pre -
distribution survey a priority list of person possessing government land is drawn up in
consultation with the Block Panchayat Samity. The order of priority is as follows:(a) landless
person in uninterrupted possession for a minimum period of three years, (b) landless
agricultural workers belonging to ST, (c) agricultural workers belonging to SCs, (d) landless
agricultural workers other than above, (e) land less sharecroppers belonging to ST, (f) landless
share croppers belonging to SC (g) landless share croppers other than above, and (h) landless
persons who used to cultivate land as sharecropper or agricultural workers under the previous
owner whose land was vested under ceiling provisions of WBEA Act 1953 and WBLR Act 1955.
Apart from poor person who is in possession of government land, poor person not in possession
of government land are also allotted government land as per provision of section 49(1) of WBLR
100 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Act 1955 .The same principle of priority is followed in these cases. Block Land and Land Reforms
Officer (BL&LRO) sends the priority list along with report of pre-distribution survey to Block
Panchayat Samity for consideration and recommendation. Panchayat samity makes necessary
recommendation specifying the persons to whom land should be distributed and also the
quantum of land to be distributed to each. Thereafter BLLRO prepares settlement proposal on
the basis of such recommendation and sends the case records along with the recommendation to
the Sub-divisional Land and Land Reforms Officer (SDL&LRO). SDL&LRO forwards the
proposal to Sub Divisional Officer (SDO) for approval. On being satisfied that that formalization
proposal is in order and that the eligibility conditions specified in section 49(1) of WBLR Act
1955 and the priority principle fixed by the government has been properly followed SDO
approves the formalization proposal and sends his approval to BLLRO through SDLLRO.
BLLRO prepares the patta (deed of settlement) in form 8A as prescribed in sub rule (4) of rule
20A of West Bengal Land Reforms Rules1965. The patta so prepared is handed over to the poor
people by BLLRO. A separate record of right is opened in the name of each patta holder and
land is transferred from the accounts of government land i.e., collectors’ record of rights.
However the poor person with whom the government land so settled with is not entitled to
transfer the land except by way of simple mortgage for the purpose of obtaining loan for
development of land or for the improvement of agricultural production or for construction of
dwelling house. Procedure of settlement of vested land with land poor or landless persons and
sharecroppers has been laid down in clauses 187 to 208 under Chapter XIII of West Bengal
Land and Land Reform Manual 1991. As on October 2013, 11,41,345 acres of land has been
distributed to 31,41,232 persons. But the number of persons recoded in RoR is 24,57,347
[Source: Report published by Directorate of Land Records and Surveys, Govt. of West Bengal].

(b) West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourer Artisan
    and Fisherman Act 1975.
State Government with the objective of recognizing the rights of landless agricultural labourers,
artisans and fisherman, occupying homestead land of other land owners enacted West Bengal
Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourers’, Artisans and Fisherman Act 1975.
Under this Act landless person mentioned above were given ownership rights over homestead to
the extent of 0.08 acres, by acquiring land of the land owners. The Land owners were given
compensation for such acquisition. As on October 2013, this Act provided ownership right to
3,26,725 families [Source: Report published by Directorate of Land Records and Surveys, Govt.
of West Bengal].

(c) Chas O BasabaserJanyaBhumidanprakalpa(Homestead and kitchen garden
    scheme) and NijoGrihoNijoBhumiPrakalpa(My Home My Land scheme)

In spite of provisions made in the West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955 and West Bengal
Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourers, Artisans and Fisherman Act 1975,
large number of landless people remained outside benefit provided by the Act. To cover these
landless people the State introduced Chas- O- Basa baser Janya Bhumidan Prakalpa
(Homestead and kitchen garden scheme) in the year 2005-06. Under this scheme land up to
0.16 acres were allotted to the landless people for homestead and kitchen garden purpose. This
micro- plot distribution is unique in the sense that Govt. purchased the land form landowners at
market rate and distributed to the landless people. But, this scheme was not seriously
implemented by the State Govt. Under the scheme State granted tenancy right to 5034 persons
over 579.79 acres of land [Source: Report published by Directorate of Land Records and
Surveys, Govt. of West Bengal]. When the present Government came into power, introduced a
new scheme Nijo Griho Nijo Bhumi prakalpa in Oct 2011 (My Home My Land scheme) with
purpose to settle 5.5 Lakh landless poor people of the State with land up to 0.05 acre. The land
to be settled will be provided from the land at the disposal of state government and land to be
purchased by the state government from land owners at market rate. The settles are to be settled
in cluster and will be provided with all essential amenities like drinking water, sanitation,
101 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
electricity, road and livelihood support by convergence of Govt. schemes. The entire 5.5 lakhs
landless people will be covered under the scheme by 2015-16. As on March 2014, 167770 persons
have been allotted land [Source: Report of Directorate of Land Records and Surveys, Govt. of
West Bengal].

Formalization of homestead sites in urban areas

(a) West Bengal Thika Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 2001:

    Thika tenants are urban tenants occupying land of a landlord by erecting a structure for
    residential, business or manufacturing purpose in urban areas paying rent to landlord.
    Occupation of land may be on the basis of written lease or without the same. Most of the
    thika tenants are poor people and slum dwellers. Specific provision has been made in this
    Act for acquisition of interest in the landlords against compensation and for formalising the
    tenants by bringing them directly under the state. A large number of poor thika tenants
    without written lease or other valid documents have been given tenancy right under the
    provision of this Act.

(b) Government of West Bengal issued a circular in 2010[circular no:1469-GE(M)/L-20/10
    Dated 17 .03.2010] for urban poor who are residing in vested land in urban areas for at least
    20 years. Land up to 2 cottah is settled for 99 years with the urban poor on token salami
    (premium) of Rs 1/ provided beneficiary house hold has monthly income not more than Rs
    6000 and the land has not been earmarked for any project. The beneficiary household only
    has to pay land revenue to be fixed under West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955 or Kolkata
    Land Revenue Act 2003.Most of these beneficiaries are slum dwellers.


Data Source:

        1.   West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955
        2.   West Bengal Land Reforms Rules 1965
        3.   West Bengal Land and Land Reforms Manual, 1991
        4.   West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead land for Agricultural Labourers, Artisans and
             Fisherman Act 1975
        5.   Chas O Basabaser Janya Bhumidan Prakalpa(Homestead and Kitchen Garden
             scheme)
        6.   Nijo Griha NijoBhumi Prakalpa (My Home My Land scheme)
        7.   Calcutta Thika Tenancy Act, 1949
        8.   Calcutta Thika Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 1981
        9.   West Bengal Thika Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 2001

Data Reliability: All data are from Acts mentioned above. Therefore all data are 100 percent
reliable.

Policy Recommendations:

    1. Analysis of the existing mechanism for recognition of rights over land, clearly indicate
       robust law and procedure exist for formalization of land possession by poor. But,
       implementation of process for formal recognition of possession needs to be more
       transparent. Recognition of possession is done through joint survey by team consisting
       of Govt. officials and representative of local self Govt. at the village level. Often political
       consideration affects settlement of land with eligible beneficiaries. Corruption also
       affects the process of formalization of land possession by poor. Available data indicates
       that patta has been granted to 3141232 but 2457347 patta recipients have been recorded

102 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       in the RoRs. The gap should be bridged and it should be ensured that RoRs is recorded
       as soon as the Patta is granted.
    2. There is large number of poor people possessing government land. Efforts should be
       made to identify poor people through time bound survey and patta be issued.
    3. There are 5.5 lakhs landless people in the State as per the National Sample Survey
       Report (59th Round). Though steps have been taken to cover these people under NGNB
       Scheme by 2015-16, but only 86883 persons have been granted patta. The progress is
       slow and it needs to be speeded up to achieve the target set by the State.


Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 17
                           Mechanisms for recognition of rights
   6        1       2      Non-documentary evidence is effectively used to help establish rights.
                           A: Non-documentary forms of evidence allow full recognition of claims to
                           property when other forms of evidence are not available.
                           B: Non-documentary forms of evidence are used to obtain recognition of a
                           claim to property along with other documents (e.g. tax receipts or informal
                           purchase notes) when other forms of evidence are not available. They have
                           about the same strength as provided documents.
                           C: Non-documentary forms of evidence are used to obtain recognition of a
                           claim to property along with other documents (e.g. tax receipts or informal
                           purchase notes) when other forms of evidence are not available. They have
                           less strength than the provided documents.
                           D: Non-documentary forms of evidence are almost never used to obtain
                           recognition of claims to property.

Analysis:

Right from the Rent Act, patta of land was insisted upon irrespective of occupancy and non-
occupancy Raiyats. In order to establish right over the land, documents like patta and rent
receipt were the statutory requirement. The Bengal Tenancy Act 1885 also laid down the same
principle of recognition of rights over the land only in case of occupancy Raiyats i.e. settled
right. Onus of proving that Raiyat is not a settled Raiyat was on the land owners who issued
patta in favour of the Raiyat.

In the West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955, provision has been made for allotment of land to
landless and land poor people holding land less than 0.4047 hectare. In Section 49 (1) of the Act,
provision was made to issue patta up to 0.4047 hectare to the landless and land poor persons
occupying government land. In this case no documentary evidence is necessary to prove their
rights, only confirmation of possession over the land by revenue officials and representatives of
the Local Self-Government is enough to recognize their rights over the land. Homestead rights
of landless agricultural labourers, artisans and fishermen occupying their land to the extent of
0.08 acres of other land owners were also recognized without documentary evidence, in the
West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourers, Artisans and
Fishermen Act 1975. In these cases only possession over the land as on 26th June 1975 is enough
to record the rights of the beneficiaries. But this benefit was awarded to the beneficiaries who
were in possession up to 26th June 1975. This Act did not extend benefit to the person who
occupied the land of other land owners after 26th June 1975.

Though sharecropping right is not a tenancy right, but the right to cultivate the land, has been
recognized, with the right of the inheritance in the West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955.
Stringent provision has also been made against eviction of sharecroppers. Incidence of
sharecroppers’ right is recorded in the RoRs on the basis of field enquiry and hearing of the land


103 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
owners and sharecroppers by the Revenue Officers. In this case also no documentary evidence is
required to recognize rights of the sharecroppers.

During preparation of RoRs under the Estate Acquisition Act 1953, general instructions were
issued by the government that the rights of persons occupying land of other persons on the basis
of consent or forcibly should be recorded in the RoR if they are found to be in possession of the
land. But during preparation of RoR under West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955 same
instructions were withdrawn to avoid legal problems and large scale encroachment of land
leading to deterioration of law and order.

Source:

       Rent Act 1859
       Bengal Tenancy Act 1885
       West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act 1953
       West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955
       West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourers, Artisans and
        Fishermen Act 1975
       General Instruction for Preparation of Record of Rights under West Bengal Estate
        Acquisition Act 1953 and West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955 issued by Directorate of
        Land Records and Surveys.

Data Reliability: As data are from Acts it is 100 Percent Reliable.

Policy Recommendation:

State Government may consider the extension of benefits to the eligible persons occupying
homestead land after 26th June 1975, by amending the West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead
Land for Agricultural Labourers’, Artisans and Fishermen Act 1975.
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 17
                           Mechanisms for recognition of rights
   6        1       3      Long-term unchallenged possession is formally recognized.
                           A: Legislation exists to formally recognize long-term, unchallenged possession
                           and this applies to both public and private land although different rules may
                           apply.
                           B: Legislation exists to formally recognize long-term, unchallenged possession
                           but applies only to one specific type of land (e.g. either public land or private
                           land).
                           C: Legislation exists to formally recognize long-term, unchallenged possession
                           but due to the way this legislation is implemented, formal recognition is
                           granted to very few or no applicants for recognition on either public or private
                           land.
                           D: Legislation to formally recognize long-term, unchallenged possession does
                           not exist.

Analysis:

The claim to rights and title in relation to private and public land has been recognized in
Limitation Act 1908. Under this Act uninterrupted and uncontested possession for a specified
period hostile to the rights and interest of the owner is legally recognized in this Act.

Article 65, Schedule I of the Limitation Act 1908 prescribes a limitation of 12 years for a suit for
possession of land or immovable property or any interest based on title. The starting point of
limitation of 12 years is counted from the point of time when the possession becomes adverse.

104 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
But to claim a title on land, a suit is to be filed by the person who possesses the land adversely to
the interest of land owner. A civil court is competent to decide the claim. Article 64 governs suits
for possession based on possessory right laid down in Section 27 (Extinguishment of right to
property) of the Act.

In case of government (Central or State Government) property, the period of limitation for any
suit is 30 years and the starting point of limitation is the same as the case of suit by a private
person (Article 112, Schedule I of the Limitation Act). Acquisition of easement is provided in
Section 27 of the Limitation Act. During preparation of RoR under Bengal Estate Acquisition Act
1953, general instruction was issued to record the possession of the possessors in the RoR, on
field verification. But to avoid legal problems and law & order problems the same was
withdrawn during preparation of RoRs under West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955. Now title
accrued out of adverse possession can be recorded in Record of rights only on the basis of
decision of the court of law.

Data Source:

       Indian Limitation Act 1908
       Decision of Supreme Court of India in Karnataka Board of Wakf Govt. of India [10SSC
        779] & Valliamma Champakavs. SivathanuPillai

Data Reliability: As data are from Act and Supreme Court Decision data are 100 percent
reliable.

Policy Recommendation: No change in the policy is suggested.
Panel     LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 17
                          Mechanisms for recognition of rights
                          First-time recording of rights on demand includes proper safeguards and
   6        1       4
                          access is not restricted by high fees.
                          A: On-demand recording of rights includes proper safeguards to prevent abuse
                          and costs do not exceed 0.5% of the property value.
                          B: On-demand recording of rights includes proper safeguards to prevent abuse
                          and costs do not exceed 2% of the property value.
                          C: On-demand recording of rights includes proper safeguards to prevent abuse
                          and costs do not exceed 5% of the property value.
                          D: On-demand recording of rights does not include proper safeguards to
                          prevent abuse or costs exceed 5% of the property value.

Analysis:

Mutation of land is done under the provision of section 50 of West Bengal Land Reforms Act
1955, Rule 21 of West Bengal Land Reforms Rule 1965 and procedure laid down in circular
issued by Land and Land Reforms Department.

The procedure laid down in State Government Circular No. 4402 – LR/3M – 135/05 GE (M)
dated 28.12.2005, requires a person to submit an application, with application fees of Rs.10/
and process fee mentioned below, registered deed of transfer, rent receipt for recording their
rights in RoRs.




105 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Rate of processing fees per decimal for mutation:
        Classification     of   Rural area     Municipal area other than         Municipal   area
        land                                   KMDA(Kolkata                      within KMDA
                                               Metropolitan Development
                                               Authority) Area
        Agricultural land       Rs.1/-         Rs.1/-                            Rs.1/-
        Non-agricultural        Rs.10/-        Rs.15/-                           Rs.20/-
        non-commercial
        land
        Commercial        and   Rs.20/-        Rs.30/-                           Rs.50/-
        industrial land

Therefore, on demand recording of rights is made after proper verification of registered deed of
transfer, rent receipts, and after hearing the concerned parties involved by Revenue Officers.
The cost of recording is nominal and do not exceed 0.5% of the property value.

Data Source: State Government Circular No. 4402 – LR/3M – 135/05 GE (M) dated
28.12.2005.

Data Reliability: since data are from Act and Govt. Circulars it is 100 percent reliable.

Policy recommendation:

Processing fees should be increased by at least 50 times to accommodate cost of manpower and
infrastructure for recording of rights over land.
                           Land Governance Indicator 18
Panel     LGI     Dim.
                           Completeness of the land registry
   6        2        1     Total cost of recording a property transfer is low.
                           A: The total cost for recording a property transfer is less than 1% of the
                           property value (time and effort costs, informal and official fees etc.).
                           B: The total cost for recording a property transfer is between 1% and less than
                           2% of the property value.
                           C: The total cost for recording a property transfer is between 2% and less than
                           5% of the property value.
                           D: The total cost for recording a property transfer is equal to or greater than 5%
                           of the property value.

Analysis:

Existing rate of stamp duty and registration fee for registration of property transfer is as follows:




106 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
           Sl. Areas                                             Rate of registration fee
           No.
           1                                      Up to Rs.250/- is Rs.2/-
               5% on market value in Panchayat area
                                                  Up to Rs.500/- is Rs.7/-
                                                  Up to Rs.1000/- is Rs.8/-
           2      6% on market value in Municipal Up to Rs.5000/- is Rs.9/-
                  areas,  Corporation areas  and for Rs.1000/- or part
                  Development areas               thereof   in    excess    of
                                                  Rs.1000/-
                                                  Above Rs.5000/- is Rs.11/-
                                                  for Rs.1000/- or part
                                                  thereof   in    excess    of
                                                  RS.5000/-


For exchange of property same rate applies. For gift rate is 0.5% of the market value of the
property when made to a member of the family but at the same rate mentioned in the table
above for gifts to others. For partition rate is 0.5% of market value of the separated share or
shares of property and registration fee is Rs.7/-.

Data Source:

       Indian Stamp Act 1899.
       The West Bengal Registration Rules 1962
       The West Bengal Stamp Rules 1964
       The West Bengal (Prevention of Under-Valuation of Instruments) Rules 2001

Data Reliability: As data are from Acts and Rules it is 100 percent reliable

Policy Recommendation: Stamp duty should be reduced to ensure that each property
transfer is registered. There is large scale evasion of stamp duty particularly by the poor people
in rural area primarily due to high rate of stamp duty.
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 18
                           Completeness of the land registry
   6        2       2      Information held in records is linked to maps that reflect current reality.
                           A: More than 90% of records for privately held land recorded in the registry
                           are readily identifiable in maps (spatial records).
                           B: Between 70% and 90% of records for privately held land recorded in the
                           registry are readily identifiable in maps (spatial records).
                           C: Between 50% and 70% of records for privately held land recorded in the
                           registry are readily identifiable in maps (spatial records).
                           D: Less than 50% of records for privately held land recorded in the registry
                           are readily identifiable in maps (spatial records).

Analysis:

In the State, cadastral parcel maps are digitized and records of rights (RoRs) are also digitized
and linked digitally. Therefore, land recorded in the RoRs is readily identifiable in the cadastral
maps. But the cadastral maps are more than 30 years old. The RoRs also do not reflect the
ground reality.


107 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
A study was conducted to find out whether record of rights reflect al the land parcel appearing in
the revenue village maps. A revenue village was selected in each of 18 districts of the state
randomly and total number of parcel was counted from the current cadastral map of the revenue
village and the number of parcels for which record of rights was prepared was also counted.
These were then matched. The result is given in the table below.

       District              Idn        Mouza Name in           J.L.NO.        No. of           No. of
                                           English                            plots in         plots in
                                                                               Map              ROR
 Bankura           0107015                  Pratappur             015           873              873
 Bardhaman         0219001                  ParulBaria            001           2325             2325
 Birbhum           0317002                   Maliana              002             22              22
 Darjeeling        0404018                   Alokjhari            018           662               651
 Howrah            0505005              Jala-Biswnathpur          005           3597             3597
 Hoogly            0609006                  Sheorafuli            006           6310             6310
 Jalpaiguri        0707001               Jiti Cha Bagan           001           703              703
 Cochbihar         0801197             KharijaNaldhandra          197           3877             3877
 Malda             0905010                    Kotuali             010           499              498
 PaschimMedinipur 1011006                   Gopalpur              006           654              654
 PurbaMedinipur     1116114                Mangalchak             114           1437             1437
 Murshidabad       1204009                    Dastina             009           829              829
 Nadia             1304007                    Balindi             007            746             746
 Purila            1410009                     Raydi              009           1190             1190
 North 24 Parganas 1506008                    Ashudi              008           1014             1014
 South 24 Parganas 1601009                   Faridpur             009            744             744
 DakshinDinajpur   1701009               Jagannathbati            009           542              542
 Uttar Dinajpur    1805058                  Baliamoni             058           824              823

From the above table it appears that 90% of privately held land recoded in record of rights is
readily identifiable in cadastral map. In the State, cadastral parcel maps are digitized and
records of rights (RoRs) are also digitized and linked digitally. Now a parcel in the record of
rights can be digitally identified on a cadastral map by a click of a mouse of a computer. Land
records and cadastral maps are dynamic in nature and changes with changes in ownership of
land and use of land. Land records and cadastral maps are updated by incorporating in the
Record of Rights changes on account of transfer, inheritance, partition, exchange, new
settlement of land, revenue, alteration in the mode of cultivation for example by a sharecropper.
Cadastral maps are also modified accordingly as Record of Rights follows the cadastral maps
(Section 50 of WBLR Act 1955). An account of mutation cases disposed of during last five years
is given below:




108 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
               Number of mutation cases disposed of and pending for
               disposal
               Year                     Disposed of      Pending for
                                                          disposal
               2008-2009                    655074         821356
               2009-2010                    831603         952943
               2010-2011                   1288697         779577
               2011-2012                  1282830          724817
               2012-2013                   1464232         818237
               2013-2014 (up to           1050433          756673
               december'13)
               (Source: Data published by Directorate of Land Records and Surveys West Bengal)

Similarly changes in the land use are updated by incorporating the changes in land use in the
Record of Rights and in the maps. Number of conversion of recorded land use cases disposed of
in last five years is given below;

               Number of conversion cases disposed of and pending for
               disposal
                          Year          Disposed of      Pending for
                                                           disposal
               2008-2009                   40868            36814
               2009-2010                   42769            43384
               2010-2011                   61877             41215
               2011-2012                   67050            38982
               2012-2013                   65551             43411
               2013-2014 (up to            41247            44056
               decmber'13)
                (Source: Data published Directorate of Land Records and Surveys West Bengal)

However there are large number of cases in which changes in land ownership or changes in land
use have not been incorporated in the record of rights and cadastral maps as it is not mandatory
for land owners to approach the officers of the land registry department to mutate their names
in Record of Rights. In some cases also officials of land records Department fails to detect
changes in the field vis-a-vis in RoR and cadastral maps. Last survey settlement operation was
taken up 39-40 years back to update Record of Rights and cadastral maps prepared under
WBEA Act 1953. Though land Records are updated through mutation and conversion there are
large number of cases either pending for disposal or land owners have not approached for
correction of Record of Rights. As a result the RoRs do not reflect the ground reality as regards
ownership, possession and land use.

Data Source: Cadastral Maps and Records maintained by Directorate of Land Records &
Surveys

Data Reliability: As information is from Cadastral maps and Record of Rights it is 100 percent
reliable.

Policy recommendations: Cadastral parcel maps should be updated by using High
Resolution Satellite imagery, Electronic Total Station, and Digital Global Positioning System.
RoRs should also be updated and registration of land should not be allowed unless name of the
transferor features in the Record of rights.
109 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 18
                           Completeness of the land registry
   6        2       3      All relevant private encumbrances are recorded.
                           A: Relevant private encumbrances are recorded consistently and in a reliable
                           fashion and can be verified at low cost by any interested party.
                           B: Relevant private encumbrances are recorded consistently and in a reliable
                           fashion but the cost of accessing them are high.
                           C: Relevant private encumbrances are recorded but this is not done in a
                           consistent and reliable manner.
                           D: Relevant private encumbrances are not recorded.

Analysis:

Private encumbrances are: Irrigation rights, user rights for road, pasture rights, Caracas
disposal rights, cremation rights, user rights of tank, pond and such other easement rights.
Private encumbrance also includes possession of land with consent, adverse possession, forcible
possession and rights of the share croppers. As of now private encumbrances created by non-
governmental bodies (banks, private institutions etc.) and court of law are not recorded in the
RoRs. However State government may consider recording private encumbrances created by
non-governmental bodies and orders issued by court of law in the RoRs. This will be possible
after programme for on line management of land records undertaken by the state government is
completed by the end of 2014.
Private encumbrances were recorded in the RoR under Bengal Tenancy Act 1885 and the same
were updated under WBEA Act 1953 and WBLR Act 1955. But the RoRs do not reflect the
ground reality at present. It needs to be updated on real time basis.

Data Source: Record of Rights (RoR) maintained by Directorate of Land Records & Surveys

Data Reliability: As information is from Record of rights it is 100 percent reliable.

Policy Recommendation: Record of Rights should be updated on real time basis.
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 18
                           Completeness of the land registry
   6        2       4      All relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded.
                           A: Relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded consistently and in a
                           reliable fashion and can be verified at a low cost by any interested party.
                           B: Relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded consistently and in a
                           reliable fashion but the cost of accessing them is high.
                           C: Relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded but this is not done in
                           a consistent and reliable manner.
                           D: Relevant public restrictions or charges are not recorded.

Analysis:

Public restriction and charges are recorded in the RoRs prepared under BT Act 1885 and revised
and updated under WBEA Act 1953 and WBLR Act 1955.

Public restriction recorded in RoRs are: restriction on transfer of land beyond ceiling limit
without approval of revenue officer, long term settlement of land, short term settlement,
settlement through patta of government land and non-transferability of such land, term for
which settled. Violation of statutory provisions of WBLR Act 1955, land allowed to be retained
beyond ceiling limit for industrial and such other purposes specified in WBLR Act 1955 which
cannot be transferred to private individual, land revenue chargeable on each RoRs are also
110 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
recoded. All public restriction is properly recorded in RoRs except revenue chargeable on land
in RoRs. Land revenue chargeable has not been recorded in RoRs, because as per WBLR Act
1955 and West Bengal Land Reforms rules 1965 land revenue and exemption from land revenue
requires determination of family of the Raiyat(land owner)and determination of which is a time
takingandcumbersome process. There is also lack of initiative on the part of the revenue officers
of Land and Land reforms Department of the state government. However State Government
may consider amendment of WBLR Act 1955 and West Bengal Land Reforms Rules 1965 to
change determination of land revenue on family basis to individual Raiyat basis. This will help
determination of land revenue and recording in RoR much easier as RoR are maintained based
on individual raiyat not based on family of Raiyat.
Data Source: Record of Rights (RoRs) prepared and maintained by Directorate of Land
Records & Surveys

Data Reliability: As source of information is from Record of rights prepared under different
Acts it is 100 percent reliable.

Policy recommendations: Relevant public restriction or charges should be recorded in a
consistent and reliable manner.
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 18
                           Completeness of the land registry
   6        2       5      There is a timely response to requests for accessing registry records.
                           A: Copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property can generally
                           be obtained within 1 day of request.
                           B: Copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property can generally
                           be obtained within 1 week of request.
                           C: It generally takes more than 1 week after request to produce a copy or
                           extract of documents recording rights in property.
                           D: It is not unusual that an extract or copy of a record cannot be produced in
                           response to a request as the original record cannot be located.

Analysis:

All RoRs and cadastral maps are digitized and digitally integrated. Information on land rights
records and cadastral maps are available in the website (http://www.banglarbhumi.gov.in)
hosted by the State. State Government has introduced Over the Counter (OTC) service. Citizens
can now access RoRs and maps within 5-15 minutes on submission of request. Cadastral maps
and land records (RoRs) has been prepared, digitized, integrated for whole of state except 1 to
100 wards of Kolkata city. Digitized land records and cadastral maps are also available in the
Website of the State Government. Growth in submission of request by citizen and service
delivery since introduction of OTC service is given below.

        No of certified copies of record of rights and parcel information
        issued (over the counter service)
                        Year                   Number of Record of              Number Plot
                                                    rights                      Information
                  2011-2012                        1747332                       2003364
                 2012-2013                         2400314                        3731702
         2013-2014(up to december'13)              1439027                        2631993




111 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Data Source: Digitized Cadastral maps and records maintained by Directorate of Land
Records & Surveys and report on OTC published by Directorate of Land Records and surveys
West Bengal

Data Reliability: As information is from digital records prepared by Directorate of Land
records and surveys West Bengal and report on OTC services published by Directorate of Land
Records and Surveys West Bengal it is 100 percent reliable.

Policy Recommendation: Land records information should be updated on real time basis.
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 18
                           Completeness of the land registry
   6        2       6      The registry is searchable.
                           A: The records in the registry can be searched by both right holder name and
                           parcel.
                           B: The records in the registry can only be searched by right holder name.
                           C: The records in the registry can only be searched by parcel.
                           D: The records in the registry cannot be searched by either right holder name
                           or parcel.

Analysis:

Land records and cadastral maps are available on website of Land and Land Reforms
Department. Therefore it is easily searchable. Citizens can now search records at OTC centres.

Data Source: Website of the department

Data reliability: Data is 100 percent reliable.

Policy Recommendations: Land records and cadastral maps are to be updated on real time
basis.
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 18
                           Completeness of the land registry
   6        2       7      Land information records are easily accessed.
                           A: Copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property can be
                           obtained by anyone who pays the necessary formal fee, if any.
                           B: Copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property can only be
                           obtained by intermediaries and those who can demonstrate an interest in the
                           property upon payment of the necessary formal fee, if any.
                           C: Copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property can only be
                           obtained by intermediaries upon payment of the necessary formal fee, if any.
                           D: Records on land rights are not publicly accessible or can only be obtained by
                           paying an informal fee.

Analysis:

Land records and cadastral maps and land value information are digitized and are available at a
nominal fee from land record and registration offices. State Government has initiated steps to
make available land information online against online payment. More over land information
and record information are available on government website.

Data Source:

Data reliability: Data is 100 percent reliable.

112 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Policy Recommendation: No recommendation is made.
                            Land Governance Indicator 19
Panel     LGI     Dim.      Reliability: Registry information is updated and sufficient to
                            make meaningful inferences on ownership
                            Information in public registries is synchronized to ensure integrity of rights
   6        3          1
                            and reduce transaction cost.
                            A: Links are in place for all types of public land information registries;
                            mandatory checks are performed to ensure legitimacy of any transactions
                            that materially affects certain parties' land rights before they can be finalized.
                            B: Links are in place for all types of public land information registries but
                            checks on the legitimacy of transactions that affects certain parties' land
                            rights are only performed ex post.
                            C: Links are in place for some types of land information and checks are
                            insufficient to eliminate a significant number of potentially fraudulent
                            transactions.
                            D: Few or none of the relevant links exist.

Analysis:

State Government has taken steps to synchronize digital records of land transaction, RoRs and
cadastral parcel and legacy records through intranet at State Data Centre. But land transactions
presently are allowed without verification of RoRs.

Land acquisition is made by Bhu-Adhigrahan software and is synchronised with Bhu-Chitra
software by which RoRs are updated and managed. Therefore land acquisition details are
incorporated in RoRs as soon as land acquisition process is finalized. As of now Bank loans,
orders of court of law are not recorded in RoRs. However, state government may consider
recording private encumbrances created by non-governmental bodies and orders issued by
courts in the RoRs.This will be possible after programme for on line management of land
records undertaken by the state government is completed by the end of 2014.
Data Source:

Data Reliability:

Policy Recommendations: Record of rights, cadastral maps legacy records of rights should
be updated.
Panel    LGI     Dim.      Land Governance Indicator 19
                           Reliability: Registry information is updated and sufficient to
                           make meaningful inferences on ownership
  6        3       2       Registry information is up-to-date and reflects ground reality.
                           A: More than 90% of the ownership information in the registry/cadaster is
                           up-to-date and reflects ground reality.
                           B: Between 70% and 90% of the ownership information in registry/cadaster is
                           up-to-date and reflects ground reality.
                           C: Between 50% and 70% of the ownership information in registry/cadaster is
                           up-to-date and reflects ground reality.
                           D: Less than 50% of the ownership information in the registry/cadaster is up-
                           to-date and reflects ground reality.

Analysis:

All RoRs and cadastral maps are digitized and digitally integrated. Information on land rights
records and cadastral maps are available in the website hosted by the State. State Government
has introduced Over the Counter (OTC) service. Citizens can now access RoRs and maps within
113 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
5-15 minutes on submission of request. However, since all the changes that have taken place
subsequent to the revision of records, RoRs cannot be said to be reflecting the ground reality in
all the cases.

Data Source: Digitized Cadastral maps and records maintained by Directorate of Land
Records & Surveys.

There is no readily available data to assess the actual percentage of updated ownership
information in registry or cadastre. The assessment is primarily made on the basis of field
experience. (As per suggestion of DDG, NIC-West Bengal during panel discussion held on 17-04-
2014).

Data Reliability: As information is from digital records prepared by state government it is 100
percent reliable.

Policy Recommendations: Land records information should be updated on real time basis.
                           Land Governance Indicator 20
                           Cost-effectiveness and sustainability: land administration services
Panel     LGI     Dim.
                           are provided in cost-effective ways that are sustainable in the long
                           term.
                           The registry is financially sustainable through fee collection to finance its
   6        4        1
                           operations.
                           A: The total fees collected by the registry exceed the total registry operating
                           costs. (Total operating costs include all non-capital investment costs (i.e.
                           salaries and wages, materials, transportation, etc.) associated with registry
                           operating costs.)
                           B: The total fees collected by the registry are greater than 90% of the total
                           registry operating costs.
                           C: The total fees collected by the registry are between 50% and 90% of the total
                           registry operating costs.
                           D: The total fees collected by the registry are less than 50% of the total registry
                           operating costs.

Analysis:

Land rights are now recorded in RoRs and copies of RoRs are provided to citizen at very
nominal fee of Rs.20/- per page of information. But huge amount is spent on salary of the
employees and infrastructure. Comparative figures of operating cost and revenue collected is
given below:

       Comparative figures on collection of revenue and expenditure (in Crores)

                    Year                       Collection of Revenue                 Expenditure

                2009-2010                               244.06                          479.52

                 2010-2011                              276.54                          538.01

                 2011-2012                              380.16                          526.29

                 2012-2013                              483.71                          559.33

       2013-2014(up to december'13)                     236.11                          534.84




114 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
From the above comparative figures it is clear that total revenue collected is between 50% and
90% of the total registry operating costs.

Data Source: Circular issued by the state government and figures on operating cost and
revenue collected received from Director of land Records and Surveys, Govt. of West Bengal.

Data reliability: Data is 100 percent reliable as source is circular issued by state government
and information on operating cost and revenue collected received from State Government.

Policy Recommendation: Existing rates should be increased. Graded rates are to be levied
for different income groups -higher rates for high income groups and lower rates for low income
groups.
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 20
                           Cost-effectiveness and sustainability: land administration
                           services are provided in cost-effective ways that are sustainable
                           in the long term.
                           Investment in land admin. is sufficient to cope with demand for high quality
   6        4       2
                           services.
                           A: Investment in human and physical is sufficient to achieve or maintain high
                           service standards and to proactively respond to future needs and new
                           developments in the sector.
                           B: Investment in human and physical is sufficient to maintain high service
                           standards but does not allow for proactively responding to future needs and
                           new developments in the sector.
                           C: Human and physical capital investment is sufficient to maintain medium
                           service standards but does not allow to proactively adapt to new
                           developments.
                           D: There is little or no investment in capital in the system to record rights in
                           land.
Analysis:

High quality service demands high level of investment and skilled manpower. Presently number
of manpower deployed and amount of investment made is insufficient to support high quality
service. Maintenance of land records has always been considered as one of the essential
functions of the government.

Data Source: DLRS

Data Reliability: High

Policy Recommendation: Graded fee structure for different services and for different income
group should be introduced to provide high quality service at cost effective manner.

                           Land Governance Indicator 21
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Fees are determined transparently to cover the cost of service
                           provision
                           Fees have a clear rationale, their schedule is public, and all payments are
   6        5        1
                           accounted for.
                           A: A clear rationale and schedule of fees for different services is publicly
                           accessible and receipts are issued for all transactions.
                           B: A clear rationale and schedule of fees for different services is not publicly
                           accessible, but receipts are issued for all transactions.
                           C: A clear rationale and schedule of fees for different services is publicly
                           accessible, but receipts are not issued for all transactions.
                           D: A clear rationale and schedule of fees for different services is not publicly
                           accessible and receipts are not issued for all transactions.

115 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Analysis:

A clear rationale of fixation of fee is not available as it was decided by the State Government to
provide the service at a token rate. However, details of fees for different service are available at
respective land record offices and registration offices and receipts are issued for all transactions.

Policy Recommendation: Rationale for fixation of fees for different services should be fixed
transparently to cover the cost of services.
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 21
                           Fees are determined transparently to cover the cost of service
                           provision
   6        5       2      Informal payments are discouraged.
                           A: Effective mechanisms to detect and deal with illegal staff behavior exist in
                           all registry offices and all cases are promptly dealt with.
                           B: Mechanisms to detect and deal with illegal staff behavior exist in all
                           registry offices but cases are not systematically or promptly dealt with.
                           C: Mechanisms to detect and deal with illegal staff behavior exist in some
                           registry offices.
                           D: Mechanisms to detect and deal with illegal staff behavior are largely non-
                           existent.

Analysis:

In all offices dealing with land transfer, registration and offices preparing RoRs and cadastral
maps, illegal staff behavior could be easily detected. Service Conduct Rules for staff are in place
and for illegal staff behavior and there is provision for punishment through departmental
proceedings and criminal proceedings. But supervision by the officials is not done regularly to
detect illegal staff behaviors and to punish them promptly and systematically.

During last three years (2011-13) departmental proceedings were drawn up against 75
employees for illegal staff behavior and 10 employees were punished and 3 vigilance enquiries
are continuing against 3 employees. These are information received from office of The Director
Land Records and Surveys Government of West Bengal.

Data Source: Office of Director Land Records and Surveys West Bengal

Data Reliability: High

Policy Recommendation: Strong monitoring and supervision mechanism should be put in
place to detect informal payments and illegal staff behavior and to punish them promptly.
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 21
                           Fees are determined transparently to cover the cost of service
                           provision
   6        5       3      Service standards are published and regularly monitored.
                           A: There are published service standards (including dealing with deal with
                           illegal staff behavior), the registry actively monitors its performance against
                           these standards and results are public.
                           B: There are published service standards, but the registry does not actively
                           monitor its performance against these standards.
                           C: Service standards have been established, but have not been published and
                           there is little attempt to monitor performance against the standards.


116 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                           D: There are no service standards set and no attempt to monitor customer
                           service or illegal behaviors by staff.

Analysis:

State Government has enacted West Bengal Rights to Public Service Act 2013 to establish
service standard and ensure providing service as per established service standard. Under this
Act, officials failing to give service as per standard will be punished. But State Government has
notified service standard for a few services, not for all services.

Data Source: NA

Data Reliability: NA

Policy Recommendation: Service standard for all services should be established and notified
and service should be ensured. For this purpose skilled manpower strength should be increased
and investment in modern infrastructure be made. A proper mechanism should be put in place
to monitor service delivery standard.

Panel      7 Land Valuation and Taxation

Indicators

      1. Transparency of valuations: valuations for tax and compensation purposes are
         based on clear principles, applied uniformly, updated regularly, and publicly accessible.

      2. Collection efficiency: resources from land and property taxes are collected and the
         yield from land taxes exceeds the cost of collection.
                          Land Governance Indicator 22
                          Transparency of valuations: valuations are based on clear
Panel      LGI   Dim.
                          principles, applied uniformly, updated regularly, and publicly
                          accessible.
  7         1       1     There is a clear process of property valuation.
                          A: The assessment of land/property for tax or compensation purposes
                          reflects market prices, with minimal differences between recorded values
                          and market prices across different uses and types of users; valuation rolls are
                          updated regularly
                          B: The assessment of land/property for tax or compensation purposes
                          reflects market prices, but there are significant differences between recorded
                          values and market prices across different uses and types of users; valuation
                          rolls are updated regularly
                          C: The assessment of land/property for tax or compensation purposes has
                          some relationship to market prices, but there are significant gaps between
                          recorded values and market prices across different uses or types of users and
                          valuation rolls are not updated.
                          D: The assessment of land/property for tax or compensation purposes is not
                          clearly based on market prices.

Analysis:

Computerisation of records in registration offices in West Bengal was taken up in 2001 and at
present all 239 registration offices have been fully computerized. West Bengal has thus become
an e-state in respect of registration. As a result there has been a clear and transparent process in
determination of market value for property through CORD (Computerisation of Registration of
Documents) software. The objectives of this e-governance system of registration includes a)
replacement of current manual records through a sophisticated imaging system, b) seamless
117 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
integration of all related system c) improving quality of services to citizens. At present in West
Bengal the market value of any property (land, building) is determined through this system.

The West Bengal Stamp (Prevention of Under-Valuation of Instruments) Rules 2001 was
introduced with effect from 1.3.2001. In the changed scenario of computerisation, the process of
determination of market value has been changed accordingly and a digitised market value
database covering all the plots under the jurisdiction of the registering officer has been installed
and interlinked with CORD software. A person desiring to transfer or acquire a property shall
have to submit the particulars of the property in the appropriate requisition form. Such
particulars are fed in the computer database and the system automatically generates the market
value of the property. The digitised market values are periodically revised (at least twice a year)
according to the field situation.

The Government of West Bengal, in supersession of all relevant procedures embodied in Land
Acquisition Manual, 1991 and previous executive orders, issued a revised procedure and
administrative rearrangement order dated 6 June 2006, for various land acquisition related
purpose including compensation purpose. The following procedures are to be followed for
fixation of appropriate market value of each type-class of land:

    1. For each of the specified type-class of the land as separately mentioned for rural and
        urban land, at least 10 and up to 20 current sale data from the concerned mouza to be
        collected and placed chronologically in the prescribed format. The sale figures from
        nearest time up to 12 months back time which can be extended up to 36 months as may
        be required to get minimum 10 sale data for the relevant class-type of land in the mouza.
        For the extended period from 12 months to 36 months sale price can be increased by 5%
        per annum. In case at least 10 sale data for the relevant mouza is not available from the
        office of the sub-registrar, sale data from adjacent mouza for same type-class of land
        needs to be considered.
    2. Using the sale data collected for each type-class of land in each mouza in prescribed
        format, fixation of average market value for the type-class of land is done with a
        reasoned analysis available. This “value assessment sheet” is prepared, signed and
        countersigned by the designated officials in the district and used for the purpose of both
        long-term lease and land acquisition purpose.
    3. For such fixation of market value of any type-class of land as stated above, abnormally
        high or abnormally low value (above or below 200% of the average value reflected in
        majority of sales) are carefully discarded.
    4. For awarding compensation of each plot of land or for fixing up salami for giving long-
        term settlement of land, additional valuation is determined on the basis of certain
        prescribed formulae.
    5. In cases of developed urban centres, municipalities and corporations, belting method is
        applied
    6. Fixation of value of land located in rural areas: each mouza is divided into seven type-
        class of land
            a. Non-irrigated agricultural land
            b. Irrigated agricultural land
            c. Homestead
            d. Danga, patit, fallow and other unused vacant land
            e. Land under commercial or industrial use
            f. Tanks, ponds and other water bodies
            g. Government land including vested land, departmental land and public-utility
                cum common property land
Each of the above seven type-classes of land in rural areas shall get value addition over and
above up to maximum of 10% on the average market value determined.


118 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    7. Fixation of value of land located in municipalities and corporations: the classes of land
        are categorized as under
            a. Land under residential use
            b. Land under commercial and industrial use
            c. Water bodies
            d. Public utility land (public roads, parks, cremation ground, burial ground, land
                under departmental use)
            e. Land not covered under above four types-classes
Each of the above type-class of land in municipalities shall get value addition over and above up
to maximum of 10% on the average market value determined.

In spite of all these valuation is not on par with market value in few cases, particularly in rapidly
urbanized areas with greater communication and urban infrastructure. But these are rather
cases of exception and compared to overall state situation, are negligible. In the state context the
transfers are happening at market value mostly and market value is comparable with
government valuation (ranking changed from A to B following discussion with EI, panellists).

Data Source: NIC and Registration wing, Finance Department, Govt. of West Bengal

Data Reliability: High

Policy recommendation:

         There is a need for coordination among the different layers of the government in use of
          Market Value Data Base (MVDB) in CORD not only for the purpose of collection of
          stamp-duty revenue/registration fee as currently done, but also for calculation of base of
          property/land tax and land revenue. This will allow for less discretion in determination
          of tax base, which is essential for a transparent and efficient tax regime.
         The scope of discretion used in determination of property tax base and rate as in the
          present system should be reduced. The credible mechanisms should be designed towards
          collection of property taxes from defaulters.

                          Land Governance Indicator 22
                          Transparency of valuations: valuations are based on clear
Panel      LGI    Dim.
                          principles, applied uniformly, updated regularly, and publicly
                          accessible.
  7         1       2     Valuation rolls are publicly accessible.
                          A: There is a policy that valuation rolls be publicly accessible and this policy
                          is effective for all properties that are considered for taxation.
                          B: There is a policy that valuation rolls be publicly accessible and this policy
                          is effective for most of the properties that are considered for taxation.
                          C: There is a policy that valuation rolls be publicly accessible and this policy
                          is effective for a minority of properties that are considered for taxation.
                          D: There is no policy that valuation rolls be publicly accessible.

Analysis:

The Government of West Bengal maintains a policy that the valuation rolls in respect of urban
properties are prepared and accessible to public. The draft valuation list for the urban local body
prepared by the West Bengal Valuation Board is published for the ULB inviting objections
within a specified period. The objections are heard and disposed within six months following
which the final valuation list is published for the ULB. The state government under section 9(2)
of West Bengal Valuation Act, 1978 issues notification indicating the date from which the list
will come into effect.

119 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Similarly for the land valuation purpose after introduction of CORD software all the valuation
rolls for each type/ classification of land in a mouza falling under the jurisdiction of a registry
office are publicly accessible and could be viewed from the website wbregistration.gov.in

Data Source: www.wbregistration.gov.in

Data Reliability: High
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 23
                           Collection efficiency: land and property taxes are collected and
                           the yield from doing so exceeds collection cost
   7        2        1     Exemptions from property taxes payment are justified and transparent.

                           A: There are limited exemptions to the payment of land/property taxes, and
                           the exemptions that exist are clearly based on equity or efficiency grounds
                           and applied in a transparent and consistent manner.
                           B: There are limited exemptions to the payment of land/property taxes, and
                           the exemptions that exist are clearly based on equity or efficiency grounds
                           but are not applied in a transparent and consistent manner.
                           C: The exemptions to the payment of land/property taxes are not always
                           clearly based on equity or efficiency grounds and are not always applied in a
                           transparent and consistent manner.
                           D: It is not clear what rationale is applied in granting an exemption to the
                           payment of land/property taxes and there is considerable discretion in the
                           granting of such exemptions.

Analysis:

Section 23 of the WBLR Act 1955 (amended in 2005) has streamlined the rates of revenue
payable for different categories of land. Section 24 of the said Act has provided with details
when such revenue is exempted for payment by a raiyat in case of land held does not exceed
2.428 ha by the family. No exemption is allowed if the land lies within a municipality or any area
which is used for mill, factory, workshop or other commercial purposes.

In villages the West Bengal Panchayat Act, 1973 states under section 46(2) about exemptions
from imposition of tax by the Gram Panchayat in the area of its jurisdiction. Lands and
buildings used exclusively for public purpose, religious, charitable and educational purposes and
when the annual valuation of land or buildings is not more than Rs. 250 are exempted.

Section 93 of the WBMA Act 1993 provides guidelines about the power to levy Property Tax on
lands and buildings. As per provisions of sections 99 to 105 of this Act Diplomatic Missions,
places of public worship, Government or Government aided educational institutions, holdings
used for charitable purposes, welfare homes run by the Government and the buildings with a
valuation of Rs. 500/- or less are exempted from payment of property tax. In every five years the
periodic assessment of holdings is done. Detailed procedure for such assessment is made in the
Act.

The Board of councillors may allow part exemptions on a) property of ex-service men b) in case
of excessive hardship, and c) holding remaining vacant or unproductive of rent for successive 90
days. It is clear that the exemptions in respect of property tax payment are limited but there is
human discretion involved which gives scope of it being applied in an inconsistent manner.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:


120 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                           Land Governance Indicator 23
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Collection efficiency: land and property taxes are collected and
                           the yield from doing so exceeds collection cost
   7        2       2      All property holders liable to pay property tax are listed on the tax roll.
                           A: More than 80% of property holders liable for land/property tax are listed
                           on the tax roll.
                           B: Between 70% and 80% of property holder liable for land/property tax are
                           listed on the tax roll.
                           C: Between 50% and 70% of property holder liable for land/property tax are
                           listed on the tax roll.
                           D: Less than 50% of property holders liable for land/property tax are listed
                           on the tax roll.


Analysis:

Rule 15 of the WBLR Rules, 1965 speaks about the process of preparation and publication of list
of raiyats who are liable to pay revenue in the notice board of the office of the BLLRO after
observing the process of inviting claims and objections and disposal thereof. The finally
determined revenue shall constitute a demand register. Demand list in the form of Register II
(Tenant’s Ledger) is prepared mouza wise in each BLLRO office and extracts sent to respective
Revenue Inspector for displaying in the Gram Panchayat office (Rule 318 of WBL&LR Manual,
1991).

For urban areas the general valuation of holdings is made by the Central Valuation Board
(Section 110 of West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993). The valuation list prepared becomes the
assessment list for the municipality. Such assessment list is published in a public place by the
concerned municipality for inspection. Any person dissatisfied has to apply for review before the
board of councillors within a period of two months from the date of presentation of bill for
property tax payment. There is steady improvement over the years in percentage of property
holders listed in tax roll and at present most of the properties within a ULB are listed in the tax
roll except the exemption cases, i.e., more than 80%.

From the statistics uploaded in the JnNURM, Government of West Bengal website in respect of
JnNURM ULB level reform agenda (No. 3) it is found that most of the ULBs in both the Mission
cities of Kolkata and Asansol (consisting of 40 odd ULBs), the property tax coverage is more
than 90% (reporting year 2008-09). For Non-mission Cities, out of 80 ULBs more than 50 have
achieved the target during the year 2008-09. For remaining ULBs, it is reported that major part
of the properties have been covered.

In case of new notified areas (change from rural to semi-urban) the procedures required for
preparation of property tax rolls are taken up simultaneously with the process of notification. In
the case of New Town Kolkata Development Authority (RajarhatTownship) the bill has been
very recently passed in the Assembly to the effect of making it a municipal body, in a parallel
process the tax roll is also under preparation and collection of property tax with arrear will start
immediately as informed by the authority.

For rural (Panchayat) areas the tax roll for land and building properties are assessed and
collected by the Gram Panchayats (section 46 of W B Panchayat Act, 1973). The demand register
is maintained though system of tax roll preparation and notice sending to the property holders
need to improve. No figure is available for the rural areas regarding percentage of property
holders shown in tax rolls.

Data Source: WBMA Department


121 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Data Reliability:
                           Land Governance Indicator 23
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Collection efficiency: land and property taxes are collected and
                           the yield from doing so exceeds collection cost
   7        2       3      Assessed property taxes are collected.
                           A: More than 80% of assessed land/property taxes are collected.
                           B: Between 70% and 80% of assessed land/ property taxes are collected.
                           C: Between 50% and 70% of assessed land/property taxes are collected.
                           D: Less than 50% of assessed land/property taxes are collected.

Analysis:

Property tax is the main source of tax revenue for the ULBs. As per the report of the Third State
Finance Commission (report published in 2008), during the years from 2003-04 to 2006-07,
share of property tax revenue to total tax revenue was 91.22%. The recommendations made by
the 13th Finance Commission (2008) mentions that there is tremendous scope for improvement
of revenue from property tax without increasing the rates and without any structural alteration
of the basis of levy. The West Bengal Valuation Board assists the municipalities in the
assessment and valuation of properties for the levy of property tax. The Commission
recommended that at least 25% of estimated number of properties in all urban local bodies
should be covered by 31 March 2015. The ULB level mandatory reform agenda under JnNURM
asks for 85% property coverage for taxation and 90% collection efficiency by the end of 2011-12.
In the state government website of JnNURM, figures available till 2008-09 shows an impressive
progress in respect of property tax coverage and collection efficiency.

The third State Finance Commission constituted by the Government of West Bengal has
observed that there is a laxity on the part of ULBs to collect property tax especially arrear
property taxes. The Commission (SFC) recommended (recommendation No. 8.17) a more
concerted effort on the part of ULBs to collect outstanding property taxes which was accepted by
the government. As per the report published by the third SFC, in the year 2006-07 total demand
of property tax was 908.48 crores, but the total collection was only 407.76 crores, i.e., 44.88% of
the total demand. In the same year the percentage of arrear demand collection was 17% and
current demand was 53%. There was wide variations reported from 124 ULBs (excluding
Kolkata and Howrah Municipal Corporations), in 10 ULBs the collection was less than 10%
whereas there were collection of more than 90% in case of a good number of ULBs. The main
arrear in property tax is contributed by state and central government departments and
undertakings (48% of total due, 26.84% of the demand).

The West Bengal Government JnNURM website reports under the ULB level mandatory reform
compliance in 2008-09 that out of 45 ULBs covered under the two Mission cities of Kolkata and
Asansol, more than 50% ULBs are showing collection efficiency of 90% out of the 85% property
coverage. For Non-Mission cities, out of 80 ULBs, 35% ULBs have achieved the target of same
collection efficiency. The main reason for lagging behind this reform agenda is said to be huge
arrear property taxes from defaulters like both central and state government establishments.
Taking into account the property taxes for both the urban and rural areas the

Data Source: Report of West Bengal Third State Finance Commission

Data Reliability: Very high

Policy recommendation: There is a big issue in respect of realization of outstanding property
tax by the ULBs, substantial part of which are due to the state and central departments and


122 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
undertakings. This issue needs to be taken up jointly by the governments for working out an
acceptable solution for all the parties involved.
                           Land Governance Indicator 23
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Collection efficiency: land and property taxes are collected and
                           the yield from doing so exceeds collection cost
   7        2       4      Receipts from property tax exceed the cost of collection.
                           A: The amount of property taxes collected exceeds the cost of staff in charge
                           of collection by a factor of more than 5.
                           B: The amount of property taxes collected is between 3 and 5 times cost of
                           staff in charge of collection.
                           C: The amount of property taxes collected is between 1 and 3 times cost of
                           staff in charge of collection.
                           D: The amount of property taxes collected is less than the cost of staff in
                           charge of collection.

Analysis:

Drawing a comparison in respect of property tax collection and cost of staff in charge of
collection a varying picture emerges. For small municipalities (like Uluberia), the amount of
property tax collection is about 3 times the cost of collections which is more than 5 times in
medium and large municipalities. In case of municipal corporations the property tax collected is
several ten times the cost of staff in charge of collection.

The situation in respect of rural areas (panchayat areas) is altogether different and the amount
of property tax collected is many times more than the cost of collection. The government made
allocation to the tune of 2.48 crores for payments of allowances to tax collecting sarkars (2012-
13) whereas the total tax revenue collected at the Gram Panchayat level for the entire state was
54.11 crores.

Data Source: Official website of Government of West Bengal, JnNURM, State Finance
Commission

Data Reliability: Highly reliable

Panel 8          Dispute Resolution

Indicators

    1. Assignment of responsibility: responsibility for conflict management at different levels is
       clearly assigned, in line with actual practice, relevant bodies are competent in applicable
       legal matters, and decisions can be appealed against.
    2. The share of land affected by pending conflicts is low and decreasing.




123 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                          Land Governance Indicator 24
                          Assignment of responsibility: responsibility for conflict
Panel    LGI     Dim.     management at different levels is clearly assigned, in line with
                          actual practice, relevant bodies are competent in applicable legal
                          matters, and decisions can be appealed against.
  8        1        1     There is clear assignment of responsibility for conflict resolution.
                          A: There are no parallel avenues for conflict resolution or, if parallel avenues
                          exist, responsibilities are clearly assigned and widely known and explicit rules
                          for shifting from one to the other are in place to minimize the scope for forum
                          shopping.
                          B: There are parallel avenues for dispute resolution but cases cannot be pursued
                          in parallel through different channels and evidence and rulings may be shared
                          between institutions so as to minimize the scope for forum shopping.
                          C: There are parallel avenues for dispute resolution and cases can be pursued in
                          parallel through different channels but sharing of evidence and rulings may
                          occur on an ad-hoc basis.
                          D: There are parallel avenues for dispute resolution and cases can be pursued in
                          parallel through different channels and there is no sharing of information.

Analysis:

WBLR Act 1955 under different provisions has categorically barred the jurisdiction of civil
courts both generally and specifically in all matters coming within the purview of the Act. Only
on question of pure title involving private individuals, civil courts may be approached. For
availing the rights of pre-emption the court may also be approached, but in pre-emption cases
the court acts as the authority under the Act. The mechanism of conflict resolution provided
under LR Act is this.

At the block level the Revenue Officers (RO) act as the primary authorities to resolve disputes at
different stages of the preparation and revision of record of right and also to implement the
ceiling provision and to enforce regulatory provisions of the Act. Against the decisions of the
ROs appeal can be preferred before the district level officers and such appeals are heard by the
DLLRO and Dy. DLLRO. Persons aggrieved with the decisions of the appellate authority may
approach the WB Land Reforms Tenancy Tribunal (WBLRTT). Against the decision of the
Tribunal appeals can be preferred before a Division Bench of the High Court specially
earmarked to hear such appeals.

Only under the provisions meant to prevent alienation of land by raiyats belonging to STs a
designated officer of the Backward Classes Welfare Department acts as the RO., against whose
decision appeal filed before a Civil Judge having local jurisdiction. Against the decision of the
appellate authority revision lies before the District Judge.

This mechanism does not admit of any parallel avenue or overlapping of jurisdiction in conflict
management and resolution of disputes. This mechanism provides for adequate remedies
against the decisions of the primary authorities.

As such it is obvious that, there is clear assignment of responsibility of conflict resolution in the
land laws of West Bengal.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:


124 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panel    LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 24
                         Assignment of responsibility: responsibility for conflict
                         management at different levels is clearly assigned, in line with
                         actual practice, relevant bodies are competent in applicable legal
                         matters, and decisions can be appealed against.
  8        1       2     Conflict resolution mechanisms are accessible to the public.
                         A: Institutions for providing a first instance of conflict resolution are
                         accessible at the local level in the majority of communities.
                         B: Institutions for providing a first instance of conflict resolution are
                         accessible at the local level in less than half of communities but where these
                         are not available informal institutions perform this function in a way that is
                         locally recognized.
                         C: Institutions for providing a first instance of conflict resolution are
                         accessible at the local level in less than half of communities, and where these
                         are not available informal institutions do not exist or cannot perform this
                         function in a way that is locally recognized.
                         D: Less than a quarter of communities have institutions formally empowered
                         to resolve conflicts and a variety of informal institutions may be available in
                         the rest.


Analysis:

The mechanism for conflict resolution at all the stages, whether during preparation of land
records or afterwards is in place and accessible to public at local level. The mechanism always
operates with the participation of the public, i.e., the raiyats, and other stakeholders. The system
of keeping records open during Draft Publication and Final Publication of records for public
inspection for a certain period of time makes the records easily accessible to the public who can
raise objections for correction of records of right and thereby resolution of conflicts, if any. In all
proceedings for conflict resolution under the extant Land Laws, opportunity is always given to
all parties being heard before resolving a conflict at any stage, starting from the preparation of
preliminary land records, to any disputes raised before the Land Tribunal or the Hon’ble High
Court.



Panel     LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 24
                          Assignment of responsibility: responsibility for conflict
                          management at different levels is clearly assigned, in line with
                          actual practice, relevant bodies are competent in applicable legal
                          matters, and decisions can be appealed against.
                          Mutually accepted agreements reached through informal dispute resolution
   8        1       3
                          systems are encouraged.
                          A: There is a local, informal dispute resolution system that resolves a
                          significant number of conflicts in an effective and equitable manner and which
                          is recognized in the formal judicial or administrative dispute resolution system.
                          B: There is a local, informal dispute resolution system that resolves a
                          significant number of conflicts in an effective and equitable manner but which
                          is not recognized in the formal judicial or administrative dispute resolution
                          system.
                          C: There is a local, informal dispute resolution system that makes decisions
                          that are not always equitable but this system is recognized in the formal
                          judicial or administrative dispute resolution system.
                          D: There is no effective informal or local dispute resolution system in place
                          that can resolve a significant number of land related disputes effectively.


125 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Analysis:

As there is no provision for any mutually accepted agreement through informal dispute
resolution system, in the extant Land Laws in West Bengal, any local or informal dispute
resolution is not recognized or resorted to in the formal judicial or administrational dispute
resolution system in the state. Since registration is expensive all kinds of transfer including
temporary transfer for a specific purpose not registered. If any dispute arises over possession of
land such dispute is resolved locally and informally. The law does not recognize partition of land
except by order of the court or registered instrument. Since the legal process is expensive the co-
sharers or successors-in-interest of the co-sharer make informal partition and possess land
accordingly. Dispute over possession always resolved locally. But law of the land does not
recognize such system.

The scope of Lok Adalats, for providing faster relief to the litigants in dispute resolution on land
matters under the provisions in sec 19(5) read with section 21 of the Legal Services Authority
Act, 1987, is presently confined to only those provisions/sections of the major Land Acts in
West Bengal, ie the West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act, 1953 and West Bengal Land Reforms
Act, 1955, in respect of disputes in determination of title, partition, pre-emption etc. which can
be adjudicated by the civil courts. But in large number of provisions of both the Acts, there has
been bar to civil jurisdiction and as such dispute resolution mechanism in respect of those
provisions has been left with the Revenue forum as per law.

It has already been mentioned earlier that there being bar to civil jurisdiction in respect of most
of the chapters in the extant land laws in the state, the role of civil court is confined to mainly in
respect of title determination, pre-emption matters etc. As such the provisions contained in the
section 89 or order XIII of the CPC or the Arbitration and Reconciliation Act, 1996 may be
applied by the civil courts in the matters under their jurisdiction in the extant land laws. The
land law matters have not been in the purview of the Lok Adalat as yet in the State.

The following are the Land Laws, which are now in force in the State:

            a. West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 (Act I of 1954) -

            b. West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 (Act X of 1956) –

            c. West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Laborers, Artisans,
               Fishermen Act, 1975 (West Bengal Act XLVII of 1975)-

            d. West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land Act, 1973 (West Bengal Act XXIII of
               1973) -

            e. West Bengal Thika Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 2001(West Bengal
               Act XXXII of 2001) –




126 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    Table showing the relevant Acts, Nature of disputes and Authority of disposal etc

Sl      Name of       Dispute type       Authority/       First Appellate          Second         Judicial      Remarks
No      the Act                         court at first       Authority            Appellate        review
                                          instance                                Authority      Authority


1         West         Dispute over        Revenue         Before Collector       No provision   West Bengal           ***
         Bengal         ownership,          Officer          u/s 51A(5)            of second        Land
          Land        possession etc.     empowered                                 appeal *     Reforms &
        Reforms        Recording of       u/s 51A(4)                                              Tenancy
        Act, 1955      Raiyat u/s 51                                                             Tribunal**

2         -Do-           Dispute           Prescribed      Before Collector         - Do -*        - Do -**      - Do -***
                      between share-     authority u/s     / DLLRO u/s 19
                       cropper and        17,18, 19B &
                      owners of land          20B
3         -Do-         Recording of        Prescribed     Before Collector/         - Do -*        - Do -**      - Do -***
                         bargadar        authority u/s     DLLRO u/s 54
                                         21D read with
                                          sec. 50 / 51
4         -Do-       Implementation         Revenue        Before Collector         - Do -*        - Do -**      - Do -***
                        of ceiling         Officer u/s     / DLLRO u/s 54
                       provisions            14T(3),        read with sec.
                                             14T(5),           14T(7)
                                             14T(6),
5        - Do -        Dispute over         Revenue        Before Collector         - Do -*        - Do -**      - Do -***
                      whether a land       Officer u/s     u/s 54 read with
                      is irrigated or          14N           sec. 14T(O)
                             not
6.       - Do -            Ch.IIA          Revenue         Appeal before           Revision         - Do -        - Do -
                      Restriction on      Officer u/s      Civil Judge u/s           before
                        transfer of           14C                14H                District
                        Tribal Land                                                  Judge
7        - Do -        Annulment of        Revenue        Before Collector/       No provision     - Do -**      - Do -***
                      settlement u/s      Officer u/s       DLLRO u/s              of second
                            49(1)        49(2) (SDO)           49(4)                appeal
8        - Do -          Mutation         Prescribed      Before Collector/             *            **                ***
                                         Authority u/s     DLLRO u/s 54
                                               50
9         -Do-         Preemption         Civil Judge        Appeal before          - Do -*        - Do -**      - Do -***
                          u/s 8              u/s 9           District Judge
10        -Do-        Conversion of       Collector/          Before the             - Do -         - Do -        - Do -
                      land u/s 4(C)       DLLRO u/s           Divisional
                                             4(C)           Commissioner
                                                                 u/s 54
*But the order of the appellate authority can be challenged before the Tribunal

**and thereafter before the Division Bench of the High Court

***nobody can approach the High Court as a court of the first instance. Appeal against the order of the Tribunal can
be made before a division bench of the High Court specially earmarked for hearing of such appeals




127 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Sl    Name of the      Dispute type      Authority/       First Appellate      Second      Judicial      Remarks
No       Act                            court at first       Authority        Appellate     review
                                          instance                            Authority   Authority
1     West Bengal       Revision of       Especially       Appeal before                  West Bengal
        Estates            finally       empowered        District Judge /                   Land
      Acquisition        published        Officer u/s     ADJ u/s 44(3)                   Reforms &
       Act, 1953         Record of          44(2a)                                         Tenancy
                         Rights u/s                                                        Tribunal
                        44(2a) Suo-
                            motu
2         -Do-          Retention of       Assistant           Before                     West Bengal
                         land by an       Settlement         Settlement                     Land
                       intermediary       Officer u/s        Officer u/s                  Reforms &
                           u/s 57B          57B(3)         57B(4) and the                  Tenancy
                                                              DLLRO                        Tribunal

3         -Do-         Determination    Compensation         The Mines                    West Bengal
                              of        Officer u/s 33     Tribunal u/s 35                  Land
                       compensation                       (District Judge &               Reforms &
                             for                             one mining                    Tenancy
                       intermediaries                          expert)                     Tribunal
                         for mines &
                           minerals
Sl    Name of the      Dispute type      Authority/       First Appellate      Second      Judicial      Remarks
No       Act                            court at first       Authority        Appellate     review
                                          instance                            Authority   Authority
1      West Bengal      Homestead       Authority u/s 4       Before the                  West Bengal
      Acquisition of    Acquisition                           Collector                      Land
       Homestead                                          ( District Land &               Reforms &
         Land for                                           Land Reforms                   Tenancy
       Agricultural                                         Officer) u/s 9                 Tribunal
        Labourers,
         Artisans,
        Fishermen
         Act, 1975
2      West Bengal      Dispute on      Special Officer   Before Collector                West Bengal
      Restoration of    restoration         u/s 4             u/s 4A                        Land
        Alienated                                                                         Reforms &
      Land Act, 1973                                                                       Tenancy
                                                                                           Tribunal

3      West Bengal      Dispute on         Thika           Appeal before                    Division
      Thika Tenancy    Thika Tenancy    Controller u/s      West Bengal                   Bench of the
        Act, 2001                           5(3)          Land Reforms &                  High Court.
                                                             Tenancy
                                                             Tribunal



In the above detailed analysis, the dispute resolution provisions of the relevant Land laws in
West Bengal have been clearly shown along with specific disputes to be resolved by the Revenue
authorities or by the formal judicial dispute resolution system. It has also been discussed with
case studies the average time taken for dispute resolution at the Revenue forum and the Judicial
forum. For providing faster relief to litigants at the formal judicial forum in cases as per law, the
provisions u/s 19(5) read with section 21 of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987, the matters
may brought under the purview of the Lok Adalat, as a forum for mutually accepted agreements
reached through informal dispute resolution system at the district level, where large number of
land related cases are pending as per report published by The Supreme Court of India on West
Bengal.

128 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Data Source:

Data Reliability:
Panel     LGI     Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 24
                          Assignment of responsibility: responsibility for conflict
                          management at different levels is clearly assigned, in line with
                          actual practice, relevant bodies are competent in applicable legal
                          matters, and decisions can be appealed against.
                          There is an accessible, affordable and timely process for appealing disputed
   8        1       4
                          rulings.
                          A: A process exists to appeal rulings on land cases at reasonable cost with
                          disputes resolved in a timely manner.
                          B: A process exists to appeal rulings on land cases at high cost with disputes
                          resolved in a timely manner.
                          C: A process exists to appeal rulings on land cases at high cost and the process
                          takes a long time/ the costs are low but the process takes a long time.
                          D: A process does not exist to appeal rulings on land cases.


Analysis:

Regarding appeal Cases in Revenue Courts on land related disputes, it takes on an average ten
months for disposal with a minimal cost, where as in a Civil Court a Title Suit is seldom resolved
before two years in the earliest at a much higher cost. However both the courts are easily
accessible to the litigant.



Data Source:

Data Reliability:
                           Land Governance Indicator 25
Panel     LGI     Dim.     The share of land affected by pending conflicts is low and
                           decreasing.
   8        2        1     Land disputes constitute a small proportion of cases in the formal legal system.
                           A: Land disputes in the formal court system are less than 10% of the total court
                           cases.
                           B: Land disputes in the formal court system are between 10% and 30% of the
                           total court cases.
                           C: Land disputes in the formal court system are between 30% and 50% of the
                           total court cases.
                           D: Land disputes in the formal court system are more than 50% of the total
                           court cases.

Analysis:

The number of Land dispute related cases in the formal legal system in the State varies between
10% and 30% of total cases. It also varies from district to district. A consolidated report on the
total pending cases in the District and subordinate courts in West Bengal at the end of the
quarter from 01-07-12 to 30-09-12 reveals the following data:




129 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                          Cases                                                 Number
                          No. of civil cases:                                  5, 29,593
                          No. of criminal cases                                21, 15,414
                          Total                                               26, 45,007


It is obvious from the above report that the percentage of civil cases in respect of the total
number of cases is approximately 20% in the formal legal system.

Data Source: Report published by The Supreme Court of India, available on the website-
http://supremecourtofindia.nic.in/courtnews.htm

Data Reliability: High
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 25
                           The share of land affected by pending conflicts is low and
                           decreasing.
   8        2       2      Conflicts in the formal system are resolved in a timely manner.
                           A: A decision in a land-related conflict is reached in the first instance court
                           within 6 months for more than 90% of cases.
                           B: A decision in a land-related conflict is reached in the first instance court
                           within 1 year for 90% of cases.
                           C: A decision in a land-related conflict is reached in the first instance court
                           within 18 months for 90% of cases.
                           D: A decision in a land-related conflict is reached in the first instance court
                           within 2 year or more for 90% of cases.

Analysis:

Land disputes at the district land administration level, are normally resolved in a timely manner
in most cases, because of inherent dispute resolution system. However, it is not so in the formal
legal system, because of lengthy judicial process. In the land administration level, disputes are
resolved within a few months after one or two hearing, if the cases are not complicated or large
numbers of parties are not involved. But in the judicial forum, cases take much longer time to be
heard and resolved, minimum two years on the average.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:
Panel     LGI     Dim.     Land Governance Indicator 25
                           The share of land affected by pending conflicts is low and
                           decreasing.
   8        2       3      There are few long-standing (> 5 years) land conflicts.
                           A: The share of long-standing land conflicts is less than 5% of the total
                           pending land dispute court cases.
                           B: The share of long-standing land conflicts is between 5% and 10% of the
                           total pending land dispute court cases.
                           C: The share of long-standing land conflicts is between 10% and 20% of the
                           total pending land dispute court cases.
                           D: The share of long-standing land conflicts is greater than 20% of the total
                           pending land dispute court cases.



130 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Analysis:

On study of long pending cases in the Land Reforms Tenancy Tribunal, the grounds for such
pendency appear to be, i) repeated adjournments sought by the applicant, ii) non-availability of
the lawyer because of his otherwise engagements in other courts iii) non-submission of proper
records or papers by interested parties, including the Government, etc.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:

Panel 9: Institutional Arrangement and Policies

Indicators:

    1.   Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates concerning the regulation
         and management of the land sector are clearly defined, duplication of responsibilities is
         avoided and information is shared as needed.

    2. Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process: policies are
         formulated through a decision-making process that draws on inputs from all concerned.
         The legal framework is non-discriminatory and institutions to enforce property rights are
         equally accessible to all.
                            Land Governance Indicator 26
                            Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates
Panel     LGI     Dim.      concerning the regulation and management of the land sector
                            are clearly defined, duplication of responsibilities is avoided
                            and information is shared as needed.
                            Land policy formulation, implementation and arbitration are separated to
9         1       1
                            avoid conflict of interest.
                            A: In situations that can entail conflicts of interest or are sensitive to abuse
                            (e.g. transfers of land rights) there is a clear separation in the roles of policy
                            formulation, implementation and arbitration.
                            B: In situations that can entail conflicts of interest or are sensitive to abuse
                            (e.g. transfers of land rights) there is some separation in the roles of policy
                            formulation, implementation and arbitration.
                            C: In situations that can entail conflicts of interest or are sensitive to abuse
                            (e.g. transfers of land rights) there is some separation in the roles of policy
                            formulation, implementation and arbitration.
                            D: In situations that can entail conflicts of interest or are sensitive to abuse
                            (e.g. transfers of land rights) there is no clear separation in the roles of
                            policy formulation, implementation and arbitration.

Analysis:

Policy formulation

Unlike some other states of India, in West Bengal there is no separate department in the
Secretariat responsible for formulating policies. Policies are formulated at the highest level of
government in individual departments. Where the policy involves a major issue approval of the
cabinet is sought by the concerned department. Land policy is formulated in the department of
Land and Land Reforms at the highest level i.e. the Minister-in-charge and the departmental
secretary etc.

Inputs from field officers are sometimes taken into account while formulating policy. If
necessary, discussions are also held with officers of the other departments which may be
131 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
affected by the proposed policy. The government being a political one, the political viability of
the proposed policy is also discussed at the political level. Also, inputs from identifiable stake
holders are assessed through discussions at political/ a - political level with the representatives
of such stake holders before finalization of any policy. Sometimes the media also acts as a
catalyst in formulation / modification of policy.

Implementation

 The major Acts which are relevant for this dimension are, the Land Acquisition Act, the W.B.
L.R. Act, the WBEA Act, the Homestead Act, the Kolkata Land Revenue Act and the Forests Acts
including the Forests Rights Act, 2006. While the Forest Acts are implemented by the Forest
Department, other Acts mentioned above excluding the L.A. Act are implemented by the
directorate of land records and surveys. The LA Act is, however, implemented by the
department itself through the collector of the district. The implementing agency though placed
under the administrative control of the Land LR Department is separated from the area of policy
formulation. Similar is the case with the Forest Directorate which is tasked with implementation
of the Forest related laws.

Arbitration / Appeal

The legal forum relating to arbitration / appeal under different Acts is as under :

         Forest Acts:
          The conservator of Forests exercises quasi-judicial powers while hearing cases.
          Therefore, there is no separation of arbitration from implementation, but arbitration is
          separate from policy formulation.

         WBEA Act :
           i. Tribunal u/s 44(3) relating to correction of RoR chaired by either the District
              Judge or the additional District Judge
          ii. Mines Tribunal u/s 361 regarding compensation for vested mining interests
              chaired by a district Judge or an Additional district Judge.

         WBLR Act :

         i.    Collector u/s 54 1(a) and Divisional Commissioner u/s 54 1(b) for any matter
               where there is no specific provisions for appeal in the Act.
        ii.    Civil Judge (Munsif)u/s/ 8(1) regarding exercise of right of pre-emption.
       iii.    Civil Judge u/s 14H on matters relating to illegal transfer of lands by a tribal
                  raiyat.
       Home stead Act :
         Collector u/s 9(1) regarding any question relating to vesting

     The government has appointed the Sub-Divisional Officer as Collector u/s 9 (1) who is not a
     part of the implementing agency.

     It is evident from the above that the dispensations provided in the WBEA Act, WBLR Act
     and the Homestead Act for arbitration / appeal are quite independent of and separated
     from the implementing agencies.

Markings:

(a) Forest Act:

The conservator of forests exercises quasi-judicial functions: hence the score should be:

132 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Separation of policy making from implementation: 10
Separation of policy making from arbitration: 10
Separation of implementation from arbitration: 0
Total score: 20 out of 30
(b) Land Acquisition Act :

The collector takes quasi-judicial hearings: hence the score should be :Separation of policy
Making from implementation: 10
Separation of policy making from arbitration: 10
Separation of implementation from arbitration: 0
Total score: 20 out of 30
(c) WBEA Act:

Arbitration is made by members of the judicial service: hence the score shall be as under:
All three components i.e. policy making, implementation and arbitration are independent of one
another. Hence Total score: 30 out of 30
(d) WBLR Act:

The collector [DLLRO] is part and parcel of the implementation team. Hence the score should
be:

Separation of policy making from implementation: 10
Separation of policy making from arbitration: 10
Separation of implementation from arbitration: 0

Total : 20 out of 30

(e) Homestead Act: The collector [in this case the SDO] who hears appeal is not associated
with implementation. Hence the score should be as under:

All three components are independent of one another.

Hence total score: 30 out of 30

(f) Kolkata Land – revenue Act:

Appeal u/s 8(1) against assessment of land revenue made by a Revenue Officer u/s 7(1) lies to
the collector of Stamp Revenue, Kolkata and collectors of districts coming within the purview of
this Act. Further, appeal against an order passed by the collector lies before the West Bengal
Land Reforms and Tenancy Tribunal [Sec.8 (2)]. These institutions are independent of the
implementing and policy making authorities. Hence the score should be: 30 out of 30.

The total score for the dimension works out to 20 out of 30 + 30 out of 30 + 20 out of 30 + 30
out of 30 + 30 out of 30 = 130 out of 150, i.e., 86%.

So, the ranking would be ‘A’.

Data Source:

       L. A. Act
       W.B.E.A Act
       WBLR Act
       Homestead Act
       Kolkata Land – revenue Act
       Back ground Note for Land Tenure Recognition etc.

133 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Data Reliability: High

Panel         LGI   Dim.    Land Governance Indicator 26
                            Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates
                            concerning the regulation and management of the land sector
                            are clearly defined, duplication of responsibilities is avoided
                            and information is shared as needed.
                            Responsibilities of the ministries and agencies dealing with land do not
9         1         2
                            overlap (horizontal overlap).
                            A: The mandated responsibilities exercised by the authorities dealing with
                            land governance are non-overlapping with those of other land sector
                            agencies.
                            B: The mandated responsibilities of the various authorities dealing with
                            land administration issues are defined with a limited amount of overlap
                            with those of other land sector agencies but there are few problems.
                            C: The mandated responsibilities of the various authorities dealing with
                            land administration issues are defined but institutional overlap with those
                            of other land sector agencies and inconsistency is a problem.
                            D: The mandated responsibilities of the various authorities dealing with
                            land administration are defined poorly, if at all, and institutional overlap
                            and inconsistency is a serious problem.


Analysis:

At the government level the domain of activities i.e. functions, duties and responsibilities etc., of
different departments are clearly defined following the RULES OF BUSINESS leaving no or little
scope for any overlap which may result in functional conflict. Besides, legislations are made or
policies formulated by different departments in consultation with other departments who are
stake holders for a particular piece of legislation or policy. This is done not only to make the
legislation or policy formulation foolproof but also to pre-empt any overlap in the functional
domain.

The L& LR department makes laws and formulates policies for land administration. Similarly, a
few other departments like the Commerce and Industries Department, Department of Urban
Development etc. administer laws by which different land related agencies have been created
and formulates policies to regulate the functions of these agencies. No overlap worth the name
among the different legislations and the policies formulated has been identified. Minor conflicts
arising out of ‘perceived’ overlap or lack of jurisdiction etc are resolved at the appropriate local
level.

A case of overlap at the functional [local] level between the Forest Department and the
Backward Classes Welfare Department in course of implementing the FRA 2006 may be cited as
an example. Way back, during preparation of r-o-r and maps under the EA Act there arose
disputes between the forest officials and the L and LR department on the question of recording
and vesting of jungles and shrubs measuring less than three acres. These disputes were resolved
at the local level in course of time.

As there is no horizontal overlap and the mandated responsibilities exercised by the authorities
dealing with land governance is non-overlapping, the ranking is ‘Á’

Data Source: Rules of Business 2012

Data Reliability: High

Panel    LGI Dim.        Land Governance Indicator 26
134 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                         Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates
                         concerning the regulation and management of the land sector are
                         clearly defined, duplication of responsibilities is avoided and
                         information is shared as needed.
9        1      3        Administrative (vertical) overlap is avoided.
                         A: Assignment of land-related responsibilities between the different levels of
                         administration and government is clear and non-overlapping.
                         B: Division of land-related responsibilities between the different levels of
                         administration and government is clear with minor overlaps.
                         C: Division of land-related responsibilities between the different levels of
                         administration and government is characterized by large overlaps.
                         D: Division of land-related responsibilities between the different levels of
                         administration and government is unclear.

Analysis:

The government agencies like the Directorate of Land Records and Surveys (DLRS), the forest
directorate etc tasked with implementation of laws and policies are multi-tiered in structure.
The tiers spread from the state to the village. For example, the administrative echelon of the
land records directorate starts at the state level and ends at the village gram panchayat level
with the district, sub-divisional and block levels in between. The functions, duties and
responsibilities of the different categories of functionaries manning these layers are so
structured that there is no scope for overlap. The functions, duties etc are assigned to each layer
keeping in mind the principle of subsidiarity , i.e. the decision making powers and duties should
assigned at the appropriate level where those are best exercised and discharged.

The functions and duties of the different categories of functionaries in the same level are clearly
defined by order issued by the appropriate authorities, the government or the land records
directorate. Resultantly, there is little scope for any inter-layer (vertical) or intra - layer
[horizontal] overlap in functioning. Functional overlap of inappreciable measures, if any, does
not in any way tell upon the working of the system.

 Agencies other than the state government and local institutions dealing with land operate on a
structured pattern of distribution of duties among different tiers avoiding overlap as far as
possible.

 There is another area which may be relevant for the purposes of this analysis, i.e. the area of
concurrent jurisdiction. An example may be cited by way explanation. The District Land and
Land Reforms Officer is competent to issue permission for conversion of land as Collector u/s
4C (i) of WBLR Act. Subsequently this power was conferred upon the Sub-divisional Land and
Land Reforms Officers for lands measuring up to 0.30 acres [30 decimals]. Seemingly, this is a
case of overlap in so far a subdivision is concerned. But the DLLROs never exercise this power as
a matter of administrative expediency unless forced by circumstances to do so. Such overlaps
which are sometimes necessitated for implementation of laws should better be appropriately
called virtual overlap. So, Assignment of land-related responsibilities between the different
levels of administration and government is clear and non-overlapping and the ranking is ‘A’

Data Source:

Data Reliability:

                         Land Governance Indicator 26
                         Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates
Panel    LGI     Dim.
                         concerning the regulation and management of the land sector
                         are clearly defined, duplication of responsibilities is avoided

135 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                         and information is shared as needed.


9        1       4       Land right and use information is shared by public bodies; key parts are
                         regularly reported on and publicly accessible.
                         A: Information related to rights in land is available to other institutions
                         that need this information at reasonable cost and is readily accessible,
                         largely due to the fact that land information is maintained in a uniform
                         way.
                         B: Information related to rights in land is available to interested
                         institutions and although this information is available at reasonable cost, it
                         is not readily accessible as the information is not maintained in a uniform
                         way.
                         C: Information related to rights in land is available to interested
                         institutions but this information is not readily accessible or not available at
                         a reasonable cost.
                         D: Information related to rights in land is not available to interested
                         institutions as a matter of policy or practice.

Analysis:

In West Bengal preparation of record-of-rights is preceded by a detailed cadastral survey of the
mouza (village). All plots in the village are mapped ordinarily in the scale of 16” = 1 mile and
their areas recorded. R-o-R thereafter prepared incorporating therein all tenurial rights in
respect of plot / plots so mapped. The original records are kept and maintained in the office of
the Block Level Land and Land Reforms Office [BLLRO]. As a matter of fact, this office is of the
repository not only of all information and documents relating to land rights and land use but
also of documents relating to land, land tenure and land revenue administration.

The different government departments or public bodies like municipalities, panchayats etc.
maintain inventories of land owned and managed by them but the records are not updated on
a regular basis. The land properties belonging to the public bodies are not recorded in the r-o-
r maintained in the office of the BLLRO.

Individuals, institutions, unions government departments, public bodies, organizations,
academic institutions, researchers etc. have to primarily fall back upon the BLLRO for different
kinds of land related information.

Record-of-rights pertaining to all villages of the state have already been computerized. On
request a copy of the r-o-r is available from the office of the BLLRO the same day, the cost per
sheet being Rs. 10.00 only (over the counter service).

Copies of village maps are available on request from the office of the District Land and Land
Reforms Officer [DLLLRO] at a cost of Rs. 100.00 only per sheet. Maps are, however, in a
process of digitization. Once this is done, availability of information will be quicker and easier.
Maintenance level of the records and maps is rather low. This is primarily due to filing of large
numbers of mutation applications resulting in a large gap between filing and disposal. There is
no mechanism in place for regular reporting of the key parts of land right and use information.

The L&LR Department uploads record- of- rights and maps of all villages in the Website of the
Department. This has greatly facilitated access to these documents.

Data Source: Directorate of Land Records and Surveys

Data Reliability: High


136 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Policy Recommendation: A drive needs to be initiated by the government for ensuring all
the land properties being physically verified, records and registers updated jointly in
collaboration with the L&LR department and field offices.

Panel     LGI     Dim     Land Governance Indicator 26
                          Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates
                          concerning the regulation and management of the land sector are
                          clearly defined, duplication of responsibilities is avoided and
                          information is shared as needed.
  9         1       5     Overlaps of rights (based on tenure typology) are minimal and do not cause
                          friction or dispute.
                          A: The issues identified in the tenure Legal framework and procedures for land-
                          related matters (incl. renewable and subsoil resources) are fully consistent and
                          a unified mechanism for complaint and grievance redress is available in case of
                          overlap.
                                B: The Legal framework and procedures for land-related matters (incl.
                                renewable and subsoil resources) are fully consistent but there may be
                                 differences in the way complaints and grievance redress are handled.
                          C: The Legal framework and procedures for land-related matters (incl.
                          renewable and subsoil resources) deal with land-related matters very differently
                          but have functioning mechanisms for redressing overlap in place.
                          D: The Legal framework and procedures for land-related matters (incl.
                          renewable and subsoil resources) deal with land-related matters very differently
                          and effective mechanisms for addressing overlap are not in place.

Analysis:

Overlap of rights is not a very common phenomenon in West Bengal in respect of land
administration and management. During preparation of maps of the villages adjoining forest
areas under the WBEA Act [mid-fifties to early sixties] minor disputes arose on the question of
jurisdiction between the officials of the Land & LR Department and the Forest Department.
These disputes or frictions which were of minor nature were resolved at local level, if necessary
with the intervention of the higher authorities.

Another common example of overlap of legally recognized right [of cultivation] and customary
right of grazing may be cited here. When the time lag between cultivation of two crops is large
the agricultural field is often used by the local community for grazing of cattle. This is a
customary right of the nature of an easement. This right is being exercised customarily without
any let or hindrance from the owners of the lands.

In case of a mining lease the surface lands are also included in the lease. The lessee ordinarily
uses the land for open cast mining, storage of machineries etc. The members of the whole
community customarily use these surface lands for pastoral purposes. The exercise of these
overlapping rights has not been a cause of friction between the miners and the local community.

The incidence of friction arising out of exercise of multiple rights is so minimal that setting up of
any common mechanism for resolution of such friction/conflict has not been considered
necessary.

So, the issues of overlap though minimal, a uniform procedure of complaint and grievance
redressal is not in place.




137 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                         Land Governance Indicator 26
                         Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates
Panel    LGI    Dim.     concerning the regulation and management of the land sector are
                         clearly defined, duplication of responsibilities is avoided and
                         information is shared as needed.
                         Ambiguity in institutional mandates (based on institutional map) does not cause
9        1      6
                         problems.
                         A: The processes applied by public institutions dealing with land are fully
                         integrated and consistent.
                         B: With minor exceptions, the processes applied by public institutions dealing
                         with land are fully integrated and consistent.
                         C: Different public institutions deal with land-related matters very differently
                         but functioning mechanisms for coordination are in place and regularly used.
                         D: Different public institutions deal with land-related matters very differently
                         and effective mechanisms for coordination are not in place.

Analysis:

In West Bengal no formal mechanism or system has been put in place while dealing with land
matters. The L&LR Department deals with land issues and as custodian of all government lands
acts as a coordinator when any situation arises for allotment of any government land to any
department or any public body for public purpose. At the district level this coordination is done
by the DLLRO who is also an Additional District Magistrate and Additional Collector. This
coordination is done by the DLLRO as part and parcel of the collectorate.

The DLLRO is an inseparable part of the Directorate of Land Records and Surveys and the
nodal officer at the district level for all functions relating to preparation of maps and r-o-r and
related matters. For the purposes of these functions, the DLLRO and all functionaries and
officers subordinate to him are quite separated from the district collectorate and act
independently subject to the supervision of the Director of Land Records and Surveys.

In addition to the r-o-r which has been fully computerized all other records relating to mutation,
land use change etc. are maintained in the office of BLLRO who functions under the DLLRO.

Records relating to land acquisition, registration etc are maintained by different wings of the
collectorate i.e. LA records being maintained by the LA wing under an additional collector
ordinarily other than the DLLRO as the head and the registration records by the District
Register.

In dealing with land matters there is some coordination among the different wings though no
formal mechanism to ensure coordination has been set up. Processes of dealing with land by
different agencies are not regulated by the same set of rules, manuals and administrative orders.
Hence there remains scope for differences of processes and procedures followed for dealing with
land by different public institutions.

Data Source:

       Practice and Procedure Manual
       L.A. Manual
       Records Manual
       Instructions issued by the Land records directorate.

Data Reliability: High

138 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                         Land Governance Indicator 27
                         Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process:
Panel    LGI     Dim.
                         policies are formulated in a broad public process, address equity,
                         and implementation is meaningfully monitored.
                         Land policies and regulations are developed in a participatory manner
9        2       1
                         involving all relevant stakeholders.
                         A: A comprehensive land policy exists or can be inferred by the existing
                         legislation, and those affected by decisions were consulted beforehand and
                         their feedback on the resulting policy is incorporated.
                         B: A comprehensive land policy exists or can be inferred by the existing
                         legislation, and sections of the community affected by these decisions are
                         informed, but feedback is usually not sought or not used in making decisions
                         C: Policy exists or can be inferred by the existing legislation but it is incomplete
                         (some key aspects are missing or only covers part of the country such as only
                         urban or only rural areas) and decisions that affect some sections of the
                         community are made without prior consultation.
                         D: No clear land policy exists or can be inferred by the existing legislation and
                         land policy decisions are generally taken without consultation of those affected.

Analysis:

In West Bengal overall land policy could be inferred from the existing legislations. The state
enacted a series of land related laws after Independence. The first law, the W.B. Bargadars Act,
1950 was almost forced upon the government by the famous Tebhaga movement focused inter
alia on the issue of division of share in barga cultivation. The principal stakeholders i.e. the
bargadars being the agitators there was little scope for consultation with them in the process of
formulating policy and subsequent enactment.

The enactment of the second Act i.e. the WBEA Act, 1950 was preceded by deliberations at all
India level on the issues of abolition of intermediary interests, imposition of ceiling etc. As a
matter of policy the state just fell in line with other states of the country. It is difficult to say at
this distant date to what extent, if at all, the state government consulted the stake-holders on
important questions like fixing ceiling limit, quantum of compensation etc.

Between the fag end of the seventies and early eighties “concentization” camps were held in
rural areas where interaction took place among the different categories of stake-holders i.e.
bargadars, land owners etc, representatives of peasants’ organizations, panchayat members on
the one hand and the administration i.e. Minister-in-charge, senior officers of the L and LR
department on the other. Inputs received during such interactions were sometimes taken into
account in policy formulation and legislation. A case in point is the insertion of sec 21B of the
WBLR Act regarding presumption of barga cultivation.

But except in some sporadic cases as mentioned above, feedback is usually not sought or not
used in decision making.

Data Source: W.B. Bargadars Act, 1950

Data Reliability: High




139 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                         Land Governance Indicator 27
                         Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process:
Panel    LGI     Dim
                         policies are formulated in a broad public process, address equity,
                         and implementation is meaningfully monitored.
9        2       2       Land policies address equity and poverty reduction goals; progress towards
                         these is publicly monitored.
                         A: Land policies incorporate clearly formulated equity and poverty objectives
                         that are regularly and meaningfully monitored, and their impact on equity and
                         poverty issues is compared to that of other policy instruments.
                         B: Land policies incorporate clearly formulated equity and poverty objectives
                         that are regularly and meaningfully monitored but their impact on equity and
                         poverty issues is not compared to that of other policy instruments.
                         C: Land policies incorporate some equity and poverty objectives but these are
                         not regularly and meaningfully monitored.
                         D: Equity and/or poverty issues are not considered by land policies.

Analysis:

The land laws in West Bengal from which the policy could be inferred contain provisions
focusing on equity and poverty objectives. The Bargadars Act, 1950 focused on the bargadars
who form a significant segment of the state’s cultivating community. The WBEA Act , 1953
demolished the persecutors’ institution of intermediaries and brought the persecuted [ raiyats]
directly under the state. It also provided for imposition of ceiling and vesting of the ceiling
surplus land. Provisions for distribution of land assets to the landless in the sister Act i.e. the
WBLR Act paved the way for an egalitarian society conducive to an equity-oriented development
- the figures available from department of L&LR indicates (till 31 March, 2011):

Total no. of pattadars benefited out of land distribution- 30.47 lakh

    a) Out of this, SC pattadar   - 11.21 lakh
    b) ST pattadar                 - 5.42 lakh
    c) Minority community pattadar - 3.66 lakh

Disadvantaged section (SC, ST and Minority) of the rural society benefited is 66%

Through implementation of the provisions of the Homestead Act, 1975 homesteads could be
provided to about 3.27 lakh homeless families who mostly comprise of ST, SC and minority
community and all are land-poor[Dec, 2013].

 The bargadars were armed with a documented right of cultivation and an enhanced sense of
security of tenure as a result of recording of their names in the r-o-r during implementation of
“Operation Barga” program. This would provide them with impetus to invest more for
cultivation both in terms of money and labor. Also, through distributive land reforms land asset
could be given to 3.16 million beneficiaries creating as much new tenure [Dec, 2013].

Unfortunately, the land policy and legislation totally lack equity objectives in respect of women.
Priority upon women in the matter of land distribution as in the case of members of the
scheduled tribes could be a good avenue for empowering women through endowment of land
asset. It is only from 1990s joint pattas are being given in the names of both husband and wife
by virtue of an administrative order.

Several studies at micro level with very small samples were carried out by scholars and
researchers to evaluate the impact of the state’s land reform efforts on the beneficiaries i.e.
pattadars and bargadars.

140 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Some studies found a change in the levels of living of poor villagers including pattadar. A
betterment of the socio-economic status of these people was also observed. Another study had
found that as a result of the reforms the rural landed elite has lost their social and political
authority over the general rural population. Another researcher found that operation barga
resulted in increased production.

A macro level study with large samples [pattadars: 21712, bargadars: 13878] was sponsored by
the State Institute of Panchayats and Rural Development, Kalyani. The study did not address
issues like child labor, out-migration of labor etc. But results of some of the social indicators
revealed that after the reforms there was increased schooling of children, literacy rate of the
beneficiaries was found comparable with the general literacy rate, level of immunization of
children showed a satisfactory level.

Some of the economic indicators suggested increased purchasing power, higher productivity
[comparable with general productivity], enhanced use of fertilizer and access to irrigation etc.

State governments have been traditionally shy of evaluating their own performance through
field studies. There is also no formal monitoring system to study the impact of the legal
provisions relating to equity and poverty reduction.

Data Source:

    (i)         John Harris, what is happening in rural West Bengal, EPW, June 12, 1993
    (ii)        RatanKhasnobis, Tenurial conditions in West Bengal, EPW, December 31, 1994.
    (iii)       Directorate of Land Records and Surveys, W.B.
    (iv)        Anil K. Chakraborti, Apurba Kr. Mukhopadhyay, Debesh Roy, Beneficiaries of Land
                reforms The West Bengal Scenario, SIPRD Kalyani, 2003.

Data Reliability: High

                         Land Governance Indicator 27
                   Dim   Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process:
Panel       LGI
                   .     policies are formulated in a broad public process, address equity, and
                         implementation is meaningfully monitored.
9           2      3     Land policies address ecological and environmental goals; progress towards these
                         is publicly monitored.
                         A: Land policies incorporate clearly formulated ecology and environmental
                         sustainability objectives that are regularly and meaningfully monitored, and their
                         impact is compared to that of other policy instruments.
                         B: Land policies incorporate clearly formulated ecology and environmental
                         sustainability objectives that are regularly and meaningfully monitored but their
                         impact is not compared to that of other policy instruments.
                         C: Land policies incorporate some ecology and environmental sustainability
                         objectives but these are not regularly and meaningfully monitored.
                         D: Ecology and environmental sustainability issues are not considered by land
                         policies.

Analysis:

Most of the land related major Acts in West Bengal were enacted much before ecology and
environment issues came in the development discourse in a strident way. This will explain why
these two issues were not at all addressed by these Acts except the L.R. Act which is the latest in
the series. The provisions in the above Act are briefly enumerated below:



141 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
 A raiyatis required to maintain and preserve his land in such a way that – (i) its area is not
diminished; or (ii) its character is not changed; or (iii) it is not used for any purpose other than
the purpose for which it was settled, without the permission of the collector. Again by virtue of
sec 4A(i) of the Act the collector of Darjeeling district may issue directions to the raiyats of the
three hilly subdivisions of Darjeeling, Kurseong and Kalimpong as to the form of cultivation to
be adopted by them. The collector is also empowered to prevent araiyat from cutting more than
one tree from his land without the former’s permission. These regulatory measures are intended
to prevent soil erosion or landslides so that ecological balance may be maintained.

Sec 4C (1) requires a raiyat to obtain permission from the collector for any change of
classification of his land. If the change sought for is to establish an industry or brick field etc
which may result in noxious waste products which may adversely affect environment, the
collector may withhold permission of conversion [rule 164(i), W.B. Land and Land Reforms
Manual, 2003]

In view of the importance of the above legal provisions those were followed up by the
appropriate authorities [the then Board of Revenue] by issue of detailed instructions to the field
level officers.

In November 2005 West Bengal government promulgated the landmark environmental
notification, the East Kolkata Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Ordinance (enactment
in 2006) to safeguard the 12,500 hectares (comprising 46% water body and 39% agricultural
land) fragile wetland located in the eastern fringes of the city of Kolkata. These wetlands are well
known over the world for their multiple uses. The wetlands are man-made and the system of
wastewater treatment is the largest in the world. It has saved the city from constructing and
maintaining a wastewater treatment plant. The East Kolkata Wetlands Management Authority
formed under the provisions of the Act is chaired by the Chief Secretary, has been entrusted with
the statutory responsibility for conservation and maintenance of the wetland area by
maintaining the existing land use practices.

The provisions related to environment and ecology in these legislations mentioned above needs
to be enforced rigorously through a functional monitoring mechanism.

Data Source:

           W. B. L. R Act
           W.B. Land and Land Reforms Manual, 1991
           East Kolkata Wetland (Conservation and Management) Act, 2006
           General Instructions issued by the Board of Revenue.

Data Reliability: High




142 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                           Land Governance Indicator 27
                           Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process:
 Panel    LGI      Dim.
                           policies are formulated in a broad public process, address equity,
                           and implementation is meaningfully monitored.
                           The implementation of land policy is costed, matched with benefits and
9         2        4
                           adequately resourced.
                           A: Implementation of land policy is costed, expected benefits identified and
                           compared to cost, and there are a sufficient budget, resources and institutional
                           capacity for implementation.
                           B: The implementation of land policy is costed, though not necessarily based
                           on a comparison of expected benefits and costs. There is an adequate budget,
                           resources and institutional capacity.
                           C: The implementation of land policy is not fully costed and/or to implement
                           the policy there are serious inadequacies in at least one area of budget,
                           resources or institutional capacity.
                           D: The implementation of land policy is not costed and there is inadequate
                           budget, resources and capacity to implement the land policy.

Analysis:

The implementation of land policy is entrusted primarily to the Directorate of Land Records and
Surveys. Funds are placed in the annual state budget at the disposal of the directorate under
plan and non-plan heads.

No allotment of funds is earmarked separately for each item of implementation programme and
is not costed.

No machinery worth the name is in place in any of the implementing agencies to match the
implementation of land policy with the benefits accruing.

Financial resources for implementation of land policy come from the Central and State
governments. The cost related to HR/ Staff is budgeted from the state resources. But this
resource and physical resources are not adequate for proper and timely implementation of land
policy. This will be evident from acute shortage of manpower and poor state of physical
infrastructure.

Data Source:

Data Reliability:

Policy Recommendation: The L&LR department to have a better human resource
infrastructure by way of filling up of the larger vacancies in field offices along with a policy for
staff capacity development equipping the HR for improved and citizen-friendly service delivery.




143 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                          Land Governance Indicator 27
                          Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process:
Panel     LGI    Dim
                          policies are formulated in a broad public process, address equity,
                          and implementation is meaningfully monitored.
                          There is regular and public reporting indicating progress in policy
9         2      5
                          implementation.
                          A: Formal land institutions report on land policy implementation in a regular,
                          meaningful, and comprehensive way with reports being publicly accessible.
                          B: Formal land institutions report on land policy implementation in a regular
                          and meaningful way but reports are not made public.
                          C: Formal land institutions report on land policy implementation but in a way
                          that does not allow meaningful tracking of progress across different areas or in
                          a sporadic way.
                          D: Formal land institutions report on policy implementation only in exceptional
                          circumstances or not at all.

Analysis:

In West Bengal land policy can be inferred from the provisions in the various land related
legislations like the W.B.E.A. Act, the W.B.LR, Act, the Homestead Act, etc. Implementation of
the provisions of these laws may be construed as the implementation of the land policy. There is,
however, another Act i.e. the Kolkata Land-revenue Act, 2003 regarding survey, preparation of
r-o-r and determination and collection of land revenue in respect of the areas coming within the
purview of this Act.

The DLRS is primarily responsible for policy implementation i.e. implementation of the
provisions of these Acts. The directorate is entrusted with the following key functions:

    1.    Preparation / revision of cadastral maps
    2.    Preparation / revision of RoR
    3.    Implementation of ceiling provisions under the WBEA Act and WBLR Act.
    4.    Distribution of land to landless and land-poor
    5.    Recording of such beneficiaries (pattadars)
    6.    Maintenance of RoR i.e., mutation
    7.    Determination and collection of revenue under the WBLR Act
    8.    Recording of beneficiaries under the Homestead Act
    9.    Collection of revenue under the Kolkata Land Revenue Act.

During the budget speech every year the details of performance of the department along with
progress are reported in the Assembly. The monthly and cumulative performance in respect of
different programs is documented. Both the assembly speech on departmental activities and
progress thereof and the performance reports produced monthly by the DLRS are not publicly
accessible.

Data Source:

        Instructions of the Board of Revenue,
        Directorate of Land Records and Surveys

Data Reliability: High

Policy Recommendation: The budget speech and information related to performance of the
department and progress thereof needs to be uploaded in the departmental website –
banglarbhumi.gov.in
144 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                       Land Governance Indicator 27
         LG    Dim     Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process:
Panel
         I     .       policies are formulated in a broad public process, address equity, and
                       implementation is meaningfully monitored.
                       Land policies help to improve land use by low-income groups and those who
9        2     6
                       experienced injustice.
                       A: Policy is in place to improve access to and productive use of assets by poor and
                       marginalized groups, and is applied in practice and is effective
                       B: Policy is in place to improve access to and productive use of assets by poor and
                       marginalized groups, is applied in practice, but is not effective
                       C: Policy is in place to improve access to and productive use of assets by poor and
                       marginalized groups but is not enforced
                       D: No policy in place to improve access to and productive use of assets by poor and
                       marginalized groups.


Analysis:

Land policies of the successive governments in West Bengal have helped the rural poor to make
better use of land.

Bringing all the tenants directly under the state in the wake of abolition of zamindary and
exemption of the smaller ones from the obligation of paying land revenue have freed the poorer
tenants from the fear of losing their lands. They definitely try their best to improve the land use.

The policy towards the bargadars – by preventing eviction, making their rights heritable,
providing very cheap mechanism to resolve disputes with the owners of the land at the block
level, providing for intervention by the revenue officers to combat the high-handed actions of
the owners and recording their names in the RoRs – has made the right of cultivation more
secure in respect of more than 14 lakh bargadars.

The policy of imposing ceiling on al kinds of lands and implement such policy in bothe letter and
spirit has made it possible to bring more than 29.99 lakh acres of land to the state coffer so that
such land can be distributed among the poor landless, marginalised sections of the society. The
policy of distribution of land at the disposal of the state government to the landless and land-
poor with preference to persons belonging to ST and SC have helped the poorer sections of rural
society to become owners of land which they try to make best use of.

The Homestead Act aimed at providing homestead to a poor section of the homeless rural
society.

However, these poor people would still better use their land if the provisions of the WBLR Act
contained in chapter V – regarding consolidation of lands and Cooperative Farming Societies
could be implemented. Agricultural inputs and other support could not be provided to an
adequate extent to the recipients of land for cultivation of the same in a productive and efficient
manner. The policy was in place but due to lack of focused approach on post land reform
measures the benefit could not be maximized to enhance the impact of pro-poor land reform.
The policy and robust implementation related to productive use of land by disbursement of
agricultural loans to the marginal farmers and bargadars along with institutional credit access
for these targeted groups also has contributed significantly in achieving food sufficiency for the
state from a food-deficient situation in the pre-reform era(ranking changed from A to B later)

Data Source:

Data Reliability:

145 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                        Land Governance Indicator 27
                        Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process:
Panel    LGI Dim.
                        policies are formulated in a broad public process, address equity,
                        and implementation is meaningfully monitored.
9        2     7        Land policies proactively and effectively reduce future disaster risk.
                        A: Policy is in place to prevent settlement in high risks areas which is enforced,
                        and translates anticipated future risks into land use planning that is enforced.
                        B: Policy is in place to prevent settlement in high risks areas which is enforced,
                        and translates anticipated future risks into land use planning but which is not
                        enforced.
                        C: Policy is in place to prevent settlement in high risks areas but which is not
                        enforced.
                        D: No policy is in place to prevent settlement in high risks areas or anticipated
                        future risks.

Analysis:

There is no policy framed in West Bengal in respect of land use to reduce or prevent disaster
risks. The state Land Use Board under the ministry of Planning and Development was
constituted in 1975 with one of the principal function as – to evaluate the water and land
resources and environment factors like erosion by wind or water, water logging, salinity etc. and
decide upon suitable land-use policy for different parts of the state so as to ensure optimum
conservation of soil, fertility and moisture, reduction of flood hazard and sustainable utilisation
of land resources like forest and grazing land etc. Later in 2009 the State Land Use Board was
reconstituted under the chairmanship of the MIC, L&LR Department and transferred to the
department of L&LR. The agenda of disaster risk reduction didn’t find a place in the parameters
set for preparation of land use maps. On the basis of initial satellite based Block-wise Maps
prepared by the Department of Science & Technology and sample field verification by the
District Offices of Land& Land Reforms Department, final Block-wise Land Use Maps of twelve
districts have been prepared and formally published.

Data Source: L&LR Department
Data Reliability: High

Policy Recommendation: Agenda of disaster risk reduction has to be incorporated in
collaboration and consultation with the Disaster Management Department while preparing the
land use maps under the direct supervision of the L&LR Department.




146 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
VII.     Analysis and policy Recommendation
         a) Substantive Findings

   The validated consensus ranking of the LGAF 116 dimensions reveals considerable strengths in
   land governance in West Bengal as 27 (23.28%) dimensions ranked A and 37 (31.90%)
   dimensions ranked B while 33 (28.45%) and 19 (16.38%) dimensions were ranked C and D
   respectively. Land governance in terms of nearly all the thematic areas is relatively strong. The
   order of weakness based on the percentage of dimensions scoring C and D are: Panel 1, Panel 2
   and Panel 3.


                                                          Strength         Weakness         Total      % age
                    Thematic Area
                                                        No.       %       No.        %
       Panel 1: Land Tenure Recognition                   3      2.59       8      6.90        11          9.48

       Panel 2: Rights to Forest and Common
                                                          5      4.31       9      7.76        14          12.07
       Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations

       Panel 3: Urban Land Use, Planning and
                                                          6      5.17       8      6.90        14          12.07
       Development

       Panel 4: Public Land Management                    8      6.90       6       5.17       14          12.07

       Panel 5: Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to
                                                         15     12.93       4      3.45        19          16.38
       Private Investors

       Panel 6: Public Provision of Land
                                                          9      7.76       9      7.76        18          15.52
       Information: Registry and Cadastre


       Panel 7: Land Valuation and Taxation               6      5.17       0      0.00        6           5.17


       Panel 8: Dispute Resolution                        5      4.31       2       1.72       7           6.03

       Panel 9: Review of Institutional
                                                          7      6.03       6       5.17       13          11.21
       Arrangements and Policies

                          Total                          75     64.66      41      35.34      116          100




         b) Strength and Weakness
   147 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panels                                                 Strengths                                               Weakness
                                       Existing legal framework in the State fully         There is gap between legislation and practice;
                                        recognizes the tenurial rights–
                                            o The West Bengal Land Reforms Act,             Certain group rights and customary rights are not
                                                 1955                                        protected by law;
                                            o West        Bengal     Acquisition of
                                                 Homestead Land for Agricultural
                                                 Labourers, Artisans and Fishermen          There are some illegal transaction of land (especially
                                                 Act, 1975                                   for distributed ceiling surplus land to land poor) in
                                            o West Bengal Thika Tenancy Act,                 practice;
                                                 2001

                                                                                            Record individualization - in case of issuing joint
                                       Distribution of ceiling surplus land among           patta records are not maintained individually.
                                        the landless and land-poor giving preference
                                        to those who belonging to the Scheduled             Records are falling out of date because of pending
                                        Tribe and Scheduled Caste. (So far [ Aug             mutation cases arising out of death, transfer;
                                        2013 ] 31,36,297 landless and near landless
 Panel 1: Land Tenure Recognition




                                        persons have been given land by way of              There are 126 non – revenue forest mouzas in the
                                        distributive land reforms thereby creating as        state, 126 chitmahal mouzas (enclaves in Bangladesh)
                                        many new tenures.)                                   and 22 diluvated mouzas in South 24 Parganas
                                       Allocation of homestead plot to absolute             district which are not surveyed and recorded creating
                                        landless and homeless through legislation            gap in recognizing the rights of people of those areas.
                                        and government schemes giving preference
                                        to women, ST and SC. (3,26,653 persons
                                        have been given land with raiyati status            Less than 15% of land recorded to physical persons is
                                        creating equivalent number of tenures.)              recorded in the name of women either individually or
                                       Government has taken initiative to issue             jointly.
                                        patta (deed of title) in the name of women or
                                        joint patta (both in the name of wife and
                                        husband) during distribution of homestead           Tribal land alienation;
                                        plot through scheme (more than 90% in the
                                        name of women from last three years);
                                       30,879 individual and 312 Community
                                        tenures were created as a result of
                                        implementation of the Forest Rights Act,
                                        2006.
                                       Existing    legal     framework     recognizes
                                        individual rights of land;
                                       Women Land Rights is legally recognized;
                                       The state has robust mechanism to secure
                                        tenure of sharecroppers (a study [2003]
                                        made by the State Institute of Panchayats
                                        and Rural Development found that about
                                        72% of share-croppers had a sense of
                                        enhanced security after their names were
                                        recorded in the land records.)
                                       Land purchase and sale is computerized;




 148 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panels                                                                                          Strengths                                                Weakness
                                                                               After initial sketchy progress enforcement of       Recognition and enforcement of rights to STs and
                                                                                Scheduled Tribe and Other Traditional                OTFDs as per the FRA, 2006

 Panel 2 : Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations
                                                                                Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Rights) Act,        JMFCs are still not recognized by any legislation;
                                                                                2006 protecting the interest of Scheduled           Functioning of Forest Department does not meet the
                                                                                Tribes and other forest dwellers in the State        basic objective of forest conservation and
                                                                                is picking up;                                       implementation of FRA 2006 fully;
                                                                               Role of the government in implementation of         126 non-revenue forest mouzas in the state have not
                                                                                National Forest Policy of 1988 giving priority       been cadastrally surveyed keeping grey areas in
                                                                                to Joint Forest Management (JFM), as                 recognizing the rights of forest dwellers; common
                                                                                pioneer in the country, and giving more              land within forest areas are not clearly identified.
                                                                                priority to people’s need and biodiversity          Information gap between L&LR Department and
                                                                                conservation than commercial exploitation            Forest Department; Records maintained by the Forest
                                                                                and revenue earning;                                 Department are not always in compliance with L & LR
                                                                               There are around 4000 Joint Forest                   Department;
                                                                                Management Committees (JFMC) formed                 There are number of forest villages as well as forest
                                                                                and functioning under Executive Order                fringe villages where remarkable number of non - ST
                                                                                (1988) protecting nearly 500,000 hectares of         communities are living. There is gap in identifying
                                                                                degraded forest areas of the State; these            and recognizing the actual non-ST forest dwellers;
                                                                                committees are traditionally strong in the          Users' rights to key natural resources are not legally
                                                                                State;                                               recognized and often not protected in practice;
                                                                               Positive role of the State Government in            There is no provision for representation of women in
                                                                                protecting trees and maintaining bio-                the LAMPS.
                                                                                diversity in rural as well as urban areas by
                                                                                enactment of Non-Forest Tree Act in 2006;
                                                                               In West Bengal, diversion of Forest land is
                                                                                one of the minimum in the country;
                                                                               There is well organized administration in the
                                                                                Forest Department.
                                                                               In West Bengal, in case of the NTFP like Sal
                                                                                Seeds and Kendu Leaves, monopoly rights of
                                                                                collection from the forest land have been
                                                                                given to the Large Sized Multipurpose
                                                                                Cooperative Societies (LAMPS) through
                                                                                West       Bengal     Tribal     Development
                                                                                Cooperative Corporation (WBTDCC).




 149 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
            Panels                                                              Strengths                                               Weakness
                                                               Existing legal framework under West Bengal          The state does not have any comprehensive land use
                                                                Town      and    Country    (Planning     and        policy especially in the context of urban growth;
                                                                Development) Act, 1979 and West Bengal               Enforcement of law is deficient;
                                                                Municipal Act, 1993(as amended in 2007)             Land related legislations in the State have largely
                                                                lays the foundation for preparing land use
Panel 3 : Urban Land Use, Planning and Development

                                                                                                                     ignored ecological and environmental issues;
                                                                plan for development of urban areas.                Regular updating of urban land use and creation of
                                                               There is a series of legislations/regulations        data base to record the changes in use is not followed;
                                                                that are for the most part serve public             Huge quantum of government land in urban areas is
                                                                purpose;                                             encroached ;
                                                               In view of the 73rd and 74th Amendments of          Policy and implementation of low cost housing is not
                                                                the constitution of India, two Acts, namely,         clear. As a result, the number of those with
                                                                W.B. District Planning Committee Act 1994,           inadequate shelter still remains high;
                                                                and W.B. Metropolitan Planning Committee            Construction of buildings violating the prescribed
                                                                Act 1994 along with the W.B. District                norms;
                                                                Planning Committee Rules 1994 came into             The state does not have a policy to deal with informal
                                                                force for the purpose of decentralized spatial       tenureship in urnan areas;
                                                                and socio-economic Planning in the state.

                                                               Draft development Plan for all the 127
                                                                municipal bodies/Corporations have been
                                                                prepared with the supports from Kolkata
                                                                Urban Services for the Poor (KUSP);

                                                               Policy for low cost housing and services
                                                                exists; (So far 1, 58,000 dwelling units under
                                                                BSUP has been sanctioned, out of which
                                                                89,000 units’ construction has been
                                                                completed. Under IHSDP, 52,000 dwelling
                                                                units have been sanctioned so far (for other
                                                                than KMA area), out of which 43,000 are
                                                                completed.)

                                                               There are professionally managed public             There are still large tracts of public lands in the State
            Panel 4 : Public Land Management




                                                                institutions like WBIDC, WBIIDC, WBSIDC              which are not clearly identified on the ground or on
                                                                etc. for management of public land and use           maps;
                                                                for the development of industries.                  The lands may not always be identifiable on the
                                                               Till December, 2013, vesting of land under           ground for various reasons like change of topography,
                                                                different Acts:                                      encroachment etc. Information on such public lands
                                                                     o WBEA Act 26,48,250.86 acres                   is not available to the public;
                                                                     o WBLR Act 3,50,990.16 acres                   There is lack of transparency in allocating public land
                                                                     o Total vesting till date 29,99,241.02          to private parties; information is not made publicly
                                                                          acres                                      available;
                                                                                                                    Inventory of public land management by various
                                                                                                                     departments and local self-governments are not
                                                                                                                     properly updated and maintained;




                                                     150 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panels                                                               Strengths                                                 Weakness
                                                     The Government of West Bengal has come              Fallow other than current fallows, cultivable waste

Panel 5 : Transfer of Large Tracts of
                                                      up with a Land Allotment Policy document             land, permanent pasture and other grazing land, and
                                                      through issuance of Administrative Order             barren and uncultivable land (which may be
    Land to Private Investors                         (No. 6686 – LP/1A-18/ 2012 dated 26                  considered as suitable for industrial growth)
                                                      December 2012).                                      combined together constitute 1% of the total land;
                                                     The government has a clear procedure of             Land demand is ever increasing in the state for raising
                                                      transfer of land to private investors which is       agricultural production to meet food demand of
                                                      laid down in the guideline and publicly              expanding population or for expansion of industrial
                                                      available.                                           activities;
                                                     WBIDC has introduced Rehabilitation and             Though there is a standard procedure of transfer of
                                                      Resettlement Scheme (R&R Scheme) in 2011             land to private investors but there is gap in practice;
                                                      which clearly spells out the standards and          Still there is lack of transparency on the ground in
                                                      norms.                                               paying compensation.
                                                     R&R Scheme also protects the rights of the
                                                      sharecroppers and even labourers.


                                                     The State has a long history of conducting          Procedure for formalization of land possession of poor
Panel 6 : Public Provision of Land Information:




                                                      survey of land and managing records;                 is robust but it is not hundred percent transparent.
                                                     Computerization of records is almost done in         Improper selection/ bias exists;
                                                      the state; all information regarding land           Cost of recording of property transfer is very high;
                                                      records, maps etc. are available through            Record of rights also does not reflect the real ground
                                                      website or through OTC services paying very          situation as there is lag between recoded ownership
                                                      minimal charges;                                     data in the record of rights and legal transaction of
             Registry and Cadastre




                                                     Updating cadastral maps and record of rights         land taking place;
                                                      of 1473 revenue villages (though current            There is also a lag between value of land in land
                                                      survey-settlement operation under WBLR               valuation register maintained by the registering
                                                      Act was initiated in 1975)                           authorities and value at which land transaction takes
                                                      The present Government has introduced a             place because valuation of land is updated
                                                      new      scheme        Nijo-Griho-Nijo-Bhumi         sporadically;
                                                      Prakalpa in Oct 2011 (My Home My Land               There is a gap between the quantum of land at the
                                                      scheme) with purpose to settle 5.5 Lac               disposal of the L&LR Department and land recorded
                                                      landless poor people of the State with land          in the record of rights, particularly Government land
                                                      up to 0.05 acre.                                     settled with the land poor people under Section 49(1)
                                                                                                           of WBLR Act 1955 and land settled through lease with
                                                                                                           private individual and institutions;
                                                                                                          Fee structures for different kind of services are not
                                                                                                           rational and transparent. It does not match with high
                                                                                                           cost of government service.

                                                     The first Municipal Finance Commission was          More than one fourth of the demand on property
                                                      set up in 1979 in the state.                         taxes of the ULBs is due from the government
       Panel 7: Land valuation and taxation




                                                                                                           departments and undertakings.
                                                     A Central Valuation Board was set up to
                                                      overcome the deficiency of under valuation
                                                      of properties in the municipal areas in 1979        There is no full proof mechanism to collect tax from
                                                      through an Act. The process of property              the     defaulters.    Government        lacks     proper
                                                      valuation is clear.                                  infrastructure to pay attention in this direction.
                                                     All 239 registration offices in the State have
                                                      been fully computerized. As a result there
                                                      has been a clear and transparent process in
                                                      determination of market value for property
                                                      through     CORD      (Computerisation      of
                                                      Registration of Documents) software.
                                                     Collection of property tax is regular (around
                                                      80%).
                                                     The amount of property taxes collected
                                                      exceeds the cost of staff in charge of
                                                      collection.




                       151 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
   Panels                                              Strengths                                                 Weakness
                                       Existing legal framework is competent               Non-participation or absence of the parties during the
                                        enough for dispute resolution through                relevant stages of preparation of land records is one of
Panel 8 : Dispute Resolution &          following Act:                                       the causes of faulty recording in land records. Lack of
    Conflict Management                                                                      awareness on the part of the stake-holders is a major
                                              o   West Bengal Estates Acquisition            reason for such absence;
                                                  Act, 1953                                 Dispute resolution through Civil Court is very time
                                             o West        Bengal   Land     Reforms         consuming compared to the exisiting system.
                                                  Act,1955                                   Repeated adjournment in Civil Courts due to various
                                             o West Bengal Thika Tenancy Act,                reasons causes unnecessary delay in disposal of cases;
                                                  2001                                      Cost of proceeding at Civil Court is relatively high
                                             o West Bengal Land Reforms &                    which makes it less affordable by poor;
                                                  Tenancy Tribunal Act, 1997                There are huge numbers of piled up long pending
                                       In the state Land Reform Tenancy Tribunal            cases in the State;
                                        (LRTT) is in operation and quick disposal of
                                        conflicts are possible;

                                       As per legislation, institutional mandates          Different public institutions deal with land-related
   Institutional Arrangements




                                        relating to administration of land is very           matters quite differently and there is lack of
                                        clear in the State;                                  coordination in practice.
        Panel 9 : Review of




                                       The role and function of different layers of        The records are not updated on a regular basis. The
                                        L&LR Department is clearly defined; there is         land properties belonging to the public bodies are not
           and Policies




                                        no scope of overlapping.                             recorded in the r-o-r maintained in the office of the
                                       The state is endowed with comprehensive              BLLRO;
                                        legislations embodying the policies on land;        Though there is a well-defined reporting system on a
                                                                                             regular basis within the department but the
                                                                                             information is not available to the public. There is no
                                                                                             mechanism      of    tracking     the    progress    of
                                                                                             implementation of different policies by the public;
                                                                                            Land related legislations in the State have largely
                                                                                             ignored ecological and environmental issues;



                                 c) Policy Matrix with suggested reform action in the short, medium and longer
                                    term
               Thematic                             Issues                              Findings                        Reform Actions
                Areas                                                                                               Short Medium Long
                                                                                                                    Term             Term
                                         1.   Existing             legal   All customary rights need to be
                       Panel 1 : Land




                                              framework recognizes         identified by a task force comprising
                        Recognition




                                              individual rights of land    land tenure experts and codified in
                          Tenure




                                              but there are certain        order to ensure protection under law.
                                                                                                                                 --          --
                                              gaps. Certain group
                                              rights and customary
                                              rights are not protected
                                              by law.




              152 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Thematic                Issues                              Findings                          Reform Actions
 Areas                                                                                    Short Medium Long
                                                                                          Term             Term
             2.   Implementation        of   The rural raiyats were experiencing
                  provision of section 21C   great difficulties in selling their lands
                  of the LR Act regarding    with barga cultivation thereon. This
                  constitution of Land       section provides for constitution of a
                  Corporation etc.           State Land Corporation or one or more
                                             Regional Land Corporations or both. In
                                             essence, the object of such a
                                             Corporation is to advance funds to a
                                             recorded bargadar or a person eligible
                                             for settlement of land u/s 49(1) of the
                                             LR Act to enable him to purchase land
                                             from a raiyat who, being in distress,
                                                                                           --      --       
                                             has failed to sell the land in open
                                             market on account of cultivation of the
                                             land by the bargadar. If for some
                                             reason or other the land cannot be sold
                                             to the cultivating bargadar or any
                                             person eligible to get land u/s 49(1), the
                                             Corporation may, on a request from the
                                             owner, purchase the land from him.
                                             The state government may be well
                                             advised to take up this important
                                             provision for implementation.




153 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Thematic                Issues                          Findings                      Reform Actions
 Areas                                                                            Short Medium Long
                                                                                  Term             Term
             3.   Women Land Rights is    A research study conducted by Rural
                  legally recognized but  Development Institute (2002) on
                  there is a gap between  women’s access and rights to land in
                                          West Bengal. The study found:
                  legislation and practice;
                                          a) Very few rural women own either
                                          agricultural land or the houses they live
                                          in
                                          b)     Despite     government     policies
                                          promoting joint titling, little joint
                                          titling of government granted land is
                                          occurring
                                          c) There is general awareness of the
                                          rights of the widows, daughters and
                                          sisters under the codified inheritance
                                          law, but these rights are not always
                                          exercised
                                          d) Separated women almost always lose
                                          access to land they have worked during
                                          marriage
                                          e) Women who hold title to land in
                                          their own names prize the security that
                                          the land endows them with
                                          It is high time the Government should
                                          take up a clear policy on land rights for
                                          women.
                                               By way of empowering women
                                                through endowment of land assets,
                                                priority could be assigned on them
                                                in the matter of distribution of
                                                land as in the case of members of
                                                the Scheduled Tribes. For this
                                                purpose sec 49(1) of the WBLR
                                                Act, 1955 shall need amendment;
                                               To give some financial relief to     --       --        
                                                women assesses it could be
                                                considered if some exemption, say
                                                25% of the revenue payable by
                                                them in terms of section 23 of the
                                                LR Act could be given. The
                                                proposed exemption could be over
                                                and above the general exemptions
                                                of revenue for land upto 2.428 Ha
                                                provided in sec 24 (ibid). Similarly
                                                exemption may also be considered
                                                in respect of land and property tax
                                                levied by gram panchayat in rural
                                                areas and ULBs in urban areas
                                               Exemption in stamp duty in case of
                                                registration when women acquire
                                                the land
                                               Make it mandatory for including
                                                women’s name in the record of
                                                rights either as partitionable joint
                                                rights or sole titles in women’s
                                                names;
                                               The past cases for joint titles in
                                                case of government land allocation
                                                which have not been implemented,
                                                may be reopened for recording the
                                                names of wives
                                               Take appropriate measures for
                                                enhancing awareness on legal
                                                rights of women
154 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Thematic                 Issues                                 Findings                         Reform Actions
 Areas                                                                                       Short Medium Long
                                                                                             Term             Term
             4.   Sharecropper           to      West Bengal is the only state where
                  landowner,        tenure       tenancy      reform      has   conferred
                  security to bargadars.         substantial benefits to sharecroppers.
                                                 The WBLR Act prohibits leasing and
                                                 highly regulates sharecropping. The
                                                 bargadars’       recorded     permanent
                                                 cultivation right is heritable but is not
                                                 transferrable. Bargadars also have the
                                                 first pre-emptive right to purchase the
                                                 adjacent land being sold. Implementing
                                                 the provision made under WBLR Act
                                                 for the state to establish a finance
                                                                                              --      --       
                                                 corporation to advance funds to
                                                 bargadars to purchase sharecropped
                                                 land from the landowner at a mutually
                                                 agreed price or market value would
                                                 ensure secure tenure, improved
                                                 utilization and productivity of the land
                                                 as stated by Banerjee, Gertler and
                                                 Ghatak, 2002. Also government may
                                                 expedite the recording of names of
                                                 bargadars who are still left in
                                                 government record so that they can get
                                                 full protection under law;
             5.   Record                         The Government may consider the
                  individualization - in         measures for individualization of
                  case of issuing joint          tenure while issuing joint patta, this
                  patta records are not          will also ensure land rights for women       --      --       
                  maintained                     in their names. An executive order to
                  individually;                  this effect is required along with
                                                 awareness generation campaign;
             6.   There are some illegal         West Bengal LR Act prohibits transfer
                  transaction      of    land    of     land     distributed   to     poor
                  (especially              for   beneficiaries’ u/s 49(1) of WBLR Act.
                  distributed         ceiling    But there are quite a good number of
                  surplus land to land           cases where land has been transferred        --      --       
                  poor) in practice but          by patta recipients. Mechanism should
                  difficult to identify;         be developed for proper monitoring.

             7.   Legal restrictions on          An in-depth research study may be
                  land leasing routinely         conducted to assess the extent and
                  neglected (clandestine         nature of lease transaction focusing on
                  land leasing)                  links between livelihoods of the poor
                                                 and clandestine tenancy. The study
                                                 should reflect on the practical scenario
                                                 and make recommendation to the
                                                 government accordingly. It is a proven
                                                 fact that land tenancy markets can also
                                                 reduce the vulnerability of poor
                                                 households by offering a more stable
                                                                                              --              --
                                                 livelihood source than frequently
                                                 volatile and imperfect labor markets.
                                                 As opportunity in non-farm economy
                                                 increases, tenancy markets may
                                                 facilitate a broader choice of livelihood
                                                 opportunities such as migration,
                                                 specialization        and     investment.
                                                 Households better suited to pursue
                                                 non-farm       livelihoods    would    be
                                                 benefited if they are able to rent out
                                                 their land for others to cultivate;


155 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
 Thematic                                                Issues                               Findings                            Reform Actions
  Areas                                                                                                                       Short Medium Long
                                                                                                                              Term             Term
                                              8.   Records are falling out    Compulsory mutation: Maintenance of
                                                   of date because of         r-o-r mainly entails mutation of names
                                                   pending mutation cases     due to transfer, inheritance etc. To
                                                   arising out of death,      facilitate such maintenance mutation
                                                                                                                                       --       --
                                                   transfer                   should be made compulsory. This will
                                                                              require amendment of section 50 of the
                                                                              WBLR Act, 1955 and of the related
                                                                              rules;
                                              9. Tribal land alienation       Despite extensive and long standing
                                                                              state     legislations     restricting   the
                                                                              alienation of tribal land, the loss of
                                                                              tribal land continues. The fact of the
                                                                              controversy reflects the need for
                                                                              comprehensive, local research on the
                                                                              impact of restrictions. Based on the
                                                                              findings appropriate actions can be
                                                                              taken at state and local levels to
                                                                                                                                --      --       
                                                                              enhance        restrictions,    shore     up
                                                                              enforcement programs, provide for
                                                                              legal services and relaxation of
                                                                              restrictions         (with       appropriate
                                                                              protections) on alienation of tribal
                                                                              land. Also an exercise across the state
                                                                              to develop a comprehensive database
                                                                              on      tribal     land     ownership      is
                                                                              recommended;




   Thematic                                              Issues                              Findings                             Reform Actions
    Areas                                                                                                                     Short  Medium     Long
                                                                                                                              Term              Term
                                              1.        Joint       Forest    1. There is a need to restructure the
Panel 2 : Rights to Forest and Common Lands




                                              Management Committees           entire mechanism of JFM so as to
                                              (JFMC) are still not            make it compatible with the provisions
                                              recognized       by      any    of FRA 2006.                                     --               --
                                              legislation; formed and
         Rural Land Use Regulations




                                              functioning under
                                              Executive Order only.
                                              2. Functioning of Forest        2. Changes in Forest Governance will
                                              Department does not meet        definitely    strengthen  the    basic
                                              the basic objective of forest   objective of forest conservation. The
                                              conservation             and    solution will be to:
                       &




                                              implementation of FRA
                                              2006 fully;                     subsequent management of the land in
                                                                              question to ensure conservation of
                                                                              existing flora/ fauna and to develop             --       --       
                                                                              the same,

                                                                              the staff of Forest Department,
                                                                              Backward Classes Welfare Department
                                                                              and the civil administration for better
                                                                              understanding and implementation of
                                                                              FRA 2006.




156 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Thematic                    Issues                              Findings                         Reform Actions
 Areas                                                                                       Short  Medium     Long
                                                                                             Term              Term
                  3. 126 non-revenue forest       3. These 126 non-revenue forest
                  mouzas in the state have        mouzas need to be cadastrally
                  not     been      cadastrally   surveyed for better implementation of
                  surveyed keeping grey           FRA 2006 in these areas. A set of
                  areas in recognizing the        cadastral maps and record-of-rights is
                  rights of forest dwellers       a sin qua non for the forest dwellers to
                                                  effectively exercise their rights like
                                                  ownership of land (delivery of              --               --
                                                  document of title) and other rights
                                                  conferred on them by the Forest Rights
                                                  Act. The state government should,
                                                  therefore, seriously consider the
                                                  question of undertaking survey and
                                                  settlement of the related forest
                                                  villages.
                  4.     Information    gap       4. Forest Department is required to
                  between L&LR Department         play proactive role in physical
                  and Forest Department;          verification of common lands and
                  Records maintained by the       updating records (record of common
                  Forest Department are not       land, record of forest patta, record of
                  always in compliance with       actual waste lands etc.). Gap in
                  L & LR Department               information between LR Department
                                                                                              --       --       
                                                  and Forest Department in respect of
                                                  forest boundary demarcation on real
                                                  time basis needs to be bridged.
                                                  Executive order should be issued
                                                  followed by practical guideline so that
                                                  L&LR       Department     and     Forest
                                                  Department work in tandem.
                  5. There are number of          5. Scope of ‘community rights’ to be
                  forest villages as well as      widened up to include other forest
                  forest fringe villages where    dwellers along with ST.
                  remarkable number of non            There is a need for re-looking into
                  - ST communities are                 JFMC (Joint Forest Management
                  living. There is gap in              & Protection Committee) orders
                  identifying and recognizing          and there has to be a synergy                  --       --
                  the actual non-ST forest             between Forest Rights Act (FRA)
                  dwellers;                            and JFMCs.
                                                      Provision should be made in FRA
                                                       to incorporate the system of JFMC
                                                       giving some waiver or making
                                                       some alteration.
                  6. Users' rights to key         Recording and mapping of the rights
                  natural resources are not       of the groups who are holding land
                  legally recognized and          under customary, group, or collective
                  often not protected in          tenures should be made mandatory.           --       --       
                  practice;


                  1. The state does not have      1. A policy statement on land use
                  any comprehensive land          planning     with      clear    and
Panel 3 : Urban


 Development
 Planning and




                  use policy to encourage         implementable     suggestions   and
  Land Use,




                  urbanization, building up       procedural mechanism needs to be
                  of infrastructure               framed in the perspective of urban          --               --
                                                  development    and     consequential
                                                  amendment of section 4C of the WBLR
                                                  Act




157 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Thematic               Issues                              Findings                         Reform Actions
 Areas                                                                                  Short  Medium     Long
                                                                                        Term              Term
             Land related legislations in   2. There is a need to review the present
             the State have largely         situation of urban land use to make
             ignored ecological and         changes in policies and legislation.
             environmental issues.          WBT&C (P&D) Act and WBLR act                         --       --
                                            contain     provisions     which     are
                                            conflicting and contradictory

             3. Regular updating of         3. The government may think of
             urban land use and             establishing a separate cell for land use
             creation of data base to       control (ensure effective monitoring).
             record the changes in use is   a. To address the problem of shortage
             not followed                   of qualified Town Planners, the
                                            Government should set up a Town
                                            Planning Educational Institution and
                                            create a cadre of Planners with
                                            adequate powers vested on them
                                            which would ensure the effectiveness
                                            of planning instruments.
                                            b. Kolkata Metropolitan Area (KMA)
                                            has two Municipal Corporations (KMC
                                                                                         --       --       
                                            and HMC) and 40 other Municipalities
                                            which normally prepare their land use
                                            plans individually not keeping in mind
                                            the overall regional context. KMDA is
                                            an institution which might act as an
                                            umbrella in bringing about an
                                            integrated approach for effective
                                            spatial expansion of the largest city
                                            which is not appropriately there in the
                                            current system. The Government
                                            should examine the gaps and if
                                            necessary create a legal backup to
                                            ensure such integration.
             4. Large quantum of            4. There should be an exercise with
             government land in urban       purpose to recover city lands from           --               --
             areas is encroached            encroachment
             5. A policy for low cost       5. A comprehensive policy on low-cost
             housing and services exists    housing/ housing facilities for the
             but implementation is not      underprivileged people needs to be
             always effective. As a         formulated      in    a    participatory
             result, the number of those    approach; considering the findings of
                                                                                         --               --
             needing adequate shelter       USHA study government should take
             still remains high             appropriate action to accelerate the
                                            implementation of Rajib Awas Yojna
                                            (RAY).

             6. Construction of             6. The legal provisions for residential
             buildings violating the        building permits appear to be
             prescribed norms               appropriate, affordable, but more
                                            vigilance would be required to ensure a
                                                                                                 --       --
                                            better system of monitoring and
                                            supervision. Good practices from other
                                            cities could be adopted




158 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       Thematic                              Issues                               Findings                          Reform Actions
        Areas                                                                                                   Short  Medium     Long
                                                                                                                Term              Term
                                   7. The state does not have a    7. Security of tenure for urban poor
                                   firm policy as yet for          continues to be a vexed issue. Experts
                                   granting tenure to slum         advocate     that    tenural     security,
                                   dwellers;                       together with an enabling role of the
                                                                   Government        with    reference     to
                                                                   provision of housing finance, would go
                                                                   a long way in mitigating the housing
                                                                   problem in cities and assist urban poor
                                                                   over time to gradually improve their
                                                                                                                 --       --       
                                                                   housing and living condition. The UN-
                                                                   HABITAT generalizes the most
                                                                   common tenure systems which include
                                                                   freehold,    leases,    provisional    or
                                                                   conditional tenure and group tenure
                                                                   arrangements. Further, importance is
                                                                   to be given to security of tenure by
                                                                   including it as one of the objectives of
                                                                   JNNURM.
                                   8. Land use change              8. As the state population continues to
                                                                   grow and additional land is needed for
                                                                   non-agricultural economic activities,
                                                                   housing and urban growth, the
                                                                   pressure to convert agricultural land to
                                                                   non-agricultural purposes will likely
                                                                   increase. The need is to establish
                                                                   government policy statements on the
                                                                   conversion of agricultural land to non-
                                                                   agricultural purposes and clear
                                                                                                                 --               --
                                                                   guidelines for determining whether a
                                                                   conversion is appropriate (e.g. policy
                                                                   could automatically permit conversion
                                                                   within a certain distance from a major
                                                                   roadway or urban centre to encourage
                                                                   economic growth). Simplification of
                                                                   rules governing the permission of a
                                                                   change in use and narrow the
                                                                   discretion of government officials in
                                                                   authenticating such changes
                                   1. There are tracts of public   1. A comprehensive ground survey is
                                   lands in the State which are    required to be taken up jointly by the
Panel 4 : Public Land Management




                                   not clearly identified on the   L&LR       department       and     other
                                   ground or on maps               departments, local bodies in the field
                                                                   level to identify and update the records
                                                                   of the precious public lands managed
                                                                   by these bodies along with present
                                                                   status. The government may take up
                                                                   this exercise on war-footing as land at      --                --
                                                                   the control of the departments and
                                                                   local bodies are highly vulnerable to
                                                                   encroachment.         An       up-to-date
                                                                   inventory of the lands settled with
                                                                   various departments and local bodies
                                                                   by the L&LR department would
                                                                   facilitate a proper planning for best
                                                                   options to utilize these resources.




159 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
              Thematic                                                      Issues                               Findings                         Reform Actions
               Areas                                                                                                                          Short  Medium     Long
                                                                                                                                              Term              Term
                                                                  2. The lands may not            2. The concerned departments or
                                                                  always be identifiable on       institutions owning public lands are
                                                                  the ground for various          required to maintain their separate
                                                                  reasons like change of          Land Registers which in most of the
                                                                  topography, encroachment        cases are not done. The above-
                                                                  etc. Information on such        mentioned joint operation will be
                                                                  public lands is not available   useful to have complete and updated          --               --
                                                                  to the public                   records of the resources managed by
                                                                                                  the departments and public bodies.
                                                                                                  Periodical physical verification and
                                                                                                  updating of records should be made
                                                                                                  mandatory

                                                                  3. There is lack of             3. Allocation of public land to private
                                                                  transparency in allocating      parties should always be uploaded in
                                                                  public land to private          the departmental website to maintain
                                                                                                                                                       --       --
                                                                  parties; information is not     transparency (WBIDC is following this
                                                                  made publicly available.        practice).

                                                                  1.   Mechanism to assess        Considering      absence    of      any
                                                                       benefit sharing when       mechanism to quantify the short-term
                                                                       land is transferred to     and long-term benefits that will accrue
                                                                       private     (industry)     to the public, an independent benefit
Panel 5 : Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Private Investors




                                                                       purpose;                   assessment system needs to be put in
                                                                                                  place so that maximum benefit can be
                                                                                                  accrued to the public;

                                                                  2.   There is lack of           There is no avenue for coordination
                                                                       effective coordination     between central and state governments
                                                                       to solve competing         when large scale acquisition of land is
                                                                       land use;                  involved leaving scope for disputes
                                                                                                  being arisen which may take a long
                                                                                                  process for reconciliation. The surface
                                                                                                  right transfer is dealt with by the state
                                                                                                  while sub-soil rights (say coal mine)
                                                                                                  are considered by central government.
                                                                                                  Some      formal     mechanism       like
                                                                                                  identifying a nodal agency from both
                                                                                                  state and central government for
                                                                                                  compliance and reconciliation might
                                                                                                  be considered.
                                                                  3.   There is lack of           An     interdepartmental      committee
                                                                       transparency         in    should be formed as per guidelines laid
                                                                       transferring land by       out in the Land Reforms Manual of
                                                                       the public institution     1991 to take final decisions regarding
                                                                       to      the     private    land allotment after careful scrutiny at
                                                                       investors; Policy is in    all levels including the L&LR
                                                                       place but there is gap     department (which has the foremost
                                                                       in implementation;         importance in giving the approval for
                                                                                                  land allotment to start with). Each
                                                                                                  department should frame its own
                                                                                                  policy accordingly consistent with the
                                                                                                  general land allotment policy of the
                                                                                                  government.




160 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                Thematic                                                           Issues                                Findings                         Reform Actions
                 Areas                                                                                                                                Short  Medium     Long
                                                                                                                                                      Term              Term
                                                                        1.      Procedure           for   1.    Procedure      laid    down     for
                                                                        formalization      of     land    formalization of land possession by
                                                                        possession of poor is             poor is good but it should be more
                                                                        robust but it is not hundred      transparent. Recognition of possession
                                                                        percent          transparent.     is done through joint survey by team
                                                                        Improper            selection/    consisting of Govt. officials and                    --       --
                                                                        biasness still exist.             representative of local self Govt. at the
                                                                                                          village    level.     Proper    capacity
                                                                                                          development         and       monitoring
                                                                                                          mechanism should be in place to check
                                                                                                          appropriateness of selection.
                                                                        2. Available data indicates       2. The gap between number of patta
                                                                        that patta has been granted       issued and RoR issued should be
                                                                        to 3141232 but 2457347            bridged by a crash program of field
Panel 6 : Public Provision of Land Information: Registry and Cadastre




                                                                                                                                                               --       --
                                                                        patta recipients have been        verification and it should be strictly
                                                                        recorded in the RoRs.             ensured that RoRs is recorded as soon
                                                                                                          as the Patta is granted.
                                                                        3. Updating of cadastral          3. Cadastral maps and record of rights
                                                                        maps and record of rights         of 1473 mouzas needs to be updated by
                                                                        in respect of 1473 mouzas         taking a program immediately.
                                                                        (though current survey-                                                                --       --
                                                                        settlement operation under
                                                                        WBLR Act was taken up
                                                                        way back in 1975).
                                                                        4. Cost of recording of           4. Stamp duty should be reduced to
                                                                        property transfer is very         encourage and ensure that more
                                                                        high.                             property transfers are registered.
                                                                                                          There is large scale of evasion of stamp             --       --
                                                                                                          duty particularly by poor people, in
                                                                                                          rural area due to high rate of existing
                                                                                                          stamp duty.
                                                                        5. Record of rights also do       5. Cadastral parcel maps might be
                                                                        not reflect the real ground       updated by using High Resolution
                                                                        situation as there is lag         Satellite imagery, Electronic Total
                                                                        between              recoded      Station, and Digital Global Positioning
                                                                                                                                                       --       --       
                                                                        ownership data in the             System. RoRs should also be updated
                                                                        record of rights and legal
                                                                        transaction of land taking
                                                                        place.
                                                                        6. There is also a lag            6. Digitization of cadastral parcel
                                                                        between value of land in          maps, record of rights, land valuation
                                                                        land valuation register           data, legacy records under National
                                                                        maintained        by     the      Land Records Modernization Program
                                                                        registering authorities and       to be completed on a priority basis.                 --       --
                                                                        value at which land
                                                                        transaction takes place
                                                                        because valuation of land is
                                                                        updated sporadically.
                                                                        7. There is large number of       7. Efforts should be made to identify
                                                                        poor people occupying             landless poor people through time
                                                                        government       land     as      bound survey and patta be issued.
                                                                        homestead                         State Government may also consider
                                                                                                          the extension of benefits to the eligible
                                                                                                                                                       --               --
                                                                                                          persons occupying homestead land
                                                                                                          after 26th June 1975, by amending the
                                                                                                          West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead
                                                                                                          Land for Agricultural Laborers,
                                                                                                          Artisans and Fishermen Act 1975.




161 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Thematic                                Issues                               Findings                         Reform Actions
 Areas                                                                                                    Short  Medium     Long
                                                                                                          Term              Term
                              8. There is a gap between       8. Record of rights, cadastral maps
                              the quantum of land at the      legacy records of rights should be
                              disposal of the L&LR            updated on real time basis.
                              Department     and    land
                              recorded in the record of
                              rights,        particularly
                              Government land settled                                                      --       --       
                              with the land poor people
                              under Section 49(1) of
                              WBLR Act 1955 and land
                              settled through lease with
                              private individual and
                              institutions
                              9. Fee structures for           9. Processing fees should be reviewed
                              different kind of services      and increased by at least 50 times to
                              are not rational and            partially    accommodate       cost    of
                              transparent. It does not        manpower and infrastructure for
                              match with high cost of         recording of rights over land.
                              government service                  Relevant public restriction or
                                                                   charges should be recorded in a
                                                                   consistent and reliable manner.
                                                                  Land records and cadastral maps
                                                                   are to be updated on real time
                                                                   basis.
                                                                  Existing rates of collection of fees
                                                                   for providing services should be
                                                                   increased. Graded rates are to be       --               --
                                                                   levied for different income groups.
                                                                   Higher rates for high income
                                                                   groups and lower rates for low
                                                                   income groups.
                                                                  Graded fee structure different
                                                                   services and for different income
                                                                   group should be introduced to
                                                                   provide high quality service at cost
                                                                   effective manner.
                                                                  Rationale for fixation of fees for
                                                                   different services should be fixed
                                                                   transparently to cover the cost of
                                                                   services.
                              10. Illegal staff behavior      10. Service standard for all services
                              and informal payments for       should be established A proper
                              service delivery                supervision and mechanism to be put
                                                              in place to monitor illegal staff
                                                              behavior and service delivery standard.              --       --
                                                              The government has enacted West
                                                              Bengal Rights to Public Service Act,
                                                              2013 which has helped in improving
                                                              service delivery standards
                              1.   Ensure          minimal    There is a need for coordination
   Panel 7 : Land Valuation




                                   differences     between    among the different layers of the
                                   the recorded value and     government in use of Market Value
                                   market prices across       Data Base (MVDB) in CORD not only
        and Taxation




                                   different uses and type    for the purpose of collection of stamp-      --               --
                                   of users. There is lack    duty revenue/registration fee as
                                   of coordination among      currently done, but also for calculation
                                   the different layers of    of base of property/land tax and land
                                   the government which       revenue. This will allow for less
                                   results     into    less   discretion in determination of tax
                                   revenue      and     tax   base, which is essential for a
                                   collection;                transparent and efficient tax regime.


162 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
   Thematic                               Issues                              Findings                         Reform Actions
    Areas                                                                                                  Short  Medium     Long
                                                                                                           Term              Term
                               2.   More than one-fourth        There is a big issue in respect of
                                    of demand of property       realization of outstanding property tax
                                    tax of the ULBs are         by the ULBs, substantial part of which
                                    from the government         are due to the state and central
                                    departments      and        departments and undertakings. This          --               --
                                    undertakings                issue needs to be taken up jointly by
                                                                the governments for working out an
                                                                acceptable solution for all the parties
                                                                involved


                               1.   Early    disposal      of   A system to be in place (on-going) for
                                    record        correction    interlinking the two departments so
                                    cases,           mainly     that simultaneous updation of Land
                                    Mutation cases, by the      Records can be done when any
                                    Revenue authorities, is     transfer is executed (through the
                                    impeded            when     Registration Department). This is
                                    difference        exists    possible in West Bengal as Land
                                    between the facts in        Records maintained by the Revenue
                                    the Land Records            Department ( i.e. the Land Reforms                  --       --
                                    maintained            by    Deptt) have all been computerized,
                                    Revenue      authorities    and the functioning of the Land
                                    and that in the records     Registration Department has also been
                                    of the Registration         fully computerized. The bridging
                                    Department.                 between the two systems will keep the
Panel 8 : Dispute Resolution




                                                                records updated and thereby reduce
  & Conflict Management




                                                                the scope of disputes in this sphere to
                                                                the minimum.
                               2. Non-participation      or     Steps should be taken for awareness
                                    absence of the parties      development by wide publicity through
                                    during the relevant         local print and electronic media, which
                                    stages of preparation       would       ensure     greater    public
                                                                                                                    --       --
                                    of land records is one      participation during preparation of
                                    of the causes of faulty     land records. This will help in reducing
                                    recording    in    land     future litigations.
                                    records.
                               3.   Dispute     resolution      Steps should be taken for speedy
                                    mechanism is in place       disposal of cases by ROs, appellate
                                    under the WBLR Act.         authority and the LRTT as follows –
                                                                   There should not be any
                                                                    unnecessary adjournment, even
                                                                    on lawyer’s ground
                                                                   The BLLRO should ensure timely
                                                                                                                    --       --
                                                                    submission of proper records and
                                                                    papers.
                                                                   The number of dates for disposal
                                                                    of a case should be limited,
                                                                    preferably three dates and those
                                                                    should also be allowed within a
                                                                    short span.




163 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
             Thematic                                                   Issues                              Findings                        Reform Actions
              Areas                                                                                                                     Short  Medium     Long
                                                                                                                                        Term              Term
                                                              1.   Though there is a well-    The budget speech and information
                                                                   defined        reporting   related to performance of the
                                                                   system on a regular        department and progress thereof
                                                                   basis     within     the   needs to be uploaded in the
                                                                   department but the         departmental         website     –
                                                                   information is not         banglarbhumi.gov.in so that people
                                                                   available to the public.   can    track    the    progress  of
Panel 9 : Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies




                                                                                                                                                 --       --
                                                                   There        is       no   implementation of land reform
                                                                   mechanism of tracking      measures with equity objectives.
                                                                   the     progress      of
                                                                   implementation        of
                                                                   different policies by
                                                                   the public.

                                                              2. Though        there    are   Gender issues should be appropriately
                                                                   legislations      which    incorporated in the land policy. And
                                                                   recognizes the rights of   in-built   mechanism      should   be
                                                                   women, State does not      developed     to     monitor      the      --               --
                                                                   have comprehensive         implementation of the policy.
                                                                   land policy to address
                                                                   the issues of gender.
                                                              3.   Land             related   Ecological and environmental issues
                                                                   legislations in the        should be reviewed in the overall
                                                                   State have largely         interest of the state and properly
                                                                   ignored ecological and     incorporated in the policy (may be by              --       --
                                                                   environmental issues.      making amendments in existing
                                                                                              legislations). Policy should spell out
                                                                                              proper mechanism for monitoring.
                                                              4. Though        there    are   Agenda of disaster risk reduction has
                                                                   certain provisions in      to be incorporated in land policy/
                                                                   the legislation like       legislation in collaboration and
                                                                   wetland management         consultation    with    the   Disaster
                                                                   which addresses the        Management        Department      while
                                                                   issues     of     future   preparing the land use maps for land               --       --
                                                                   disaster risk but there    zoning under the direct supervision of
                                                                   is      lacuna        in   the       L&LR      Department.       A
                                                                   enforcement.               comprehensive        policy     should
                                                                                              adequately address the issues of future
                                                                                              disaster risk.




164 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    d) Data Gap


The following gaps in data availability were identified during the course of LGAF exercise and it
would be helpful to collect or create access to the data source in the future for the purpose of
monitoring of land governance progress.

                                              Panel 1
        Actual number of record of rights and land parcels
        Data related to change in economic and social status of land reform beneficiaries
        Assessment of women land ownership in the State
        Data related to illegal land sales and land lease transaction
        Individual land parcels in urban areas in the State
                                              Panel 2
        Data related to commons lands
        Change in land use over a period of time
                                              Panel 3
        Urban land use planning and its actual implementation / progress within a period of
         time
        Building permits applied for and disposed off with time period
        Informal or illegal occupation of urban land
                                              Panel 4
        Public land managed by Local Self-Government and recording of publicly held land
                                              Panel 5
        Land acquisition for different purposes over last 5 years
        Data related to compensation payment – quantum of land, period of time taken,
         disbursement etc.
        Data related to Public land transaction (transfer, lease etc.) and the cost involved
        Data realted to contractual provisions including benefit sharing mechanism
        Information on spatial extent and duration of approved concession
                                              Panel 6
        Extent of long term, unchallenged possession of government and private land
                                              Panel 7
        Details of exemption from property tax payment
        Percentage of property tax demand (ULB wise and collection thereof)
                                              Panel 8
        Number of land dispute pending district wise in the offices of the BLLROs
        Number of cases lodged every year and dispossed off with time taken by the ROs and
         appellate authorities




165 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    e) Evolution of Land Governance in West Bengal

To understand the land governance in modern times in the state of West Bengal it is necessary
to trace the history of the land tenure system in this part of the country.

During Hindu period extending up to the end of the 12th century land came to be looked upon as
a common property like air, water and light. The person, who cleared the jungle to cultivate the
land, became the owner of the land. This is the concept of the ownership of land-peasant
proprietorship during that period, as we learn from Manu’s Sanhita, The Monarch’s claim over a
share of the produce of the landrestedon the fact that he provided protection to the enjoyment of
the Land. Two persons were thus interested in land and its produce -- the king and the tiller of
the soil. Intermediate interests or sub-letting was unknown during the Hindu period. Sub-
letting of land began only when the actual occupant of the land either out of necessity or
indolence started employing hired men for cultivation. However, the concept of creation of
tenancy for cultivation of land was alien to the Hindu sages or shastrakars who were the laws-
givers at that time.

The indigenous system of land-law, more socio-political than legal came into a severe conflict in
the beginning of the 13th Century with the Islamic jurisprudence brought in by the Muslim
conquers who started with the proposition that upon conquest all individual ownership came to
an end, and all land stood vested in the conqueror. Accordingly, the conqueror distributed the
lands among soldiers- Jagirdars. The land which could not thus be distributed was given to
Muslims, the believers and the Hindus, the Kafers or non-believers. The rent that was collected
from the Muslims was much lower than that collected from the Hindus.

Thus the Muslim system completely reversed the principle underlying the land system of the
Hindu period. However, the Muslim rulers on practical consideration seldom interfered with the
conflicts between the Jagirdars and their sub- lessees, or the cultivating raiyats, the peasant
proprietor with the result the old system of cultivation and occupation of land continued as
before at the ground level.

The great Mughal Emperor Akbar wanted to bring back the old Hindu system. His finance
Minister Todarmal introduced a system of assessing a fixed sum as rent per bigha on actual
measurement by abolishing the distinction between the low rate of rent at which the Muslims
were paying and high rate of rent at which the Hindus were paying. He also introduced the
system of collecting rent directly from the cultivating tenants ignoring the Jagirdars. However,
Todarmal’s system of assessment of rent on actual measurement occupied by a tenant could not
be introduced in full in Bengal Subaha and the land revenue system continued as before till it
was systemized by Murshid Kuli Khan who was sent by Arungazeb to Bengal Subha first as the
Finance Minister of the Subhadar and later promoted as the Subhadar of Bengal.

It was Murshid Kuli Khan, not Cornwallis, contrary toa common belief, who was the founder of
the Zemindary system of Bengal; He largely replaced the Monnsabdars and Jagirdars many of
whom were up country Muslims having no vested interests in their estates in Bengal. He
appointed a new set of Zemindars, most of whom were Hindus. He also appointed many Bengali
Hindus in the high offices ofrevenue administration.

When East India Company obtained the Dewani (revenue administration) of Bengal, Behar and
Orissa it inherited the structure of land revenue administration introduced by Murshid Kuli
khan. Initially the company did not interfere with the existing system. But land revenue being
the principal source of income the company went on putting pressure for collection of more
revenue. Collection of revenue in addition to what was being collected before put additional
burden on the cultivators and this burden was much more than they could bear. One of the main
causes of the great famine of 1176 BS (corresponding to 1770 Christian era) which came to the
known as “Chiyattarer Monwantar” is, in the language of W.W. Hunter in the Annals of Rural
166 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Bengal, “the brutal fleecing of the cultivators of land by the NayebDewanReja Khan” who was
entrusted by the company with collection of Revenue in Bengal. Nearly one- third of the total
population of Bengal was eliminated as a result of this famine.

The English received a rude shock which awoke them from slumber. The company sacked Reja
Khan and took upon itself the land revenue administration. Lands were settled with the
Zamindars for five years only. This is known as quinquennial settlement. After expiry of five
years this system was discontinued. The company introduced the system of settlement of land
on auction for one year only. Many old Zamindars having long experience of managing lands
and collecting revenue failed to succeed in the competitive bidding, had to bow out. The new
rich who made money in different trades with the company having no knowledge of managing a
zamendary took the place of the old Zamindars. Since the tenure was for one year only with no
guarantee of renewal the new Zamindars did not bother about the cultivators and the cultivation
of land. Their sole object was to make as much money as they could during their very short
tenure of zamindary.

When Cornwallis came to India as the Governor General he could realize the mischief caused by
the yearly settlement. In 1789, he settled lands with the Zamindars for 10 years. This is known as
decennial settlement. This 10-year settlement of land was converted into permanent settlement
by the Permanent Settlement Regulation I of 1793.

Permanent settlement gave the Zamindars proprietary rights on land. The Zamindars who were
hither to mere collectors of revenue became the proprietors of land, and the sovereign thus
parted with the ownership of land with the collectors of revenue. The only obligation of the
proprietor-Zamindar was to pay revenue before the sun-set of the last day of Chaitra, the last
month of the Bengali year. This is known as the Sun-Set law. The Zamindars paying revenue on
time enjoyed unchartered rights over not only the lands but also the lives of those who cultivated
the lands. The concept of peasant proprietorship surviving various onslaughts for more than two
millennia finally made way for the Zamindary proprietorship.

Although Cornwallis’ primary object of ensuring a stable yearly income to balan ce the
Company’s budget and creating a powerful but loyal class of landlords on whom the Company
could rely for the governance of this country were achieved, the permanent settlement was
proved to be an unmitigated disaster for Bengal. The Zamindars felt free to do whatever they
liked. Not only did they go on enhancing the rate of rent but invented various means for
extracting money from the cultivators in the form of what came to be known as “abwabs”. Since,
many of the estates permanently settled with the Zamindars were very big in size the Zamindars
could not manage their estate. They went on creating tenants under them for collection of rent.
This is how middleman between the landlords and the cultivators were created. The net result of
permanent settlement was that while the Zamindars and the middleman lived in luxury the
cultivators led a miserable life in abject poverty.

The Company’s attempt to provide a mechanism for resolution of disputes and conflict
management by way of employing patwari for every village and kanungo to supervise the work
of the patwaris did not succeed in protecting the tenants against the landlords due to absence of
a law, or a reliable document of land and tenancy thereon. It was only after the revolt of 1857
and the taking over of the governance of this country by the British Crown a mechanism for
resolution of disputes and conflict management was sought to be provided in the Rent Act of
1859. As a matter of fact during the period between the death of Murshidkuli Khan and gradual
weakening of Mughal administration and the coming into force of the Act of 1859 the landlord-
tenant relationship was in a nebulous condition. However, it is a landmark legislation aimed at
protecting the rights of hereditary raiyats and resident raiyats and of occupancy of land and
curbing the rights of the Zamindars to increase rent at will. But the mechanism was rendered
ineffective by the manipulative tactics adopted by the Zamindars.

167 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The Bengal tenancy Act (BT Act) came into force in 1885. Since th e Zamindars’ lobby was much
more powerful than some of the leaders who took up the cause of cultivating raiyats and
organized a movement urging the government to incorporate in the Act some measures which
would make their rights more secure. The Act did not contain anything which would mitigate
the hardship of the cultivating tenants. Hence, the Act laid more emphasis on systematizing the
land tenure system than providing relief to them. This Act aimed at providing a tangible and
more precise law on land. It divided those who lived off land into two categories: - landlords and
tenants. A landlord was defined as a person including the government under whom a tenant
held land. The tenants were classified as:

    (a) Tenure-holders including under tenure-holders who acquired land from a proprietor
        (owner of an estate) or tenure holder a right to hold land for the purpose of collecting
        rent
    (b) Raiyats who acquired a right to hold land for the purpose of cultivating lands by
        themselves;
    (c) Under-raiyats- tenants holding lands under raiyats.

The Act also defined the incidents of tenures and occupancy right. An occupancy raiyat was not
to be ejected by his landlord except in execution of a decree of the Civil Court. The Act put
restriction on enhancement of rent, which could be made only in accordance with the provisions
of the Act.

The most significant contribution of this Act to systemize the land tenure system of Bengal is
that it provided for a detailed survey and settlement operation in respect of each and every piece
of land of every village. Accordingly cadastral map of each and every village was prepared with
each and every piece of land with classification according to use as well as ownership was
plotted therein. Each such piece of land came to be known as a plot. Each such plot was given a
separate number. On the basis of such map record of rights containing plot or plots of land with
the respective rights and interests therein of the landlord and tenant and other incidence
attached thereto was prepared. The record of rights is known as Khatian (loosely Parcha)
bearing a separate number in relation to a particular mouza or village (the distinction between
the two is very subtle) which also was assigned a separate jurisdiction list number in relation to
a police station or thana. This is how each and every piece of land of Bengal came to be known
as a plot or “dag” and given a distinct identification number. How a plot of land was possessed
and the capacity in which such possession was being exercised was also noted.

Armed with the BT Act and the record of rights the tenants sought to assert whatever rights the
Act gave them and resist violations of their rights by the landlords. Litigations were in spate. The
landlords by virtue of their more resources tilted the decisions in dispute before the executive
authorities as well as the Courts in their favour. The objects of the Act were thus frustrated to a
great extent. The Act had to be drastically amended is 1928 and 1938 to plug the loopholes
through which the landlords escaped.

Fazlul Haque ministry then ruling the Province of Bengal was very vocal in castigating the
Zamindary system. The British government came to realize that the diseases from which the
Zamindary system introduced by the permanent settlement suffered were incurable. It would be
interesting to know that after having introduced permanent settlement of law with the
Zamindars with a view to transplanting English aristocracy into the soil of Bengal the English
themselves did not do so elsewhere of India except in a few small pockets of Madras Presidency.
For other place their preference was for raitwary system in which the government settled lands
directly with the cultivating tenants and collected rent from them. In 1938 they set up a Land
Revenue Commission under the chairmanship of Sir Francis Floud. The commission in its
report submitted in 1940 recommended abolition of Zemindary by bringing the cultivators of
the land directly under the state. This report was referred to the Bengal Administrative Inquiry

168 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Committee which fully endorsed the recommendation of the Floud Commission. Since the days
of the British rule was coming to an end nothing was done on these reports.

The West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953

India became independent in 1947. In the debates of the Constituent Assembly on the right to
property, it was unanimously resolved that the cultivators of land should be conferred with the
rights to hold land directly under the state by abolishing the estates and eliminating the
intermediaries. The Constitution of India came into force on 26.01.1950. The articles 31, later
31A, 31B and 31C provided for acquisition of estates and all preexisting rights of the
intermediaries.

In pursuance to these Constitutional provisions the States passed legislation to abolish
Zamindary. In this State, the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act 1953 (EA Act) was passed. It
came into force on 12th February 1954.

The EA Act had two objects:

    a) To abolish Zamindary - that is all rent receiving interests;
    b) To impose a ceiling on land held by individuals. These objects were sought to be achieved
       by the scheme of the Act made out in sections 4,5 and 6 contained in chapter II dealing
       with the acquisition of estates and of the rights of intermediaries therein.

Notification was issued u/s 4 declaring that with effect from 15.04.1955 (the date of vesting) all
estates and the rights of every intermediary in each such estate shall vest in the State. 16.04.1956
is the date of vesting for the raiyats who came to be regarded as deemed intermediaries
subsequently. Section 5 lays down what precisely vested in the state on publication of
notification u/s 4. The combined effect of sections 4 and 5 is that all lands held by an
intermediary - be he a proprietor, or tenure-holder or under- tenure- holder or raiyat or under-
raiyat including all his pre-existing rights, title and interests vested in the state. Only the lands
held by a non-agricultural tenant and under-tenant remained beyond the purview of the Act.
Section 6 (I) provides that notwithstanding the vesting of all lands in the State, an intermediary
is entitled to retain 25 acres of agricultural land and 15 acres of non- agricultural land (20 acres
together with homestead land). No ceiling was imposed on other kinds of land. Section 6 (2)
says that an intermediary who is entitled to retain possession of land u/s 6(I) shall hold such
land directly under the state as a tenant. This is how all those who lived off land came on the
same platform as a tenant under the State no matter what was his status previously.

To give effect to the scheme and carry out the purposes of the EA Act as discussed above it was
necessary to get the possession of land and all incidences attached thereto obtaining on the
relevant date of vesting -15.04.1955 or 16.04.1956, as applicable. Provisions were made under
chapter V of the Act for preparation of records of rights and revision of record of rights prepared
previously under the BT Act. Field verifications were made, the changes noted down and the
records were draft published inviting objections thereto from the interested persons. After
disposal of objections the records were finally framed and published. In the process the disputes
between the tenants and the landlords and between tenants lying undecided during the period
between preparation of records under the BT Act and revision thereof under the EA Act got
resolved. In the final records the interests of all intermediaries were eliminated. The state in
each record was the landlord and the person holding the land was shown as tenant.

The West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955

As a follow-up of the EA Act by a comprehensive measure of land reforms so as to remodel the
system of land tenure, the West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955 (LR Act) was passed. It came
into force on 30.03.1956. According to the present definition of a raiyat under the Act whoever

169 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
holds land for any purpose whatsoever is a raiyat and land as defined in the Act means land of
every description.

Chapter II deals with the rights and obligations of the raiyat. His right is heritable and
transferable. But he has no right to sub-soil, quarry sand or to dig or use earth or clay for the
manufacture of bricks or tiles. He is prohibited from letting out his land. By an amendment of
the Act in 2012, some relaxation has been provided. He can now lease out land for certain
specific purposes. A raiyat cannot also change the area, character or use of his land except on
permission from the appropriate authority. He can transfer land only by a registered
instrument, and partition of land among co-sharers shall have to be made either by a registered
instrument or a decree or order of a court.

Chapter IIA puts restrictions on the model of the BT Act on alienation of land by a Scheduled
Tribe, who can transfer his land in the manner laid down in section 14C. Sale of land to a non-
tribal can be made only with the previous permission in writing of the appropriate authority.
Penalties have been provided for violation of the prohibitory provisions.

Chapter IIB imposes ceiling on land held by a raiyat. Originally LR Act dealing with only
agricultural land did not impose any new ceiling. The ceilings prescribed under the EA Act
continued. Ceiling under the EA Act was imposed on the land held by an individual raiyat. A
family consisting of many raiyats was thus entitled to retain lawfully considerable amount of
land in aggregate. Again there was no ceiling on land comprised in tank-fisheries, orchards, and
lands held by religious and charitable institutions. Thus, there was scope for making more lands
available for distribution among landless people. On the basis of the results of examination of
ceiling laws of different states made by the Planning Commission, it was decided in a Chief
Ministers’ Conference at the beginning of seventies that a new ceiling taking a “family” as aunit
as against “an individual” should be imposed. Accordingly, the LR Act was amended in 1971 and
chapter IIB was inserted.

A comprehensive definition of “family” has been provided. Land has been classified as in
irrigated area and non-irrigated area. A concept of “standard hectare” meaning 1.0 hectare of
land in irrigated area is equal to 1.40 hectare of land in non-irrigated area has been introduced.
Ceiling area has to be determined according to the size of a family as well as the fact whether the
land held by a family is in irrigated area or non-irrigated area. For a one-member family the
ceiling area is 2.50 standard hectares, corresponding to 6.18 acres in irrigated area and 8.65
acres in non-irrigated area. For two to five-member families the ceiling area is 5.0 standard
hectares. For each member in excess of five, the ceiling area shall be increased by 0.50 hectare
subject to a maximum of 7 standard hectares corresponding to 17.35 acres in irrigated area and
24.20 acres in non-irrigated area.

The Act suffered two drastic amendments in 1981 and 1986. Many revolutionary changes were
brought in the Act. The notable changes are:

The definition of “land” underwent a sea-change. Previously land under the LR Act meant only
agricultural land including homestead. Under the amended definition land means land of every
description. All that we see around is land. Lands held by non-agricultural tenants and under-
tenants under the Non-Agricultural Tenancy Act 1949, remained unaffected by the ceiling
provisions under the EA Act and LR Act. Under the amended Act all lands held by such tenants
and all their rights therein vested in the state with effect from 09.09.1980. Such tenants are now
to be deemed as raiyats under the LR Act and ceiling provisions of the Act will apply on the
lands held by them.

Ceiling provisions have been extended to all kinds of land irrespective of their use and the
status, nature and character of the raiyats who hold the lands. No land therefore has been kept


170 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
beyond the ceiling provisions - tank-fisheries, orchards, lands held by religious and charitable
institutions – all have come within the fold of the ceiling provisions.

Chapter III deals with the rights and obligations of Bargadars. A bargadar is a person who
cultivates the land of another person on condition of paying a share of the produce. His right of
cultivation is heritable but not transferable. The shares of the produce and the manner in which
such share shall be tendered have been laid down in the Act in detail. Termination of cultivation
of land by a bargadar can be made only in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Act,
with the result eviction of a bargadar is well-nigh impossible. Revenue Officers at the field level
have been armed with ample powers to decide the disputes between a bargadar and the owner
of the land. Jurisdiction of the Civil Court has been ousted. The provision of the Act have been
so modeled as to make it almost impossible for the owner of the land to get back his land once
he has inducted a bargadar to cultivate his land. A bargadar’s right of cultivation is thus fully
secure.

A provision exists in the Act to constitute a State or Regional Land Corporation to advance funds
to a bargadar to enable to purchase land that he cultivates when the owner of such land intends
to sell the land. No step however, has been taken by the government to implement this
provision. May be the political groups interested in keeping the bargadars at the existing state
for electoral gains do not want this provision of the Act to be implemented.

Chapter IV contains provisions for determination and payment of revenue to the Government
of West Bengal, the landlord of all the lands of the state by the tenants – the raiyats. This
chapter has a cheqered history. Under the EA Act, the state acquired the rent receiving interests
of the intermediaries against compensation. Detailed provisions were made in Act regarding
assessment and payment of compensation. It was therefore, necessary to obtain first what was
the amount that an intermediary was actually collecting as rent from his tenants as on the date
of vesting with effect from which his rent receiving interests vested in the state. Keeping this
purpose of the Act in view when the land records were revised under the EA Act the rent that
was actually being paid by the tenants to their immediate landlords were noted in the records.
The Act however, provided for determination of revenue during revisional settlement operation
in respect of only the lands for which no rent was paid (niskar land or rent free land) or rent was
paid in kind. The basis of such determination – the average yield per acre of the class of land
concerned prevailing in the vicinity – was provided in the Act. The Act also provided for
determination of rent for different classes of land held by tea-gardens.

When the LR Act with chapter IV containing provisions for determination of revenue came into
force on 30 March 1956, no determination was made till 14.04.1981 and revenue was being
collected on the basis of the rent that was recorded in land records revised under the EA Act in
the fifties. Obviously the rate was very low rupees 3/4 per acre. If we trace the history of why the
rate of rent in Bengal was low compared to that prevailing elsewhere in the country when India
became free we got an interesting story which establishes that nothing in this world is an
unmixed evil. Since Bengal was a permanently settled area it was the Zamindar’s prerogative as
a proprietor of land to induct tenant thereon at a rent fixed by him. It was again his prerogative
to enhance the rate of rent. The government did not gain thereby because the government could
not claim anything more than the revenue at which the estate was settled. The government could
not lest curb the tendency of indiscriminate enhancement of rent as they did by the Rent Act
1859 and the BT Act of 1885. But in raiyotary areas, since the government settled the lands
directly with the tenants at rent fixed by the government it was open to the government to
enhance the rate of rent when the government needed more money and land revenue remained
principal source of income of the government. Hence the government freely enhanced the rate
of rent. This is how the rate of rent soared in raiyotary area whereas in Bengal the average rate
of rent remained low because some Zamindars were more sensible than others and considered


171 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
tenant’s ability to pay, but the revenue officials and tahasildars of raiyotary areas mechanically
collected rent at enhanced rate.

From 15.04.1979 the government exempted the raiyats owning land up to 6 acres from paying
revenue. Only the raiyats owning more than 6 acres of land were to pay the revenue, and the
number of such raiyats after implementation of two ceiling laws is not great in this state. This
can be safely said that only a few persons in this state pay land revenue.

Exemptions to small land owners gave rise to a practical problem. The Rent Act of 1859gave
occupancy rights to cultivating tenants and the BT Act of 1885 systematized the rights of such
tenants on land. In a dispute between the landlord and the tenant the stock plea of the landlord
was that the contestant was not his tenant. Since the tenant was not armed with a patta (a
document of creation of tenancy) which the landlord seldom granted in clear violation of of legal
provisions the tenant was at a serious disadvantage to prove his tenancy. The civil courts in
course of time and in acknowledgement of the hapless condition of the tenants to contest the
denial by the landlords of the creation of tenancy tilted in favor of the tenants and accepted rent
receipts as a proof of tenancy. This is how rent receipts came to be regarded as a valuable
document to the tenants.

As a result of exemption the tenants holding lands up to 6 acres were not to pay revenue and so
not to get any receipt. They apprehended that exemption of revenue which was a paltry sum in
any case was going to rob them of the valuable document which receipt to them is. The
government took notice of this apprehension and provided in the Act that the tenant would pay
different kinds of cess as before and get receipts and such receipts would be as good as the
revenue receipts.

The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue Act, 1979 with comprehensive provisions for
determination and payment of revenue came into force with effect from 14.04.1981. This
independent Act dealing with revenue matters omitted chapter IV of the LR Act as a logical
corollary. But the Act met a road block in the Calcutta High Court and was never implemented.

In 2000, the LR Act was amended and chapter IV was reintroduced by repealing the Land
Holding Revenue Act 1979, and the amended provisions were given retrospective effect from
14.04.1981. In 2003 and 2005 chapter IV of the LR Act was again amended. The latest table of
the rates at which land revenue is to be paid with effect from 17.12.2005 was provided by the
amendment of LR Act in 2005.

Meanwhile, during the long period between the fifties of the last century when records revised
under the EA Act recorded the rent the tenants were actually paying to the landlords and the
end of 2005 land use pattern has undergone a sea-change. The traditional classification of land
as agricultural land and non-agricultural land no longer holds good. There have been a lot much
stratification under both the heads. Land has been put to various forms of commercial and
industrial uses, as will be evident from the table containing categories of land and the rates at
which revenue is to be paid, provided in the Act. Obviously, the rates vary between Rs. 20/- per
acre and Rs. 17,500/- per acre. Main features of the table are the following:

Determination of the rates at which revenue has to be paid is not left with any official of the
government. The Act has not only laid down the rates at which revenue has to be paid but also
categorized the lands to which such rates apply. What is left is only simple arithmetical
calculation. Hence, manipulation at the lower level has thus been minimized, if not fully
eliminated.

A clear distinction has been made between the lands within municipal areas and lands in non-
municipal areas. Although for lands used for the purpose of agriculture in both the areas is the

172 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
same – Rs. 20/- per acre (to be paid by the raiyats holding more than 6 acres of land), for other
categories of land in municipal areas the rates are much higher than the rates of similar
categories of land in non-municipal areas.

A new concept of “activities allied to agriculture” meaning fisheries, poultries, piggeries,
potteries, floriculture, horticulture, sericulture, dairies, livestock breeding and other land based
bio-mass production activities – have been introduced and a slightly higher rate of Rs. 30/- per
acre has been fixed. For land used as homestead and non-agriculture purposes other than
commercial and industrial purposes double the rate of agricultural land has been fixed.

Another new concept on the principle of the ability to pay has been introduced. For the same
category of land if it is held by an individual or a cooperative society the rate is much lower than
the rate if such land is held by a company. While for land used as homestead or for non-
agricultural purposes an individual will pay at Rs. 40/- per acre, a company will have to pay at
Rs 150/- per acre, and for land used for brackish water fisheries the individual or a cooperative
society will pay at Rs. 200/- per acre but a company will have to pay at Rs. 400/- per acre, and if
land is used for multi-storied building by a cooperative society the rate is Rs. 600/- per acre,
while for the same land a company will have to pay at Rs. 800/- per acre.

Land in municipal areas has been categorized under five heads – categories A to E, according to
the size of the population, plus a special category such as land in Municipal Corporation has
been made. While the rate at which revenue is to be paid for land in category E municipal area is
the lowest it has graduated upwards and for land within a Municipal Corporation area the rate is
the highest.

It is clear from the provisions as to revenue contained in chapter IV that a modern approach has
been adopted in determining the rates of revenue for various categories of land. The approach is
fairly comprehensive and the principle of equity according to gains a raiyat as defined in the Act
including an individual as well as a company makes for putting the land to different uses has
been followed.

The revenue for which provisions have been made in chapter IV discussed above is to be paid by
the tenants who own lands and pay revenue to the government as landlord because the
government acquired the rent receiving interests of the landlords of such tenants. For the lands
owned by the government, the approach is absolutely different. When land is settled for a non-
agricultural purposes now the rent has to be assessed and at what rate premium or salami is to
be charged, when sairati interests such as hats, bazars, fisheries etc., are settled what is the
procedure to be followed and what should be the rate of rent for such settlement – have all been
extensively dealt with in the West Bengal Land and Land Reforms Manual, 1991, under
respective chapters.

Chapter V provides for consolidation of plots of land and formation of cooperative farming
societies. These are post reform measures for improvement of agriculture.

After implementation of the ceiling provisions under the EA Act and LR Act and distribution of
surplus lands that came into state coffer land-holding pattern in the state has undergone a
revolutionary change, Cultivating raiyats holding 10 acres or above land now constitute less
than 10 percent of the total raiyats. They also do not hold their lands in compact blocks. The
small and marginal farmers constitute the bulk of the raiyati population. Inheritance, partition,
exchange etc., result in division f the plots of land. The problem of a small state like West Bengal
with adverse land man ratio is the existence of huge number of small plots of land. This is not
conducive to modern cultivation with even minimum use of mechanical implements. Hence,
consolidation of such plots of land, formation of cooperative farming societies and cooperative


173 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
common service societies are a must and this is what the provisions contained in chapter V aim
at.

Unfortunately, the peasants wings of different political parties of the state who are out in the
their slogans to lay down their lives for the good of the peasants and in spite of the state having
been ruled for more than 30 years by a left leaning government, have shown scant interest in
getting the post reform measures contained in chapter V implemented. They are unanimous, a
rare thing, on one point that the task of making the raiyats concerned convince the good of
consolidation of plots vial the route of land acquisition by the state and formation of cooperative
societies resulting in the vesting of lands of the members in the societies is much more difficult
than the taking away of lands from Ram for giving the same to Shyam or Rahim by operation of
laws through paper work. Breaking away from the tradition to embrace a new path is sure to
disturb the present equilibrium in rural society. The peasant leaders not bold enough to face
such disturbance have preferred maintenance of subsistence farming and the status quo in rural
society.

Chapter VI deals with the principles of the distribution of lands at the disposal of the state
government. For settlement of lands by the government detailed provisions have been made in
Rule 20A of the West Bengal Land Reforms Rules, 1965 as well as the West Bengal Land and
Land Reforms Manual of 1991. Bulk of the land at the disposal of the state government is
accounted for by the vested lands under the EA Act and the LR Act. The amount of land which
always remained with the government as khasmahal land which was not settled with any tenant
is insignificant.

The conditions of the settlement of agricultural land and homestead land are that – no premium
shall be charged, the settlees must be residents of the locality where the land is situated, they
must be landless or hold less than 0.4047 hectare of land (one acre), the settlees who are
popularly known as patta-holders who will be given agricultural land must bring the land under
personal cultivation, and those having no homestead who will be given such land must construct
a dwelling house thereon. In selecting the beneficiaries preference shall be given to persons from
Scheduled Tribes or Scheduled Castes who form themselves into a cooperative society. However,
no land shall be given to a person, if he or any member of his family is engaged in any business,
trade, undertaking, manufacture, calling service or industrial occupation. The target group
therefore, is landless or homeless persons who have no other means to live on or no house to
reside in. The right given to such settlees is heritable but not transferable except by way of
mortgage by deposit of title deed with a Scheduled Bank, or a cooperative society or a
government corporation.

Provisions have also been made for settlement of land with a local body or a statutory body or
any other person for educational or research institution or industry. The terms and conditions
for such settlement have been made in Rule 20A of the LR Rules 1965 and LR Manual 1991.

Chapter VII deals with maintenance of the records of rights. Land records should be kept up-
to-date by incorporating the changes taking place as a result of transfer or inheritance, partition,
exchange, settlement of lands by the government, determination of revenue etc.

Chapter VIIA provides for preparation or revision of records of rights. In spite of the
provisions contained in chapter VII land records were not kept up-to-date. Changes taking place
since the revision of records in the latter half of fifties under the EA Act were not incorporated.
By the middle of seventies the records became hopelessly outdated. A full-scale operation for
revising the record of rights had to be taken up from 1975 in respect of all the mouzas of the
state in accordance with the provisions contained in chapter VIIA. This revisional operation has
almost been completed and records thus prepared have been computerized except in respect of
mouzas which have become fully urbanized and congested. The distinctive feature of the new
174 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
records is that in a mouzaone raiyat is having only one khatian (record of right) in his name, in
which all his lands situated in the mouza stand recorded on the principle of one-man-one
khatian in a mouza. This is the latest record of the state, whether the changes continuously
occurring are being regularly incorporated in the records to keep them up-to-date have to be
verified on the field. However, from the Order No. 644 – LR/1A dated 06.02.2009 with the
heading “Simplified Procedure of Mutation” published in the Kolkata Gazette, Extraordinary
dated 06.02.2009 it is clear that – “there are a considerable number of mutation cases lying
pending for disposal . . . .”. Even this simplified procedure is not as simple as its heading
suggests. Application is to be made in prescribed proforma with application fee and process fee
with as many as four photocopies of documents and a declaration in the prescribed form with a
court fee stamp of Rs. 10/-, two envelopes each with postage stamp of Rs. 5/-. A time limit of 60
days, if no field enquiry is required and 120 days if field enquiry is required, has been prescribed
for disposal of the mutation cases. All these requirements of the simplified procedure are quite
frightening to the farmers who can very well go on possessing lands without getting their names
mutated in the record of rights. The government will suffer by maintaining outdated records and
may have to go in for another revisional operation which is nothing but a mass mutation. The
simplified procedure shows the government in a very defensive mould. More bold steps are
needed to deal with the practical problem. There is absolutely no reason to charge application
fee, process fees, court fees, postage stamp. Overwhelming majority of people requiring
mutation are not companies or realtors. They are the poor farmers. Government has forgotten
that it is the legal obligation cast upon the government under section 50 to keep the records
updated. Government cannot shift the obligation to others and pave the way for another
operation for mass mutation by incurring a huge expenditure. It would not be out of place to
point out here that before abolition of zamindary, mutation of the names of new tenants in the
register of Zamindars was an oppressive tool. Not only did the Zamindars charge a hefty sum as
mutation fee they also harassed the tenants in various ways. It was a common demand of the
tenants in all their peasant movements that the procedure for ‘namkharij’ (mutation) and the
charging of fee should be done away with. The government should have kept in mind this history
before issuing an order like this.

Chapter VIII deals with management of lands. All lands to which the LR Act applies, and all
lands belonging to the state including the ceiling surplus lands under the EA Act and LR Act –
be managed in the manner prescribed under the rules made under LR Act and contained in the
WBLR Manual, 1991 by the Collector of the district under whose jurisdiction the lands are
situated.

Public land in broad sense means lands held by different departments of both the Central and
State Governments, such as the Railways, the Defence, the Irrigation Department, Public Works
Department, the Forests Department etc. The land held by the West Bengal Industrial
Infrastructure Development Corporation and the government undertakings is also public land.
However, lands held by these departments were generally acquired under different land
acquisition acts on the requisition of the respective department, to be used for specific purposes
and handed over to them to use the land for the purpose for which such lands were acquired.
Such lands are managed by the departments according to the policies adopted by them.

However, what by “public land” is specifically meant in this state is the land referred to under
chapter VIII – land which is at the disposal of the state government. The principles of
distribution of such lands have been dealt with under section 49 of the LR act read with Rule
20A of the WBLR Rules 1965 and the WBLR Manual 1991.

The WBLR Act is thus a comprehensive legislation of landlord-tenant relationship covering each
and every aspect of land related matters.


175 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The hierarchical structure for administration of the Act is this. The Land & Land Reforms
Department of the Government of West Bengal is the administrative department of the Act. The
Director of Land Records & Surveys having jurisdiction all over the state is in charge of making
village maps and preparing, revising and maintaining the records of rights. At the district level it
is the Collector and District Land & Land Reforms Officer who has been given the powers of a
Collector. At the Sub-divisional level there are Sub-divisional Land & Land Reforms Officers.
But the most important functionary is at the block level – Block Land & Land Reforms Officers.
The BLLROs are assisted by some Revenue Officers. At the village level there is a Revenue
Inspector for each Gram Panchayat. It is the BLLRO who is the custodian of records of the
villages within his block. Most of the actions taken under this Act originate from his office.

However, the remedies against the actions of the Revenue Officers lying at the lowest level of the
hierarchical structure are slightly different. When the Act does not provide for any specific
appellate authority, appeals should be made before the District Land & Land Reforms Officer.
Against the order of the appellate authority the aggrieved party may move the West Bengal Land
Reforms and Tenancy Tribunal created under an Act of 1997 carrying the same name. Against
the order of the Tribunal appeal can be preferred before a Division Bench of the High Court
exercising writ jurisdiction Under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India. Nobody can
approach the High Court as a Court of the first instance on a matter coming within a specified
Act such as West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955.



    f) Suggestion for Monitoring

Considering the history of land governance in West Bengal and present situation in the State
and taking into account the role of the government to ensure redistributive justice, the Expert
Investigators and the Panelists have prepared the documents with their wisdom, experience and
expertise in the respective fields. Based on the findings from the exercise, the panels of experts
have made specific recommendations.

Now the government may proactively consider implementing the recommendations of the
framework after validation of the documents. In this regard the concerned department is Land
and Land Reforms, which will lead the team including the departments like Urban Development
and Panchayat and Rural Development, Government of West Bengal. Therefore there is a need
to set up a High Level Committee at the state comprising 5 – 9 members that would be decided
by the Government of West Bengal. Similarly at the district level and block level there will be the
committees in order to facilitate the implementation and monitoring the Land Governance
Assessment Framework. Since land is having pivotal role in the growth of economy of the
country therefore the LGAF will enable the government to ensuring land use in an appropriate
way and efficient manner.

The committees may decide on the frequency to meet at their own level for analyzing all the
issues related to land governance and take appropriate measures as described in the LGAF
documents once it is validated and being in action.



    g) Best Practices

   Vesting of ceiling surplus land under the provisions of reforms Acts is 13.14 lakh acres in
    West Bengal (2011) and the corresponding national figure is 69.99 lakh acres comprising all
    states


176 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
   The state has distributed ceiling surplus land among the landless and land-poor giving
    preference to those who belong to the Scheduled Tribe and Scheduled Caste. (So far [ Aug
    2013 ] 31,36,297 landless and near landless persons have been given land by way of
    distributive land reforms thereby creating as many new tenures), land involved is 10.44 lakh
    acres.
   Allocation of homestead plot to absolute landless and homeless through legislation and
    government schemes giving preference to women, ST and SC. (3,26,653 persons have been
    given land with raiyati status creating equivalent number of tenures.)
   Government has taken initiative to issue patta (deed of title) in the name of women or joint
    patta (both in the name of wife and husband) during distribution of homestead plot through
    scheme (more than 90% in the name of women either jointly or as single during the last
    three years in respect of implementation of NGNB);
   The government in recent times has played proactive role in giving land tenure to the forest
    dwellers. 30,879 individual and 312 Community tenures were created as a result of
    implementation of the Forest Rights Act, 2006.
   The state has robust mechanism to secure tenure of sharecroppers (a study [2003] made by
    the State Institute of Panchayats and Rural Development found that about 72% of share-
    croppers had a sense of enhanced security after their names were recorded in the land
    records.)
   There are around 4000 Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMC) formed and
    functioning under Executive Order (1988) protecting nearly 500,000 hectares of degraded
    forest areas of the State; these committees are traditionally strong in the State;
   The state has given monopoly rights of collection of NTFP like Sal Seeds and Kendu Leaves,
    from the forest to the Large Sized Multipurpose Cooperative Societies (LAMPS) through
    West Bengal Tribal Development Cooperative Corporation (WBTDCC).
   State government took the initiative of introducing the Kolkata Urban Services for the Poor
    (KUSP), a multi-sector urban reforms programme by creating Change Management Unit
    (CMU) with DFID funding. CMU initiated DDP preparation for 40 ULBs under KUSP in
    July 2005. Subsequently, this programme was rolled out to 127 Municipalities in the state of
    West Bengal. All the 127 municipal bodies/Corporations have prepared 1st generation Draft
    Development Plan (DDP) following participatory process.
   The present government has a clear procedure of transfer of land to private investors which
    is laid down in the guideline and available in public domain.
   Base value of property determined acroos the state, updates happen based on field
    verification. Valuation rolls are publicly accessible (www.wbregistration.gov.in) and transfer
    of properties are mostly happening as per market value.
   Computerization of records is almost done in the state; all information regarding land
    records, maps etc. are available through website or through OTC services paying very
    minimal charges.
   A Central Valuation Board was set up to overcome the deficiency of under valuation of
    properties in the municipal areas in 1979 through an Act. The process of property valuation
    is rational and uniform.
   All 239 registration offices in the State have been fully computerized. As a result there has
    been a clear and transparent process in determination of market value for property through
    CORD (Computerisation of Registration of Documents) software.
   In the state Land Reform Tenancy Tribunal (LRTT) is in operation and quick disposal of
    conflicts are possible;

   As per legislation, institutional mandates relating to administration of land is very clear in
    the State;
   The role and function of different layers of L&LR Department is clearly defined; there is no
    scope of overlapping.

177 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
VIII.   Conclusion

    The LGAF has provided an exhaustive diagnostic assessment of the most relevant land
    governance issues in West Bengal. A key characteristic of the LGAF is that it is broad based and
    multidisciplinary, involving a diversity of themes and it has mobilised expertise to obtain inputs.
    LGAF tool has provided a synoptic view of land governance in West Bengal that cuts across
    sectors, institutions and stakeholders. The LGAF methodology has enabled a highly
    participatory implementation that raised awareness of the importance of using indicators to
    diagnose and track progress in land governance in the future. The government buy-in was
    considered to be very important and all efforts were made to maintain very close interface with
    the State Nodal Officer designated by the government for LGAF. This was critical to ensure that
    the government agrees with and owns the outcomes from the exercise and understands about its
    necessity as a tool for improving land governance, a key component of transparent, accountable
    and good governance as a whole. The standardised methodology of LGAF emphasised on
    bringing a host of legitimate local experts to head the panels as expert investigators and enabled
    to arrive at a consensual assessment with the help of panellists from different distinguished
    fields. The core approach of LGAF exercise in West Bengal was to ensure according ratings of
    the dimensions through panel of experts who brought together a variety of user perspectives and
    substantive expertise need to provide a meaningful rating. This tool has helped to identify areas
    where more in-depth study is needed to facilitate the process of taking important policy
    decisions and complementary areas of policy that need to be addressed. The tool was also useful
    to identify certain gaps in policy and the way institutions function or responsibilities between
    institutions as are assigned in West Bengal.

    The findings from this study reiterated that land sector in West Bengal is governed by a
    comprehensive legal framework that has been progressively updated and requires further
    updating to improve land governance and come to terms with development realities.

    The study has also clearly demonstrated that there is a lack of systematic approach to land use
    planning and management of public land in spite of having very well-knit legislations in this
    regard. Comprehensive and integrated approaches to land use planning incorporating both rural
    and urban lands are needed for the state to govern land system better. This is an area that
    requires urgent attention considering that there are diverse land uses being practiced in both
    rural and urban areas and there are also many and diverse interest holders. For urban land there
    is a good practice of land use planning exercises but plans are not regularly updated and
    provision of public input should be made. In addition, the plans are not enforced, monitored
    and controlled due to lack of procedures and capacity (financial and human).

    The government needs to review the functional responsibilities of different agencies and specify
    roles and responsibilities both at State and district level for different categories of land.
    The study has also shown that there is inadequate capacity (financial, human) at land registry
    establishments down the line resulting in gap in information management and service delivery.

    The land sector requires systematic monitoring and evaluation of the framework and procedures
    so that developments in the land sector can be monitored as part of the state development
    system. This will require setting up of system and enhanced capacity at state and district level to
    ensure that there is continuous and effective monitoring and reporting in the land sector.

    The study reveals that the validated consensus ranking of the LGAF 116 dimensions have
    considerable strengths in land governance in West Bengal as 38 (32.48%) and 35 (29.91%) of
    the dimension A and B respectively while 25 (22.22%) and 18 (15.38%) were ranked C and D
    178 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
  respectively. Land governance in terms of nearly all the thematic areas is relatively strong. The
  order of weakness based on the percentage of dimensions scoring C and D are: Panel 2, Panel 3,
  panel 4 & Panel 6.

  The areas requiring further work in land governance in West Bengal include the following:

           There is need to engage the key government departments, Land & Land Reform
            Department, Urban Development Department, Development and Planning Department,
            Finance Department, Environment Department and to discuss the LGAF objectives,
            outcomes and indicators so that they can be systematically adopted and used in a
            coordinated manner;
           There is need for an assessment on how to integrate the LGAF into national monitoring
            and reporting, environmental monitoring or through regular surveys of such as
            integrated survey;
           The LGAF needs to have set time frame to be undertaken every five years and could be
            related to major policy reviews in the country.

  Among the benefits, LGAF has enabled identification of good practices systematically in several
  land governance areas in West Bengal. As this tool has already been used in several countries, a
  good exposure to some of the better practices across countries identified during LGAF
  implementation are available for discussion with the experts for developing greater
  understanding in land governance. In India six states have taken up LGAF with the support
  from World Bank simultaneously under the aegis of the Department of Land resources,
  Government of India and during the process several interactions with other states in review
  meetings have helped the state coordinator for widening the look and approach to land
  governance. LGAF has pointed to a number of areas that change relatively quickly and in which
  designing quantitative indicators to monitor land governance on a more regular basis will be
  useful. Lastly it would be useful to share experiences and collaborate across the states in India to
  effectively address some of the challenges in trying to improve land governance in the country.



IX.       Overall Score Card

                                                                                                          Score
      P   LGI    dim                       Panel, Indicator and dimensions
                                                                                                      A   B   C   D
      1                PANEL I: LAND TENURE RECOGNITION
                       Recognition of a continuum of rights: the law recognizes a range
                       of rights held by individuals (incl. Secondary rights of tenants.
      1      1    0    Sharecroppers, women etc.)
      1      1    1a   Individuals' rural land tenure rights are legally recognized
      1      1    1b   Individuals' rural land tenure rights are protected in practice
      1      1     2   Customary tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in practice
                       Indigenous rights to land and forest are legally recognized and protected in
      1      1     3   practice.
      1      1     4   Urban land tenure rights are legally recognized and protected.
      1      2    0    Respect for and enforcement of rights
      1      2     1   Accessible opportunities for tenure individualization exist.
      1      2     2   Individual land in rural areas is formally registered and mapped.
      1      2     3   Individual land in urban areas is formally registered and mapped.


  179 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                                                                                         Score
 P   LGI    dim                        Panel, Indicator and dimensions
                                                                                                     A   B   C   D
 1      2     4    The number of illegal land sales is low.
 1      2     5    The number of illegal lease transactions is low.
                   Women's rights by law are registered and recognized in practice in both
 1      2     6    urban and rural areas.
                   Women's property rights to land are equal to those by men both in law and
 1      2     7    in practice.
                   PANEL II: RIGHTS TO FOREST AND COMMON LANDS & RURAL LAND
 2                 USE REGULATIONS
 2      1     0    Rights to forest and common lands
                   Forests and common lands are clearly identified in law and responsibility for
 2      1      1   use is clearly assigned
 2      1     2    Rural group rights are formally recognized and can be enforced.
                   Even where ownership or trusteeship is legally with the state, arrangements
                   to ensure users' rights to key natural resources on land (incl. Fisheries) are
 2      1     3    legally recognized and protected in practice.
                   Multiple rights over the same common land and natural resources on these
 2      1     4    lands can legally coexist.
                   Multiple rights over the same plot of land and natural resources on these
 2      1     5    lands can legally coexist (e.g. tree rights).
                   Multiple rights over land and mining/ other sub-soil resources located in the
 2      1     6    same plot can legally coexist.
 2      1     7    Accessible opportunities exist for registration and mapping of group rights.
 2      1     8    Boundary demarcation of communal land
 2     2      0    Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
 2      2      1   Restrictions regarding rural land use are enforced.
 2      2     2    Restrictions regarding rural land transferability serve public purpose.
                   Rural land use plans and changes in these plans (incl rezoning) are based on
 2      2     3    clear process for public input and burden sharing
                   Rural land use changes to the assigned land use in a timely manner and into
 2      2     4    the destined use.
                   There is a clear public process for rezoning of land use classes that
 2      2     5    safeguards existing rights.
                   Use plans for specific rural land classes (forest, pastures, wetlands, national
 2      2     6    parks etc.) Are in line with actual use.
                   PANEL III: URBAN LAND USE, PLANNING, AND DEVELOPMENT
                   Restrictions on rights: land rights are not conditional on
 3      1     0    adherence to unrealistic standards.
                   Restrictions regarding urban land ownershipand transferability effectively
 3      1      1   serve public purpose and are enforced.
                   Restrictions regarding urban land use serve public purpose and are enforced
 3      1     2    (including risk prone and protected areas).
                   Transparency of land use restrictions: changes in land use and management
                   regulations are made in a transparent fashion and provide significant
 3      2     0    benefits for society in general rather than just for specific groups.
                   There is a clear process for expansion of urban land and infrastructure
                   development that respects existing rights and information on land use
 3      2      1   change is public and easily accessible.
                   In urban areas, land use plans and changes in these plans are based on a
 3      2     2    clear public process and on input of all relevant stakeholders.
 3      2     3    Urban land use changes to the assigned land use in a timely manner.
                   Efficiency in the urban land use planning process: land use plans
 3     3      0    and regulations are justified, effectively implemented, do not

180 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                                                                                         Score
 P   LGI    dim                        Panel, Indicator and dimensions
                                                                                                     A   B   C   D
                   drive large parts of the population into informality, and are able
                   to cope with population growth.
                   A policy is in place and progress is being made to ensure delivery of low-cost
 3      3      1   housing and associated services to those in need.
                   Land use planning effectively guides urban spatial expansion in the largest
 3      3     2    city.
                   Land use planning effectively guides urban development in the four largest
 3      3     3    cities, excluding the largest city.
 3      3     4    Planning processes are able to cope with urban growth.
                   Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land uses:
 3     4      0    development permits are granted promptly and predictably.
                   Provisions in applications for building permits for residential dwellings are
 3      4      1   appropriate, affordable and effectively disseminated.
                   The process for obtaining a building permit for a residential dwelling is
 3      4     2    short.
 3     5      0    Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
 3      5      1   Formalization of urban residential housing is feasible and affordable.
                   In cities with high levels of informal tenure, a clear, well-documented
 3      5     2    process to increase tenure security, infrastructure and housing, exists.
                   A condominium regime provides for appropriate management of common
                   property (rules for common property for management of driveways, parking,
 3      5     3    gardens, stairways, etc.)
 4                 PANEL IV: PUBLIC LAND MANAGEMENT
                   Identification of public land and clear management: public land
                   ownership is clearly defined, effectively serves the public
                   purpose, is inventoried, under clear management
 4      1     0    responsibilities, and relevant information is publicly accessible
                   Public land ownership is clearly defined, serves the public interest and is
 4      1      1   managed at the appropriate level of government.
 4      1     2    There is a complete recording of publicly held land.
 4      1     3    The inventory of public land is accessible to the public.
                   The management responsibility for different types of public land is
 4      1     4    unambiguously assigned.
 4      1     5    Sufficient resources are available to fulfill land management responsibilities.
                   All essential information on public land allocations to private interests is
 4      1     6    accessible to the public.
                   Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition processes: the
                   state expropriates land only for overall public interest and this
 4     2      0    is done efficiently
 4      2      1   There is minimal transfer of public land to private interests.
 4      2     2    Acquired land is transferred to destined use in a timely manner.
                   The threat of land acquisition does not lead to pre-emptive action by private
 4      2     3    parties.
                   Transparency and fairness of expropriation procedures:
                   expropriation procedures are clear and transparent and fair
 4     3      0    compensation is paid expeditiously
                   Compensation is paid for the expropriation of all rights regardless of the
 4      3      1   registration status.
                   There is adequate compensation if land use change result in loss of rights or
 4      3     2    restriction on land use.
 4      3     3    Expropriated owners are compensated promptly.
 4      3     4    There are independent and accessible avenues for appeal against

181 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                                                                                       Score
 P   LGI    dim                       Panel, Indicator and dimensions
                                                                                                   A   B   C   D
                   expropriation.
 4      3     5    Timely decisions are made regarding complaints about expropriation.
                   PANEL V: TRANSPARENT PROCESS AND ECONOMIC BENEFIT OF
 5                 TRANSFER OF PUBLIC LAND TO PRIVATE USE
                   Transfer of public land to private use follows a clear,
                   transparent, and competitive process and payments are
                   collected and audited (with the exception of transfers to improve
 5      1     0    equity such as land distribution and land for social housing).
 5      1      1   Public land transactions are conducted in an open transparent manner.
 5      1     2    Payments for public leases are collected.
                   Public land is transacted at market prices (when not divested for equity
 5      1     3    purposes).
 5      1     4    The public captures benefits arising from changes in permitted land use.
 5      1     5    Policy are in place to improve equity in access to and use of assets
 5     2      0    Private investment strategy
                   Policy and regulations are in place and applied to unambiguously and
                   publicly identify land that can be made available to investors, in agreement
 5      2      1   with land rights holders.
                   Policy process is in place to identify and select economically,
                   environmentally, and social-cultural beneficial investments and implement
 5      2     2    these effectively.
                   Public institutions involved in transfer of large tracts of land to private
                   investors are clearly identified; without institutional and administrative
 5      2     3    overlap.
                   Public institutions involved in transfer of large tracts of land to private
                   investors share land information and effective coordination mechanisms are
                   in place to timely identify and solve competing land use assignment
 5      2     4    (inclsub_soil)
                   Investors' compliance with agreed business plans is regularly and effectively
 5      2     5    monitored and remedial action is taken if needed.
                   Safeguards (socio-economic, culturally and environmental) are established
                   and applied to prevent that investments involving large tracts of land
 5      2     6    infringe on or extinguish existing tenure rights.
                   Cases were resettlement and rehabilitation are required are clearly
 5      2     7    circumscribed and implementation follows uniform, transparent procedures.
                   Policy implementation is effective consistent and transparent
 5     3      0    and involves local stakeholders
                   Sufficient information is required from investors for government to assess
 5      3      1   the effects of proposed investments.
                   A clearly identified process is in place for approval of investment plans and
 5      3     2    the time required is reasonable and adhered to.
                   There are free, direct and transparent negotiations between right holders
 5      3     3    and investors; rights holders have access to relevant information.
                   Contractual provisions are publicly available and include benefit sharing
 5      3     4    mechanisms with right holders
                   Contracts are made public, easily accessible and agreements are
 5     4      0    monitored and enforced
                   Accurate and easily understood information on spatial extent and duration
                   of approved concessions is publicly available to minimize overlap and
 5      4      1   facilitate transfers.
                   Compliance with safeguards on concessions is monitored and enforced
 5      4     2    effectively and consistently.


182 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                                                                                          Score
 P   LGI    dim                        Panel, Indicator and dimensions
                                                                                                      A   B   C   D
                   Avenues exist for right holders to air complaints if investors do not meet
 5      4     3    contractual obligations and decisions are timely and fair.
                   Panel 6: Public provision of land information: registry and
 6                 cadastre
 6      1     0    Mechanisms for recognition of rights
                   There is an efficient and transparent process to formalize unchallenged land
 6      1      1   possession by the poor that is in line with local practice and locally accepted.
 6      1     2    Non-documentary evidence is effectively used to help establish rights.
 6      1     3    Long-term unchallenged possession is formally recognized.
                   First-time registration on demand includes proper safeguards and access is
 6      1     4    not restricted by high formal fees.
 6     2      0    Completeness of the land registry
 6      2      1   The total cost of registering a property transfer is low.
 6      2     2    The information held in records is incorporated in maps and reflects reality.
 6      2     3    All relevant private encumbrances are recorded.
 6      2     4    All relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded.
 6      2     5    There is a timely response to requests for accessing registry records.
 6      2     6    The registry is searchable.
 6      2     7    Land information records are easily accessed.
                   Reliability: registry information is updated and sufficient to
 6     3      0    make meaningful inferences on ownership
                   Information regarding land rights maintained in different public registries is
                   routinely synchronized so as to reduce transaction cost for users and ensure
 6      3      1   integrity of information.
 6      3     2    Registries information is up-to-date and reflect ground reality.
                   Cost-effectiveness and sustainability: land administration
 6     4      0    services are provided in a cost-effective manner.
 6      4      1   The registry is financially sustainable through fee collection.
                   Investment is sufficient to cope with demand and provide high quality
                   services that are clearly defined and adhered to (reliable, accessible and
 6      4     2    affordable land information).
                   Fees are determined transparently to cover the cost of service
 6     5      0    provision
                   The rational for the determination of fees is clear, the schedule of fees is
 6      5      1   publicly accessible and payment is accounted for.
 6      5     2    Informal payments are discouraged.
 6      5     3    Service standards are published and regularly monitored.
 7                 PANEL VII: LAND VALUATION AND TAXATION
                   Transparency of valuations: valuations for tax and
                   compensation purposes are based on clear principles, applied
 7      1     0    uniformly, updated regularly, and publicly accessible
 7      1      1   There is a clear process of property valuation.
 7      1     2    Valuation rolls are publicly accessible.
 7      2      1   Exemptions from property taxes payment are justified and transparent.
 7      2     2    Property holders liable to pay property tax are listed on the tax roll.
 7      2     3    Assessed property taxes are collected.
 7      2     4    Receipts from property taxes exceed the cost of collection.
 8                 PANEL VIII: DISPUTE RESOLUTION
                   Assignment of responsibility: responsibility for conflict
 8      1     0    management at different levels is clearly assigned, in line with

183 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                                                                                      Score
 P   LGI    dim                        Panel, Indicator and dimensions
                                                                                                  A   B   C   D
                   actual practice, relevant bodies are competent in applicable
                   legal matters, and decisions can be appealed against
 8      1      1   There is clear assignment of responsibility for conflict resolution.
 8      1     2    Conflict resolution mechanisms are accessible to the public.
                   Mutually accepted agreements reached through informal dispute resolution
 8      1     3    systems are encouraged.
                   There is an accessible, affordable and timely process for appealing disputed
 8      1     4    rulings.
                   The share of land affected by pending conflicts is low and
 8     2      0    decreasing
                   Land disputes constitute a small proportion of cases in the formal legal
 8      2      1   system.
 8      2     2    Conflicts in the formal system are resolved in a timely manner.
 8      2     3    There are few long-standing land conflicts (greater than 5 years).
                   PANEL IX: REVIEW OF INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND
 9                 POLICIES
                   Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates
                   concerning the regulation and management of the land sector
                   are clearly defined, duplication of responsibilities is avoided and
 9      1     0    information is shared as needed.
                   Processes of policy formulation, implementation, and arbitration affecting
 9      1      1   land rights and land use are properly separated.
                   The responsibilities of the ministries and agencies dealing with land do not
 9      1     2    overlap (horizontal overlap).
 9      1     3    Administrative (vertical) overlap is avoided.
                   Information on land ownership and use is shared among responsible
 9      1     4    institutions and relevant parts are freely accessible to the public.
                   Overlaps of rights (based on tenure typology) are minimal and do not cause
 9      1     5    friction or dispute
                   Ambiguity in institutional mandates (based on institutional map) does not
 9      1     6    cause problems.
                   Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process:
                   policies are formulated through a decision-making process that
                   draws on inputs from all concerned. The legal framework is non-
                   discriminatory and institutions to enforce property rights are
 9     2      0    equally accessible to all
                   Land policies and regulations exist and are developed in a participatory
 9      2      1   manner involving all relevant stakeholders.
                   There is meaningful incorporation and monitoring of equity and poverty
 9      2     2    reduction goals in land policy.
                   There is meaningful incorporation and monitoring of environmental and
 9      2     3    sustainability goals in land policy.
                   The implementation of land policy is costed, matched with benefits and
 9      2     4    adequately resourced.
                   There is regular and public reporting indicating progress in policy
 9      2     5    implementation.
                   Land policy is effective in ensuring that suitable land is available for
 9      2     6    smallholder farming and housing for low-income groups
                   Land policy is effective in preventing settlements in high risk areas and
 9      2     7    prepare for future disasters risk




184 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
X.   Bibliography

     1.  Directorate of Land Records and Surveys
     2.  Backward Classes Welfare Department
     3.  Floud Commission in its report submitted in 1940
     4.  A research study jointly undertaken by the World Bank and Michigan State University in
         2011 and subsequent reports published “Complete the incompleteness of Land reform”
         (by Klaus Denienger, Songquin Jin and Vandana Yadav) reveals some interesting facts
         on tenancy reforms in West Bengal
     5. National Sample Survey Organization in its 59th and 60th round reports
     6. Backward Classes Welfare Department, Govt. of West Bengal
     7. Directorate of Land Records and Surveys
     8. Monthly progress report [December, 2013] of the Directorate of Land Records and
         Surveys.
     9. DDP manual, study as referred conducted by the Administrative Training Institute,
         Kolkata
     10. Directorate of Agriculture (Evaluation Wing), Govt. of West Bengal, reproduced in
         Economic Review, 2011-12
     11. Land and Lard Reforms Department, Government of West Bengal
     12. http://wbidc.com/images/pdf/Pricing_Policy_WBIDC.pdf
     13. Anim-Odame, W. F. (2011): Compulsory Acquisition and Compensation in Ghana:
         Principles & Practice, Paper presented at the American Real Estate Society Conference,
         Seattle, Washington, USA
     14. Wallace, J. (2010): Land Acquisition in Developing Economies, International Federation
         of Surveyors, February, 1-21
     15. WBIDC
     16. Bengal Aerotroplolis Projects Ltd management
     17. http://wbidc.com/images/pdf/Criteria_Assessment.pdf
     18. http://www.banglarbhumi.gov.in
     19. Official website of Government of West Bengal, JnNURM, State Finance Commission
     20. Sen, Arindam (2002): Social – Democratic Agrarian Programme in West Bengal
     21. Anil K. Chakraborti, Apurba Kr. Mukhopadhyay, Debesh Roy (2003): Beneficiaries of
         Land reforms - The West Bengal Scenario, SIPRD Kalyani.
     22. Jennifer Brown, Sujata Das Chowdhury (2002): Women’s Land Rights in West Bengal: A
         Field Study, RDI/Landesa.
     23. Hanstad, Haque, Nielsen, Brown: Meeting the Goals of Land Reforms in India.




 185 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
XI.   Annexure

  Annexure 1: Expert Investigator Report (Background Notes)

  Panel 1: Land Tenure Recognition

  The Legal Frame work

  In West Bengal land and land tenure administration is regulated by the provisions of the
  following Acts:

             West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953
             West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955
             West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourers, Artisans
              and Fishermen Act, 1975
             West Bengal Thika Tenancy Act, 2001


  Other Acts like the Rent Act, 1859, the B.T. Act, 1885 and the Bargadars Act, 1950 have been
  repealed but are often referred to in academic discussions and in the literature.

  The West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953

  India became independent in 1947. In the debates of the Constituent Assembly on the right to
  property, it was unanimously resolved that the cultivators of land should be conferred with the
  rights to hold land directly under the state by abolishing the estates and eliminating the
  intermediaries. The Constitution of India came into force on 26.01.1950. The articles 31, later
  31A, 31B and 31C provided for acquisition of estates and all preexisting rights of the
  intermediaries.

  In pursuance to these Constitutional provisions the States passed legislations to abolish
  Zamindary. In this State, the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act 1953 (EA Act) was passed. It
  came into force on 12th February 1954.

  The EA Act had two objects:

      c) To abolish Zamindary - that is all rent receiving interests;
      d) To impose a ceiling on land held by individuals. These objects were sought to be achieved
         by the scheme of the Act made out in sections 4, 5 and 6 contained in chapter II dealing
         with the acquisition of estates and of the rights of intermediaries therein.

  Notification was issued u/s 4 declaring that with effect from 15.04.1955 (the date of vesting) all
  estates and the rights of every intermediary in each such estate shall vest in the State. 16.04.1956
  is the date of vesting for the raiyats who came to be regarded as deemed intermediaries
  subsequently. Section 5 lays down what precisely vested in the state on publication of
  notification u/s 4. The combined effect of sections 4 and 5 is that all lands held by an
  intermediary - be he a proprietor, or tenure-holder or under- tenure- holder or raiyat or under-
  raiyat with all his pre-existing rights, tittle and interests vested in the state. Only the lands held
  by a non-agricultural tenant and under-tenant remained beyond the purview of the Act. Section
  6 (I) provides that notwithstanding the vesting of all lands in the State, an intermediary is
  entitled to retain 25 acres of agricultural land and 15 acres of non- agricultural land (20 acres
  together with homestead land). No ceiling was imposed on other kinds of land. Section 6 (2)
  says that an intermediary who is entitled to retain possession of land u/s 6(I) shall hold such
  land directly under the state as a tenant. This is how all those who lived off land came on the
  186 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
same platform as a tenant under the State no matter what was his status previously. Till
December 2013, a total of 26,48,250.86 acres of land vested in the state under EA Act.

To give effect to the scheme and carry out the purposes of the EA Act as discussed above it was
necessary to get the position of land and all incidences attached thereto obtaining on the
relevant date of vesting -15.04.1955 or 16.04.1956, as applicable. Provisions were made under
chapter V of the Act for preparation of records of rights and revision of record of rights prepared
previously under the BT Act. Field verifications were made, the changes noted down and the
records were draft published inviting objections thereto from the interested persons. After
disposal of objections the records were finally framed and published. In the process the disputes
between the tenants and the landlords and between tenants lying undecided during the period
between preparation of records under the BT Act and revision thereof under the EA Act got
resolved. In the final records the interests of all intermediaries were eliminated. The state in
each record was the landlord and the person holding the land was shown as tenant.

Women’s land right and EA Act - The Hindu Succession Act giving the right of inheritance to the
women and converting life interest into absolute interest came into existence in 1956 when the
record of rights under the BT Act were being revised under the EA Act. Before the implications
of the revolutionary Hindu Succession Act could be fully understood, the revisional operation
was almost over. Moreover, the thrust of revisional operation under EA Act was to obtain the
position of land and all pre-existing rights therein as on 15.04.1955 or 14.04.1956, the date of
vesting under EA Act. Naturally recording the names of women according to the new law did not
get the importance it deserved. So, in this way another opportunity for recording women’s land
right was missed out.

The West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955

As a follow-up of the EA Act by a comprehensive measure of land reforms so as to remodel the
system of land tenure, the West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955 (WBLR Act) was passed. It came
into force on 30.03.1956. According to the present definition of a raiyat under the Act whoever
holds land for any purpose whatsoever is a raiyat and land as defined in the Act means land of
every description.

Women’s land right in WBLR Act– a missed opportunity again; the latest revision of the records
was taken up in 1975 under the LR Act, when the women’s legal right to property stood fully
established. Hence, attempt was made to record the names of women owners of land. However,
the same problem of ascertaining the truth has been faced. The male heirs who normally attend
the place where record-writing is done have been found to be reluctant to give out the names of
female heirs particularly when they have been married off to a distant place. Brothers are still
not reconciled to the sharing of paternal property with the sisters. In a male dominated society
where the mind-set of even the persons entrusted with preparation or revision of records is not
women-friendly as far as married women’s right to paternal property is concerned it has been
difficult to elicit information about the existence of female heirs.

Since revisional operation under the LR Act has almost come to an end, the effect of the
amendment Act of 2005 giving more rights to the Hindu women belonging to a family governed
by the Mitakshara School was not featured in the records.



Classification of all lands of the state for management purposes:

The Government of West Bengal acts both as a regulator and manager in respect of all lands
within the state. It acts as manager in respect of lands at its disposal, and as a regulator in


187 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
respect of lands held by raiyats who are the owners of their lands enjoying heritable and
transferable rights.

Role of L and LR department:

The Land & Land Reforms Department is the administrative department of the WBLR Act and
deals with all matters relating to land except the lands held by other departments who use and
manage such lands for their own purposes. The main functions of the L&LR Department are as
follows:

    (i)     Formulation of policies with regard to the management of the land at the disposal of
            state government and regulation of lands held by the raiyats
    (ii)    Making legislation to give a legal basis to the policies
    (iii)   Distribution of land to the landless and land-poor [Section 49(1) of the WBLR Act] –
            till December 2013, a total of 10,50,984.71 acres of land distributed]
    (iv)    Settlement of land for non-agricultural purposes [ rules 215 onwards, W.B. Land and
            Land Reforms Manual, 1991](area settled as long-term lease 6299.63 acres till
            December 2013)
    (v)     Prevention and removal of encroachment on the land at the disposal of the state
            government
    (vi)    Transfer of lands to other departments and to act as a coordinator among those
            departments (total of agri and non-agri land transferred to other departments is
            132,675.33 acres till December 2013).
    (vii)   Acquisition of land


Lands held by other Government departments:

Many departments have lands at their disposal. They require the lands for their own use and
they themselves manage such lands. The purposes to which the lands are used are as follows:

             DEPARTMENT                                       PURPOSE OF LAND USE
    Forest department                       :     Afforestation and tree planting, including forest
                                                  cover, issue of pattas to eligible forest dwellers
                                                  under Forest Rights Act, 2006.
    Fishery department                      :     Pisciculture, leasing out water bodies to
                                                  Fishermen’s Co-operatives, development of
                                                  water areas for the purpose of pisciculture.
    Irrigation and Waterways                :     Construction of embankments on river banks,
    Department                                    leasing out water areas for short periods.
    Public Works department                 :     Construction of roads and buildings and issue
                                                  short term leases in respect of roadside lands.
    Commerce and Industries                 :     Issue of license for industrial activities,
    Department                                    providing      infrastructure     for     planned
                                                  development.
    Urban Development                       :     For planned development of cities and towns
    Department

Land related agencies

Town & Country Planning Act has been enacted for planned development of cities and towns.
Kolkata Metropolitan Development authority is an authority under such Act. For construction of
important roads and buildings containing flats for higher, middle and lower income group
people. Land has been given to KMDA either after acquiring it under the Land Acquisition Act,

188 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
or by lease of government land granted by the L&LR Department. Similarly land was given to
other authorities under the Act. Land was also given to West Bengal Housing Board under the
Housing Department for construction of flats for MIG and LIG.

Evolution and recognition of tenancies in Bengal / West Bengal

Tenurial structure in the state before the abolition of zamindary with effect from
15.04.1955

The BT Act, 1885 divided people living off agricultural land into two classes – landlords and
tenants – the rent receivers and rent payers. A landlord was defined as a person under whom a
tenant holds and includes the government. A proprietor is the owner of an estate and for that he
paid revenue to the government. The Act then classified the tenants as tenure-holders including
under-tenure-holders, raiyats and under-raiyats:

                                    The land tenurial structure




Tenure holders and raiyats

A tenure holder is primarily a person who holds land under a proprietor or another tenure-
holder for the purpose of collecting rent or bringing it under cultivation by establishing tenants
on it [ sec 5(1) B.T. Act]. A raiyat is primarily a person who holds land for the purpose of
cultivating it by himself or by members of his family or by servants or by hired labourers [Sec.
5(2) B.T. Act]. In reality, the raiyats who were primarily cultivators used to induct tenants under
them and such tenants came to be known as under-raiyats. The raiyats thus became both payers
and receivers of rent. The under-raiyats also had tenants under them. Such tenants were called
under-under-raiyats.

The Scenario after abolition of zamindary

After acquisition of all rent receiving interests and imposition of ceiling under the EA Act, the
intermediaries defined in the Act who retained land within the ceiling limit became tenants

189 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
directly under the state. Thus all kinds of previous landlords and tenants were brought on the
same platform - the tenants under the state, the only landlord is the state and whoever holds
land is a tenant under the state. To deal with the scenario brought about by the abolition of
zamindary system WBLR Act, 1955 was enacted to regulate the landlord-tenant relationship.
The tenants who held lands for the purpose of agriculture were defined as raiyats, and land was
defined as agricultural land including homestead. Thus the only status the Act confers on the
tenant of agricultural land is that of a raiyat. Thereafter whoever came to own land for
agricultural purpose came to be known as raiyat.

The position underwent a sea-change with effect from 07.08.1969 as a result of amendment of
the Act. Now land means land of every description and a raiyat means a person or institution
holding land for any purpose whatsoever. With effect from 09.09.1980 the non-agricultural
tenants and under-tenants also came to be treated as raiyats [section 3A of WBLR Act]. Now
whoever holds land in this state other than a lessee under the government holding land for non-
agricultural purpose is a raiyat.

A share-cropper becomes a raiyat by operation of law when the land cultivated by him vests in
the state as the surplus land of the owner, within a certain ceiling limit [Section 14(S) of WBLR
Act]. An occupier under the W B Acquisition of Homestead Land for agricultural Labourers,
Artisans and Fishermen Act, 1975, becomes a raiyat when the land occupied by him within a
limit vests in his favour [Section 7 of the Act]. The landless and land-poor who have been given
agricultural or homestead land under section 49(1) of the WBLR Act have become raiyats whose
right is inheritable but not transferable.

   Category        Tenure type           Mode of creation and              Number           Area of
                                            recognition                                   occurrence

                 Rayati - Tenure      Customary             tenure,
        1.                            recognition:                             NA             Rural
                                      Sec 5(2), B. T. Act, sec
                                      2(7),WBLR
        2.              -do-          A share cropper cultivating
                                      vested land straightaway                 NA             Rural
                                      assigned raiyati status under
                                      certain circumstances [sec
                                      14S(2), WBLR]
        3.              -do-          Created by operation of sec             *No.        Rural, Semi-
                                      7(i) of the W.B. Acquisition          3.27 lakh      Urban and
                                      of Homestead land for                                 Urban
                                      Agricultural      Labourers,           Area.
                                      Artisans and Fisherman Act,           7883.80
                                      1975 only known as the                  Ha
                                      “Homestead Act”. Persons of
                                      the above three categories in
                                      occupation of private land as
                                      on 26th June 1975 are under
                                      certain       circumstances,
                                      assigned raiyati status in
                                      respect of such land or part
                                      thereof.
        4.              -do-          Landless and semi landless              *No.            Rural
                                      persons distributed vested           31.36 lakh
                                      land as a measure of                    Area
                                      agranian reforms accorded             425982
190 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                       the status of a raiyat [u/s        Ha
                                       49(1), WBLR]
         5.           Raiyati-         Tenants and under tenants          NA               Rural, Semi-
                      Tenure           under the Non-agricultural                           urban and
                                       Tenancy Act, 1949 given                                Urban
                                       raiyati status by amendment
                                       of the WBLR Act [sec 3A (1)].
         6.        Other kind of       Through        delivery    of    (+)No.                 Rural
                     tenures           documents of title to forest individual
                                       dwellers under the Forests      30,879
                                       Rights Act, 2006              community
                                                                          312
                                                                      Area total
                                                                      4958 Ha
                                                                      (17247.12
                                                                         Acre)

         7.             -do-           Squatters on govt. land by              NA          Urban and
                                       the then Refugee, Relief and                        Semi-urban
                                       Rehabilitation   department
                                       have been given documents
                                       of settlement.
         8.       Share cropping       Customary:                           *No.15.21          Rural
                      tenure           Recognised, [clause(b) of sec          lakh
                                       2 of W.B. Bargadars Act,               Area
                                       1948, sec-2(2), WBLR                 4.53 lakh
                                                                               Ha
Source:* Directorate of Land Records and Surveys
        (+) Backward Classes Welfare Department


Distribution of land among landless and land-poor (creation of tenure and equity)

Distribution of ceiling surplus land among the landless and land-poor of which those belonging
to the Scheduled Tribe and Scheduled Caste getting preference is one of the main items of
agrarian reforms to ensure redistributive justice. So far [ Aug 2013 ] 31,36,297 landless and near
landless persons have been given land by way of distributive land reforms thereby creating as
many new tenures. Again, by implementing the Homestead Act, 3,26,653 persons have been
given land with raiyati status creating equivalent number of tenures. Likewise, 30,879 individual
and 312 Community tenures were created as a result of implementation of the Forest Rights Act,
2006.

The beneficiaries who have got lands are mostly all from the poorer section of the society (Rule
194 of the WBL&LR Manual 1991 provides principles for making a priority list). It is, therefore,
clear that the policy of the government is to provide land and homestead to the downtrodden
land-poor for improvement of their lot. In essence, the policy is equity oriented.

Rights on land and duties of a raiyat in respect of the land comprising his tenure

Rights

A raiyat has the following rights over the land comprising his tenure:

        Heritability i.e. the lawful successors inherit the land of a deceaced raiyat
        A right to use the land subject to certain restrictions

191 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        A right to derive income from the land
        A right to protection from illegal expropriation of the land
        A right to transfer the land either wholly or in part subject to certain restrictions in
         respect of some categories of tenures.
        A residuary right to the land
        A right to enjoy the landed property in perpetuity unless terminated under a due process
         of law
        Right of pre-emption (this right is available to a raiyat whose lands have a common
         boundary with the lands of another raiyat).


Duties

        Maintenance and preservation of land as prescribed under WBLR Act


Rights of a bargadar over the land cultivated by him

        Occupancy right [right of a bargadar to cultivate lands cannot be terminated except in
         accordance with law
        Right to succession [the lawful heirs of a deceased bargadar has a right to succession of
         cultivating right of the bargadar. Succession in this case does not follow the ordinary
         laws of succession. The lawful heirsm according to the succession law applicable, decides
         by consensus who among them will inherit the right of cultivation. On their failure to do
         so, the competent officers determine a successor from among the heirs.
        Right of pre-emption [available to a bargadar when the land under barga cultivation has
         a common boundary with the land of another person]
        Right to voluntarily surrender the right of cultivation.


Restrictions on the rights of a raiyat:

Sub-section (2) and sub-section (4) of the WBLR Act takes away sub-soil right from a raiyat. In
terms of sub-section (2A) of the WBLR Act a raiyat is not permitted to quarry sand from his plot
or dig or use earth or clay of his plot for manufacture of bricks or tiles etc. He may, however, do
so only for his own use with the permission of the state government. Sub-section (4) ibid puts
some restrictions on use of the land of the tenure. In brief, these are:

            (i)     The land cannot be used for any purpose other than for which it was taken [
                    ordinarily agriculture] [sec 4(4)(1)(a)]
            (ii)    The land cannot be left fallow for more than three consecutive years.
                    [4(4)(1)(b)].
            (iii)   The holder has to bring the land under personal cultivation [sec 4(4)(1)( c)].
            (iv)    The holder cannot let out any part of the land [sec 4(4)(1)(d)].


Restrictions on transfer have been imposed by law on a few categories of lands.

To enumerate:

    a) The land of a tenure created u/s 49(1) of the LR Act can be transferred only by way of a
       simple mortgage to specified institutions for the purpose of taking loan for improvement
       of land or for construction of a dwelling house [ sec 49(1A)].


192 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    b) An occupier under the WB Acquisition of Homestead land for Agricultural Labourers,
       Artisans and fisherman Act, 1975 may transfer the land as at (a) above only for the
       purpose of development of the land [sec 10(2)].


Chapter IIB of the WBLR Act has put restrictions on the transfer of land of tribal raiyat. He
cannot transfer land except in the ways mentioned in Sec 14C (1). The focus of this section is to
restrict transfer of tribal lands to non-tribals. In terms of sec 14E a Revenue officer may annul
any transfer made in contravention of the provisions contained in sec 14C.

The obligations cast upon the general category raiyats were meant for keeping the area of arable
land undiminished and agricultural land was to be held by farmers only. The restriction on
letting out by raiyats is in keeping wth the principle of abolition of all kinds of rent-receiving
interests. According to the present tenurial structure the State is only landlord and whoever
holds land is a tenant under the State. However, in view of the changed situations calling for
various use of land it has to be considered whether such restrictive use of land will serve the
purpose. However, restriction of transfer of land by those raiyats who have got lands from the
government as beneficiaries of land reforms measure is justified in the sense that without such
restrictions they cannot hold on their lands. In reality, a lot many have transferred their lands in
spite of such restrictions. Curiously those who have purchased such lands illegally are in most
cases as poor as the transferors. As for tribals, the restriction on transfer is meant for preventing
the non-tribals from purchasing their lands.

Ban on creation of tenancy on private land

The law does not permit creation of tenancy on private land. But such tenancies or tenancy like
situations operate clandestinely. These ‘concealed tenancies’ (lease) as they are called are, in
effect, a mode of cultivation in violation of the modes permissible under the LR Act. Ban on
tenancies imposed by law as a measure of tenancy reform in the state is quite relevant.
Reintroduction of this institution would amount to emergence of feudalism in land tenural
system with its concomitant social ills.



Security of Tenure of a Raiyat

Tenure security is defined as i) protection against eviction; ii) the possibility of selling, and
transferring rights through inheritance; iii) the possibility… (of having) . . .mortgage, and having
access to credit under certain conditions (UN-HABITAT).

In West Bengal after reforms, a very skewed and complex land tenure system has been replaced
by a simple one where the state is the landlord and whoever holds land is a raiyat under the
State. The rights of a raiyat are clearly laid down in the WBLR Act as pointed out earlier. His
right is heritable and transferable. Since this right is protected by law under the umbrella of the
right to property under Article 300A of the Constitution of India his right is well secured.
However, the extreme penalty of vesting of land for violation of any of the obligations u/s 4(4) of
the WBLR Act is sub-judice before the Supreme Court. If however the land of a raiyat is acquired
under any land acquisition Act he has to be compensated adequately and such compensation
cannot be less than what has been provided for under the new LARR Act 2013.

Bargadars

Before reforms the tenure of the share cropper was the most insecure. After reforms security of a
share cropping tenure has been greatly enhanced because of the following factors:


193 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    (a)     Recording of the names of the share-croppers in the record-of-rights – a public
            document.
    (b)     Very stringent legal provisions regarding eviction of share cropper by the owner.
    (c)     Share-cropper-friendly ambience in the State.
Security of tenure cannot be measured or quantified. However, a study [2003] made by the State
Institute of Panchayats and Rural Development found that about 72% of share-croppers had a
sense of enhanced security after their names were recorded in the land records.

Occupiers of private and public land

Occupiers of private land with/without the land owner’s leave or illegal occupiers of government
land do not have any tenurial security. Of late the government has been implementing an
innovative scheme Nijo Griha Nijo Bhumi for homestead micro-plot (up to 5 decimals by either
land purchase at market price from willing sellers or vested land fit for distribution) allocation
to the poorest. The scheme takes into account regularization of the poor settlers’ illegal
occupation on government land by granting patta and record of rights jointly in the name of wife
and husband, judging suitability of each case as per the provisions of beneficiary selection.

Land and Land Tenure Governance

In common parlance land and land tenure governance means – institutionalization of legal
provisions related to the subject of land; respect of security, protection, exercise of rights and
delivery of justice through an appropriate system developed by the state. Governance also
includes effective functioning of a tax and land revenue collection machinery.

Administrative framework

Following is the land reforms administrative set up in West Bengal




194 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Divisional Commissioner can hear appeal under section 54(1)(b) of the WBLR Act, only in
respect of the orders passed by the Collector. The DL&LRO enjoys all the powers of a Collector
under the WBLR Act. The DLLRO is an appellate authority in respect of an order made by a
Revenue Officer.



Major functions of the field level functionaries relating to land and land reforms:

           Settlement of land u/s 49(i) L.R. Act and issue of pattas (Deed of settlements)
           Recording of bargardars
           To ensure that the restrictions imposed by law on the use of land is adhered to by the
            raiyats
           To ensure that protection to the tribal raiyats given by law is made available to them
           To adjudicate disputes / conflicts between land owners and bargadars in relation to
            share of produce, termination of barga cultivation etc.
           Keeping a vigil on illegal conversion of land
           Assessment of land revenue and collection thereof.
           Maintenance of r-o-r.

    [The list is illustrative only]

Mode of formulation of policy

Policy is formulated at the highest level of the Land & Land Reforms Department. Inputs from
field officers are sometimes taken into account in formulating the policy. Sometimes discussions
with officials of other departments which may be affected by the proposed policy also take place.
And finally, as the ministry is formed by the elected representatives of the political parties, the
political input is supplied by the Minister-in Charge.

Preparation of Cadastral maps and Record – of – Rights

A set of updated cadastral maps and RoR based thereon is a sin qua non for good land and land
tenure governance. In West Bengal all rural lands except the following were surveyed and record
of r-o-r thereof prepared under the B.T. Act and successively revised under the WBEA Act and
the WBLR Act:

    (a) 126 non – revenue forest mouzas in the state
    (b) 126 chitmahal mouzas (enclaves in Bangladesh)
    (c) 22 diluvated mouzas in South 24 Parganas


As regards urban lands, all such lands were surveyed and r-o-r thereof prepared as in the case of
rural lands except the areas comprising the first hundred Wards of present Calcutta Municipal
Corporation.

Schedule A appended to the W.B. Land Reforms Rules, 1965 prescribe the steps to be followed
for revision or preparation of record-of-rights.

Detailed technical instructions are issued by the Directorate of Land Records and Surveys for
Traverse and Cadastral surveys. Maps for mouza (village) are prepared after detailed survey.
Each plot is separately demarcated on the map and assigned a distinct number. Based on the
plot/plots so mapped and details thereof are incorporated into the record-of-rights prepared for
the tenure comprising the plots.


195 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The finally published record-of-rights contains particulars regarding the raiyats, class of land
comprising the tenure, name of bargadar, if any, etc. [rule 23], particulars of the plot/plots
comprising the tenure. A copy of the r-o-r so finally published [parcha] is handed over free of
cost to the raiyat. A parcha is a very important and useful piece of document particularly for a
rural raiyat. A copy is also handed over to the bargadar, if there is any.

Status of record-of-rights in regard to question of title

The old system of issue of patta [document of creation of tenancy] by the landlord and execution
of a Kabuliyat by the tenant was given legal sanction by the Rent Act, 1859. The landlords were
largely reluctant to issue a patta, and so the practice had already died down when settlement
under BT Act was taken up. But the BT Act provided that the landlords should grant rent
receipts and maintain counterfoils thereof. The law courts accordingly accepted the rent receipts
as proof of creation of tenancy and also held that since tenancy is a question of fact oral evidence
and other forms of evidence were admissiable. During preparation of RoR under the BT Act
tenancies were accordingly recorded based on possession backed up by rent-receipts.

During revisional settlement under the EA Act, designing landlords freely used the rent receipts
to show creation of tenencies in favour of their near relations to frustrate the ceiling provisions
of the Act. The ROs at that time could not reject such rent receipts and unwittingly made records
in favour of such fake tenants. Afterwards, it took considerable effort on the part of the
authorities to cancel records made on the basis of such fake tenancies.

WBLR Act doesn’t permit creation of tenancies and does not recognize and transfer except
through registered documents. Hence, in course of current revision under the LR Act only
transfer executed through registered deeds has been accepted and recorded. To the law courts
RoR is primarily a document of possession and not title. However, since RoR is made to record
possession of land backed up by registered documents recognized by law RoR can be accepted as
an indicator of title.

Recording of women’s land rights in the R-O-R

Since the Hindu women did not have the right of inheritance very few women land owners were
recorded under the BT Act operation. There was no significant improvement in the two
successive operations under the EA Act and LR Act although women’s right to inheritance
stands established. Pattas issued to women singly or jointly with their husbands are, however,
being brought into the records. A study by SIPRD finds that the total number of pattas, joint
inclusive, issued to women constitutes about 14.89 % [March, 2002] of the total number of
pattas issued.

Accuracy of land records and maps

The accuracy of maps and records prepared under the BT Act is proverbial. Such maps and
records have only been revised. Records are continuously updated through maintenance. The
present records are fairly accurate. West Bengal being a State of small land-holders the
incidence of change as a result of inheritance, transfer etc. is very high and reluctance of the
successors to approach the authority for incorporating the changes in the records is so great that
by the time revision of records comes to an end, the record gets out of date. A programme of
mass-mutation has become imperative to make the records up-to-date.

Computerization of cadastral maps and records

All large scale maps of villages have been digitized (till date 40,585 out of 42042, source NIC).
Also, records of rights of these villages have been computerized. As a result, copies of such
records (parcha) may be instantly made available to the members of the public. Similar facility
will be available soon in respect of supply of digitized maps.
196 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
A simple land tenure pattern

Tenancy reforms in the state have resulted in the following:

    (i)     All raiyats hold land under the state and so the landlord-tenant relationship is
            simple.
    (ii)    Abolition of different kinds of rent like rent in kind, service rent etc. - acceptance of
            cash rent only also have made things simple.


This has given the West Bengal land-tenure system a very simple pattern.

Implementation of the Reform Acts: an overall assessment

Objectives and scheme

In keeping with the national policy and in pursuance to the Constitutional provisions West
Bengal enacted WBEA Act 1953 for abolition of Zamindary and all forms of rent receiving
interests and imposition of ceiling on individual holding of land. Since all those who retained
land under the Act became tenants directly under the state, WBLR Act 1955 was passed to
provide for a landlord – tenant law and other land reforms measures.

These two Acts form the legal framework for West Bengal land reforms with focus on the
following:

           Abolition of Zamindary and all rent-receiving interests [WBEA]
           Imposition of ceiling on land [WBEA]
           Rationalisation of tenancy structure [WBEA]
           Equalisation of rent [WBEA]
           Equalisation of social status of different categories of tenants [WBEA]
           Vesting of ceiling surplus land [WBEA]
           Vesting of land on application of family ceiling [WBLR], and
           Bringing all kinds of land within the definition of ‘land’ under the WBLR Act
           Abolition of non-agricultural tenancy and treating the non-agricultural tenants and
            under-tenants as rayats [WBLR Act]

Some observations on implementation of land reforms measures

The Zamindars constituting the landed aristocracy of Bengal started losing interest in
Zamindary from the last quarter of the 19th Century and preferred living in the city of Calcutta
pursuing various professions leaving management of Zamindary to the employees called Nayeb
and Gomostas. A direct outcome of the 19th Century Bengali Renaissance. Moreover, the
compensation provided for in the WBEA Act for the acquisition of rent-receiving interest was
reasonably fair. So there was least resistance to the abolition of Zamindary.

Imposition of ceiling on their Khas lands (lands held in personal cultivation), both agricultural
and non-agricultural was severely resisted, not physically but legally. In spite of Constitutional
provisions for acquisition of estates and any rights therein all legislations relating to agrarian
reform Constitutional validity of each and every provision of ceiling was challenged before the
High Court. As goes the judicial procedure the matter is to be decided first by a single bench and
then appeal to be heard by a division bench of the High Court. Finally the matter is to be decided
by the Supreme Court. It takes years for a final decision. During the period the matter is before
the court possession of land held in excess of the ceiling limit by the petitioners cannot be taken.
This is exactly what happened to the ceiling provisions under both the WBEA Act and WBLR
Act. Constitutional validity of the amendment of the WBLR Act made in 1981 and 1986 is yet to
197 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
be decided by the Supreme Court. In addition to this, the big land owners who were going to lose
land as a result of ceiling did all they could do to evade the ceiling provision. They resorted to
various designs to keep more lands than the ceiling permits by circumventing the law. And they
displayed rare ingenuity in crafting the designs. Since mid-1960s it has been one of the most
important items of work of the Revenue Officers to detect lands held clandestinely and draw up
proceeding to vest such lands in accordance with law. But almost all such actions have been
challenged in the court giving rise to a spate of litigations involving thousands of acres of vested
lands. It took years for disposal of such cases and still a lot many remained pending. It is only
after constitution of the West Bengal Land and Land Reforms Tribunal (WBLRTT) by excluding
the jurisdiction of the High Court as a court of the first instance, transfer of pending cases from
the High Court to the Tribunal and automatic vacation of stay orders passed in such cases, that
orders of vesting passed by the Revenue Officers and approved by the Tribunal could be given
effect to and possession of vested land taken over. Thus the authorities implementing the ceiling
law faced hurdles at every step.

Cultivation of land by Sharecroppers (Bargadars)

Share-croppers, generally known as bargadars in this State, who cultivate lands belonging to
others on condition of paying a share of the produce, have been cultivating considerable extent
of land for centuries. Floud Commission in its report submitted in 1940 estimated that 22.5% of
the total arable land was being cultivated by bargadars. The 1941 Census corroborated this
figure. But the Bengal Tenancy Act 1885 virtually ignored the bargadars except in a negative way
that they are not the tenants. Since they did not enjoy any protection of law the bargadars could
be evicted by the owners of land at will. Bargadars were actual tillers of the soil but their right to
cultivation was insecure.

After independence and before the WBEA Act and WBLR Act came into existence the Bargadars
Act of 1950 was passed to provide for protection to the bargadars against eviction. The WBLR
Act of 1955 incorporated the provisions of the Bargadars Act 1950. However, when effort was on
to give legal protection to the right of cultivation of bargadars a few thousands of them became a
victim of legal fiction and got evicted. The right of cultivation of bargadars was an
“incumbrance” as defined in the Estate Acquisition Act. When the ceiling provisions under the
Act were applied the owners of lands had the option to select the lands they would like to retain.

They naturally opted for retaining the lands which were not being cultivated by bargadars. The
lands cultivated by the bargadars were thus surrendered. Since the lands vested in the State free
from all incumbrances the right of cultivation by the bargadars got terminated by operation of
law.

This legal imbroglio has been rectified under the WBLR Act. In the definition of “encumbrance”
it has been clearly stated that encumbrance does not include the right of cultivation by a
bargadar. Hence, when lands cultivated by a bargadar vested under the WBLR Act his right of
cultivation did not get terminated automatically in respect of all the lands he cultivates. His right
of cultivation stood terminated only in respect of land cultivated in excess of a limit laid down in
the Act [Sec 14S(2)]. On the other hand, he becomes a raiyat automatically in respect of the land
which he was cultivating as a bargadar up to that limit [Sec 14S(3)].

Again, since most of the bargadars did not get their names recorded in the record of rights for
fear of incurring the wrath of the owners, they could not avail of the protection against eviction
provided by the WBLR Act. Although the law does not distinguish between a recorded bargadar
and an unrecorded bargadar the grim fact is that whenever there is a dispute between an
unrecorded bargadar and the owner of the land the stock plea of the owner is that his land is not
cultivated by a bargadar. It becomes difficult for an unrecorded bargadar to prove that he
cultivates the land. A special drive was taken to record the unrecorded bargadars in 1978-79.
This drive came to be known as “operation barga”.
198 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Thereafter, in the amendment of the WBLR Act made in 1981 and 1986 many pro-bargadar
provisions were inserted in the Act. A bargadar’s right of cultivation became heritable, though
not transferable. As a result of these amendments the right of cultivation of a bargadar is fully
secure.

Transfer of Barga land: The SIPRD study addressed the crucial issue of dispossession of
barga lands through eviction transfer, mortgage and various other modes. The following results
emerged:

         14.37% of the bargadars had lost possession of their barga lands with 85.63% remaining
          in possession.
         Eviction [either lawful or unlawful] accounts for 24.14% and inability to invest for 9.82%
          of dispossession. The remaining 66.04% is accounted for by transfer, mortgage etc.

Transfer of the right of cultivation by a Bargadar is not permissible under law. However, a
bargadar mau surrender his right of cultivation or abandon cultivation of a particular plot of
land. Consequential actions in such cases have been provided under section 20 B of the WBLR
Act.

Objectives of Reform Acts: How far achieved.

Imposition of ceiling provisions followed by implementation and abolition of intermediary
interests weakened the landed aristocracy and subsequent distribution of vested lands to the
poorer section of the society empowered the poor with land assets. With this asset they could
improve their economic condition which ultimately made them socially relevant and politically
articulate. Several studies on micro level and a macro level by State Institute of Panchyats and
Rural development suggest empowerment in the socio-economic status of the beneficiaries and
their political importance. These studies further indicate the emergence of some sort of
economic egalitarianism in rural society of West Bengal. However, their income level has not
gone up nor can they provide for the next generation with such meagre asset.

Distributive land reforms in West Bengal: the state and National scenario.

Lands held in excess of the ceiling limits under the WBEA Act and WBLR Act have been duly
taken away by the government, and such lands have been distributed among the landless and
land-poor.

A quantitative evaluation of performance shows that till March, 2013, about 10, 51,731 acres of
land were distributed to 31, 26,527 beneficiaries. A comparison with the all India scenario may
not be out of place. The Table below shows the performance of a few states who have done
comparatively better in the area of distributive land reforms:

                                   Distributive land reforms
                             State wise performance (March, 2013)

Sl. No.        Name of state       Area distributed        % of All          No. of           % of All
                                      (in acre)              India        beneficiaries         India
                                                         performance                        performance

1.          Andhra Pradesh         562226                10.99            471548            8.42

2.          Assam                  545875                10.67            445862            7.97

3.          Maharashtra            634158                12.39            139755            2.49


199 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
4.         West Bengal                1051731                20.56              3126527            55.88

           ........................   ....................   ................   ................   ...............

           ........................   ....................   ...............    ................   ...............


           All India                  5115161                100.00             5594187            100.00
Source: Ministry of Rural Development, Development of Land resources [Land Reforms Division]

The figures speak for themselves. West Bengal being the smallest of the four States ranks by far
the highest both in terms of land distributed and number of beneficiaries covered. As regards
recording of bargadars till December, 2013 the names of as many as 15, 20,431 bargadars have
been brought into the land records.

In the distribution of land the stress has been on the redistribution of the landed asset rather
than economic viability and sustainability of a family of five. There is no disputing the fact that
in West Bengal the land at the disposal of the government is too inadequate to meet the demand
of all the landless and land-poor of the State. Still, keeping in view the sustenance of a family of
five the maximum limit up to which land could be settled was determined as 1.0 hectare (almost
2.47 acre) before the Left Front came to power in 1977. The Left Front Government brought the
limit down to 0.4047 hectare (one acre) so that more people could avail of the benefit. In reality,
less than one bigha of land (one third of an acre) and that also, in many cases, not in one block
but comprising two/three tiny pieces of land. In this way, the number of the beneficiaries has
been increased. But whether or not the benefit of such land even with the back-up support of the
government by way of providing fertilizer, seeds, pesticides etc. at subsidized rate can make the
beneficiaries economically viable is a matter of debate. The reality is this. Traditional
agricultural pattern has been followed. Income of the rural people has not increased. It is said
that whatever may be the extent of land given to the poor the very fact that they now own land
has empowered them and made them hold their heads high. Empowerment by itself does not do
much good to the poor if their income does not increase. That is why more and more people
from rural West Bengal migrate to other States to augment their income by taking even menial
jobs. Moreover, since the interests of the rural women have not received any particular
importance in the schemes of land reforms except as a member of the family their lot has not
improved at all. This explains why in the list of trafficking of women this state occupies one of
the top positions.

The object of land reforms is integrated development of rural economy and all round
development of life. This State has a long way to go to achieve this object despite its spectacular
achievements in implementing some of the items of land reforms measures.

A research study jointly undertaken by the World Bank and Michigan State
University in 2011 and subsequent reports published “Complete the incompleteness of Land
reform” (by Klaus Denienger, Songquin Jin and Vandana Yadav) reveals some interesting facts
on tenancy reforms in West Bengal:

        1. Beneficiaries of tenancy reform are those households who were endowed with little
           or no land and were relatively poorer and whose livelihood was more dependent
           upon agricultural sector
        2. In 1978, the average land endowment, inclusive of patta land, for barga and patta
           (u/s 49 of LR Act) beneficiaries was respectively 1.92 and 1.31 acres
        3. Land reform benefited more households from lower castes, as indicated by the fact
           that 56% of barga beneficiaries and 73% of patta beneficiaries are from the
           marginalized SCs and STs

200 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The study also revealed that “tenants have less incentive to make long-term land investment on
reform land than their own land. Appropriate policy to address this loss of productivity on
reform land needs to be devised. These differences in productivity can be mitigated by making
changes in tenancy status which prevents sufficient use of labour, inputs and investments in the
plots”.

A step forward towards agrarian reforms: “Nigo Griha Nijo Bhumi [NGNB]

As a measure of agrarian reforms the state government addressed the acute problem of
homestead and landlessness in the state [above 5.5 lakh families according to the estimates of
the National Sample Survey Organisation in its 59th and 60th round reports]. The scheme
launched upon for the purpose [NGNB] covers agricultural labourer, rural artisan and
fisherman community. The key features of the scheme are:

           Proposed coverage 5.5 lakh absolute landless families by 2016
           Assignment of 5 decimals of homestead land along with land patta (land title)
           Patta in the name of wife or jointly in the name of wife and husband.
           Land for assignment made available from the land at the disposal of the government
            or by purchase from raiyats.
           Land use : homestead and home garden etc
           Cluster approach and support through convergence of various departmental schemes


Since inception of the scheme [October, 2011] and up to February 2014 more than 150,000
families have been covered by it. The scheme bids fair to attain the target by the stipulated time
frame.

Considering rural landlessness as one of the strongest indicators of poverty this innovative
scheme launched by the state government has targeted to provide land tenure security to most
disadvantaged and excluded poor with 87% women tenure holder either self or in joint name
with spouse.

Issues and policy recommendations

1. Regularisation of illegal occupation of public lands

In all the records of rights – first prepared from the beginning of the 1900 under the BT Act,
revised in the fifties under the EA Act and again revised under the LR Act taken up from 1975 a
clear process for formal recognition of possession of any kind of land has been followed.

When the owner is in possession of his land there has been no problem. However, when the
person possessing the land is not the owner different nomenclatures have been used to record
such possession. Persons possessing government land without being legally inducted on such
land have been recorded as “unauthorised occupiers”. Persons forcibly occupying the lands of
another private person have been recorded as “forcible occupiers”. Persons possessing lands on
permission from the owners of such lands have been recorded as “permissive possessors”.
Legally speaking, such possessions differ in character and import. But the fact remains that
possession of any kind has scrupulously been recognised in this state. However, recording of
possession of government land that is unauthorised possession has not been recorded in recent
times.

Considerable area of public lands particularly government lands is under illegal occupation in
the state. The phenomenon is more pronounced in and around urban and semi-urban areas.
There are laws for eviction of the illegal occupiers; but those are seldom used. Legal provisions
are available for regularization of such illegal occupation by higher income group which will

201 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
fetch a considerable amount of revenue to government by way of long-term settlement. Such
regularization may, however, invite fresh illegal occupation. The issue needs attention with a
holistic approach. The NGNB scheme stated above has been leveraged to regularize more than
150,000 cases of occupation of public lands, used for homestead purpose by the most
disadvantaged landless poor over the last three years.

2. Compulsory mutation of names in the R-O-R

Raiyats are not always interested in getting their names mutated in the r-o-r. This is one of the
reasons why the records cannot be maintained updated. The Land Reforms Act and related
Rules may be amended to provide for compulsory mutation of names by the raiyats through
filing of applications for the same to the appropriate revenue authorities. [Maharashtra has legal
provisions for compulsory mutation].

3. Women empowerment: Individualization of Joint Pattas, issue of separate
patta for husband and wife, reduction of revenue burden for women assesses.

By way of women empowerment through endowment of land asset the state government had
started grant of Joint pattas in the name of both husband and wife with effect from 1994-95.
This is being done on the basis of an administrative order which is inconsistent with the
provisions of sec 49(1) of the WBLR Act. It is necessary to amend the law to provide for grant of
joint patta with wife’s name coming first as has been stated in the implementation guideline of
NGNB. In this context the following issues are relevant:

    (a)     Reopening of the past cases where the patta has been issued in favour of a single
            person.
    (b)     Individualisation of tenure i.e. assigning separate r-o-r to husband and wife in case of
            a joint patta already granted.
    (c)     Grant of separate pattas for all future cases of settlement u/s 49(1)

In case of (a) the task is herculean. As regards (b) the measure on the face of it may enhance the
level of women empowerment, but there are many other factors to be considered.

The measures will require amendment of the WBLR Act.

Reduction of Revenue Burden for women assesses: Section 23 of the WBLR Act
provides for payment of revenue by a raiyat for his holding according to the rate mentioned in
the related Table. In order to give some financial relief to the women assesses it could be
considered if some exemption say 25% of the rent payable by them in terms of this section could
be given. The proposed exemption shall be in addition to the general exemption up to 2.428
acres as provided in Sec 24(1), WBLR Act.

4. Bridging the gap between legislation and implementation

4.1 Implementation of sec 21C, WBLR Act regarding constitution of State Land
Corporation etc

Section 21C was inserted in the Act in 1981 to address the difficulties faced by a section of the
rural raiyats in selling their lands cultivated by bargaders. Implementation of this need driven
section has been hanging fire for more than three decades. This should be taken up for
implementation because West Bengal’s rural society still continues to be plagued by the above
problem.

4.2 Implementation of the provisions in the WBLR Act (Chap V) regarding
    consolidation of Holding, Co-operative Farming Society and Co-operative
    Common Service Society.
202 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The above provisions are critical for agrarian reforms in the West Bengal context, have been
lying dormant in the statute book with none of the state governments since Independence
having taken any interest in implementing them. It should be seriously considered if these
provisions should be implemented to further the state’s land reforms efforts and achieve the
long term goal of improved agriculture and higher income.

5. Conferring tenancy right upon bargadars

The Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885 was significantly silent as to the status of a bargadar. During
settlement operations under the B.T. Act bargadars were recorded as tenants with assignment
of khatian (r-o-r) in several districts. In the 1928 amendment of the BT Act bargadars were
expressly excluded from the definition of a tenant. In its report [1940] the Floud Commission
had inter alia recommended grant of tenancy right upon the bargadars with one third produce
as rent. Taking a cue from this recommendation the left parties built their tebhaga movement.
However, they did not demand tenancy rights for the bargadars. After abolition of all kinds of
rent receiving interests and bringing all the tenants under the state, the only land lord in this
state and prohibiting letting out of land by the rayats a new land tenure structure has come into
place. Creation of new tenancies in favour of the bargadars means creation of rent receiving
interests by the rayats. This does not fit in with the present structure. The legislators in their
window instead, wanted to make the bargadars the owners of land by taking loan from Land
Corporation to be set up in accordance with the provision of section 21 C of the WBLR Act. Since
the peasant organizations did not shown any interest in such measure Sec 21 C has not been
implemented. The present government may consider implementing this provision to bring to an
end once for all the inherent clash of interest between the bargadars and their owners of land.

6. Non-revenue Forest mouzas

126 non-revenue forest mouzas in the state have not been cadastrally surveyed. The eligible
forest dwellers are being endowed with numerous rights including issue of land-pattas through
implementation of forest Rights Act, 2006. It is necessary to cadastrally survey these mouzas
and incorporate these rights in the r-o-r to be prepared. The job is pretty tough as it will entail
Traverse connection in the forest areas. The issue may be considered by the government.

Data source

The data relating to the land quantum and number of beneficiaries used in the document have
been sourced from Director of Land Records & Surveys, Government of West Bengal.

Panel 2: Rights to Forest and Commons Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations

1.1 Background
The total reported area under different categories of land use in West Bengal in 2007-08 was
8.684 million ha (excluding Kolkata district) of which four categories of land use comprising
120,450 ha are as below:

    a.   Permanent pastures and other grazing land (6110 ha)
    b.   Land under misc. tree groves not included in net sown area (61310 ha)
    c.   Culturable waste land (32850 ha)
    d.   Fallow land other than current fallow (20180 ha)


This area constitutes only 1.38% of the reported area under different uses in West Bengal
(source, Director of Agriculture, Evaluation Wing).

1.1.1    Commons

203 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
For the purpose of LGAF communal land (or commons) is defined as “land over which a
community has right or access to, the community may or may not have legally recognized
ownership over the land. In some cases the state may be considered as owner”. In West Bengal
all the lands per se latest RoR are either recorded in the name of a raiyat or government. The
West Bengal Land and Land Reforms Manual, 1991 specifies about maintaining Register VIII for
unoccupied government land which are in use by the public and not to be settled, e.g., roads,
drinking water tanks, grazing land, cremation ground, burial ground, disposal ground etc. There
are of course raiyati agricultural lands which are traditionally used by the community for cattle
grazing purpose purely on temporary basis in the lean season. Except where the record of the
land clearly mentions about ‘meant for communal use’ (as in the case of Register VIII) there is
no scope of legal coexistence of multiple rights on seasonal common land. Vested, resumed and
abandoned lands are also entered in this Register and are settled according to the prescribed
procedure.

All the forest lands are clearly identifiable on revisional survey maps, but demarcation on
ground does not exist in all cases. Patches of blank forest land within the notified forest area or
adjacent to the notified but degraded forest land are traditionally used by the community
residing in forest villages or in the fringe area for grazing or other social/ community purposes
like village huts etc. There is no proper record or boundary demarcation for these lands in many
of the cases and exercising customary rights over these lands often comes under question from
forest authorities.

West Bengal does not have large areas of common land as is found in other less densely
populated states of India. In West Bengal access to many natural resources (common property
resources) is not clearly defined legally but depends on a process of negotiation, bargaining or
conflict between the rich and poor, an on a system of customary rights whereby the poor access
land of the rich (Beck, 1998). While some resources are open access (for example stubble left
after harvesting or wild foods that grow in drainage ditches or by the sides of ponds), borrow
pits, other important CPRs (such as gleaned grains, fallen fruits, the right to collect cow dung or
graze cattle on the boundaries between fields) should be defined as products that are mainly
found on private land or which are controlled by richer villagers, or to which the poor have
customarily negotiated access. While from the perspective of the rich these latter resources may
be privately owned, from the perspective of the poor these resources are common in that the
poor have attempted to maintain a right of access to them (source – Excluding the Poor from
their Rights – the case of natural resources in West Bengal, by Tony Beck). Beck’s analysis
highlights an important issue, namely the de facto CPRs are in fact better indicator of CPR use,
as an enquiry into use of de jure CPRs only might underestimate dependence.

1.1.2 Forests

 The State of West Bengal has a total geographical area of 88752 sq. km., which is 2.7% of the
total geographical area of the country. Population density of the state was 1029 per sq.km as
compared to that of the country at 382 per sq.km (2011 Census). By reason of the Estates
Acquisition Act, 1953, all the recorded forests of the state other than those under lease
agreements with tea gardens had vested in the State and are now managed by the Forest
Department, West Bengal. Subsequently the Tea garden forests had vested with Forest
Department as “Resumed Forests”. At present, all the recorded forests of the State are classified
as Reserved Forests, Protected Forests and Unclassed State Forests, under the Indian Forest
Act, 1927. The recorded forestland of the State (11879 sq.km.) is 1.54% of the recorded forest
land of India (770078 sq.km.).

Working Plan Divisions of Forest Department regularly carry out boundary survey between
forest and non-forest land, using GPS, and boundaries are permanently demarcated with pillars
having Lat/ long positions. Except in the district of Purulia, status of clear forest boundary is

204 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
reasonably good and extents of old encroachments, which are now being regularised under FRA,
are well documented.

West Bengal has one of the oldest histories of scientific management of its forests which dates
back to mid-nineteenth century. Detail working plans were prepared by the British Foresters for
management of this natural resource, which depended heavily on economic aspect of value
addition, but did not totally overlook the aspect of Bio-diversity Conservation as well. In late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the art and science of artificial regeneration with fast
growing spp. like Teak (tectona grandis), Sal (Shorea robusta), Champ (Michelia champaca),
etc. in Northern Bengal, after clear-felling of natural forest, was perfected. During the early parts
of twentieth century, in order to ensure steady labour availability in the remote forest areas, for
carrying out commercial forestry operations, people, mostly tribals, were brought in and made
to settle in the forest areas with allotment of per capita land for shelter and cultivation. These
Forest villages in North Bengal were registered with Forest Department, but these villagers were
deprived of the benefits of any rural development activities as they were neither part of civil
villages nor under the Panchayati Raj Institutions. This continued till the 1980s, and the
economic development of forest villages remained totally dependent on the Forest Department.

However, in the districts of undivided Midnapore, Bankura and Purulia, the post-independence
scenario was different. On the basis of Estate Acquisition Act of 1953, all the zamindari forests in
these districts were taken over by the State and their management was vested with State Forest
Department. These forests were notified as Protected Forests, under Indian Forest Act of 1927,
without clearly defining or settling the rights of forest fringe people as per the provisions of the
Act. These notified forests were in disjointed patches, varying between a few hectares to a few
hundred hectares. The forests were surrounded by villages with large population and high
population density. The poverty level in these villages was also high due to near-absence of
irrigation facilities and industries, as well as low agricultural productivity as the fields were
monsoon-cropped. The fringe population depended heavily on the sal coppice forests for their
subsistence, fuel wood and fodder requirement. The heavy biotic pressure started denuding the
forests and by the beginning of 1970s, most of the sal coppice forests in these districts had
degenerated to bushy/ scrub forests. The efforts of the Forest Department staff to control the
process of degradation, by mere use of force or legal measures, led to total failure. The trend
continued till mid-seventies.

Meanwhile, in South Bengal, in the districts of Bankura, Midnapore, Purulia and elsewhere,
large scale Eucalyptus and Acacia auriculiformis (Akashmoni) plantations were raised by the
Forest Department during nineteen sixties and seventies, as part of “degraded forest
regeneration”. Sal (Shorea robusta) plantations were also tried in degraded sal forest areas,
however, with limited success due to heavy biotic pressure from fire and grazing in the young
plantations. Beautiful patches of Eucalyptus and Akashmoni plantations provided ground cover
to all those barren / degraded forest areas, which could not be otherwise regenerated with slow
growing, miscellaneous spp. Simultaneously, another socio-economic experiment was initiated
in Arabari village of Midnapore district by Dr A.K.Banerjee, Forest Silviculturist in 1972-73,
trying to regenerate nearly 1200 hectare of degraded/ blank forest area with the help of around
615 families. The idea of sharing of usufructs with the villagers, from the resuscitated forest
areas, was conceived in the Project. The success of the experimental project ultimately led to the
generalized concept and adoption of Joint Forest Management (JFM) at the State and National
level. The first Government Order on sharing of usufructs and constitution of Joint Forest
Management Committees was issued in 1988 and over the next few years, the voluntary
movement of forest protection through people’s participation spread like wild fire. Nearly 4000
Forest Protection Committees (FPC) were formed to protect nearly 500,000 hectares of
degraded forest areas of the State. Government Orders were issued separately for forests of
North Bengal, South West Bengal and Sundarban regions. Similarly, Eco-development
Committees (EDC) were formed around the national Parks/ sanctuaries and the schemes on

205 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
development of Sustainable, alternate livelihood were initiated to reduce the pressure of poor
fringe population on the forest land for their sustenance. Government Orders were issued
separately for the EDCs, outlining the duties, responsibilities and usufructuary benefits for the
EDC members.

The movement received a material boost with the introduction of World Bank sponsored Social
Forestry Project from the beginning of 1980s and the World Bank funded Joint Forest
Management Project from the early 1990s. The distribution of vested waste land to landless
rural families, in the three districts of South West Bengal, in later part of the 1970s/ early ‘80s
was also a giant step towards the future success of farm forestry in South West Bengal.

National Forest Policy of 1952 had one of the objectives as conservation of wild flora and fauna
of the country. In West Bengal, the concept of preservation of wildlife and its habitat was always
part of the forest management, even when the major thrust was on commercial forestry ignoring
the need of local population. Senchal Santuary was notified as early in the 1940s, Jaldapara
Sanctuary was also notified- and subsequent notifications followed Gorumara & Chapramari
Sanctuaries respectively, all those notifications being issued under the Indian Forest Act of 1927,
prior to promulgation of Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. However, with the advent of the later
Act, the preservation of floral & faunal biodiversity received a tremendous boost & statutory
support.

Early eighties also saw the global resurgence of Biodiversity conservation and renewed interest
in the preservation of the endangered flora & fauna of the world. In keeping with the
international & national trend, West Bengal too shifted its priority in forest management
towards conservation of natural flora & fauna in the forests & the wetlands. National forest
policy of 1988 and the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 put severe restriction on the harvesting of
the natural forests. The late eighties & early nineties saw increased activities in wildlife
management in West Bengal. Large tracts of forest areas, having ecological importance and
significance, had been declared as protected areas in the form of National Parks, Sanctuaries,
Biosphere Reserves and Tiger Reserves. Policy decisions were taken to hand over administrative
control of these protected areas (PA) to Wildlife Wing for more intensive management from
wildlife conservation angle. Till date, nearly 34% of the total recorded forest areas of the State
have been declared as P.A., as compared to 16.5% for the entire country.

1.2 Critical issues
1.2.1 West Bengal changed its Forest Policy, in line with National Forest Policy of 1988, by
switching over to Joint Forest Management (JFM), as pioneer in the country, and giving more
priority to people’s need and biodiversity conservation than commercial ex ploitation and
revenue earning. Government Resolutions were first issued in the State in 1988, taking the pro-
fringe people stand by allowing sharing 25% share of harvested forest produce with the forest
fringe population. However, such orders, issued more than two decades back, need to be
reviewed and the mechanism of JFM need to be amended in order to ensure more active
participation of the forest fringe population and to empower these people in sustainable
management of the Community Property Resources (CPR). A large number of Forest Village
Development projects were implemented by Forest Department during 1980s to 2012, for
development of infrastructure and livelihood options in the recorded Forest villages in North
Bengal. However, there is a felt need to synergize the benefits from the JFM mechanism with the
proposed benefits of FRA, 2006. There is also a need to institutionalize and legalize the JFM, so
that the people’s participation does not depend on the initiatives of Forest Department alone.

1.2.2 Clear felling of Natural Forest had been stopped in the State from 1990s, on the basis of
Forest Conservation Act, 1980 and in compliance with order of Hon’ble Supreme Court. Only
felling of plantations and coppice forest is carried out in the State, as per prior approval of Govt.
of India/ Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF), in order to sustain the JFM model and
sharing usufruct with the forest fringe population. Afforesation of degraded/ blank forest land is
206 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
done with indigenous/ local species. In South Bengal, a small percentage of plantation areas
include Eucalyptus/ acacia spp. which has a strong local demand for fuel/ small timber and
these species are always preferred by the Social Forestry planters as they are grazing and
drought hardy.

As per an Act of State Govt. namely Non-Forest Tree Act of 2006, there are some restrictions on
felling of trees in urban and rural areas. However, there is also a lot of relaxation in case of
felling up to 3 trees in each case, by bonafide owners, and farm forestry spp. like Eucalyptus,
Acacia spp. are exempted from certain provisions of the Act. The objective is to encourage
people for planting trees, facilitate harvesting of trees on private land and also prevent large
scale conversion of non-forest tree land by the timber mafia resulting into loss of green cover.

1.2.3 In West Bengal, diversion of Forest land is one of the minimum in the country. Most of the
diversions, under FC Act, 1980 with prior approval of MoEF, are for infrastructure
developments, like roads/ Rlys/ Electrification/ Water supply/ irrigation etc. benefitting the
local people more than others. No subsidy on any forest produce is given to any industry. There
is no case of mining on Forest land by industries without prior approval of MoEF under FC Act
and as per order of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.

1.2.4 People – forest interaction with regard to collection of Minor Forest Produce (now coined
as Non-Timber Forest Products nationally) have been addressed in the Government Resolutions
on JFM. However, The Government Resolution involves more of voluntary association, where
forest officials play a major role, and does not have legal backing for the participating people.
NTFP are not nationalized in the State. In West Bengal, in case of the NTFP like Sal Seeds and
Kendu Leaves, monopoly rights of collection from the forest land have been given to the Large
Sized Multipurpose Cooperative Societies (LAMPS) through West Bengal Tribal Development
Cooperative Corporation (WBTDCC). Every year this Corporation deposits the Royalty at fixed
rates to the Forest Department on behalf of the LAMP societies participating in the NTFP
operations. Till December 2013, a total of 301 Community Forest Rights (CFR) under FRA 2006
have been claimed by the LAMPS. Whether benefits of the monopoly right reaches the tribal,
who are the members of LAMPs can be evaluated better by Tribal Development department of
the State. But, Forest department gets a very nominal Royalty towards these NTFPS from the
WBTDCC.

1.2.4 Regarding the observations on JFM, a few studies have been conducted but none of them
are comprehensive. With reference to the State of Forest Report, 2011, published by Forest
Survey of India which has concluded that West Bengal is one of the few States in India which has
reversed its earlier trend of forest degradation, and has effectively increased its forest cover over
the recorded forest land. The W.B State Forest Report 2010, based on satellite imageries, shows
that in state forest cover has increased from 13.4% in pre-1988 to more than 16% as in 2010,
primarily due to success of JFM. Reference may also be made to the Report titled “Joint Forest
Management in West Bengal : A critique” prepared by Mr. P. Guhathakurta et al, and published
by World Wide Fund for Nature – India in 2000, about the success of JFM in resuscitation of
degraded forests of the State. However, after more than two decades of its initiation, present
form of JFM has reached the crossroads and a more innovative mechanism of people’s active
participation and sustainable management of the CPR. Most of the JFM Committees have
become controlled by a handful of villagers, who are either more concerned socially or are self-
styled village leaders. Micro-level planning in most JFMC areas have become confined to the
small group of villagers and the field forest staff and the micro plans mostly overlook the real
need and aspiration of the poorer section who are neither verbally nor socially vocal. The very
objective of JFM, to empower the forest fringe villagers and transfer the management of the
CPR to the community, has met a dead end. A time has come to explore the option of
Community Forest Management (CFM) of the Forest land, without active control of Forest
Department. We may start with a few Pilot Projects on CFM.
207 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Some reasons could be cited for success of JFM in South Bengal:

        a)      Fast degradation of Protected Forests, mostly ex-zamindari forests which had
                vested in the State as per Estate Acquisition Act of 1953, by the forest fringe
                population for collection of fuel/ timber for their livelihood. Some of the rights of
                the fringe dwellers had not been settled, as required under Indian Forest Act,
                1927, and the vested forests had stopped suo motu all the existing rights,
                resulting into forest-people conflict.
        b)      Success of fast growing Eucalyptus plantations, on degraded and blank forest
                patches raised under Social Forestry programmes, as alternate land-use options
                for the lateritic, non-irrigated, low-productivity private land in South west
                Bengal.
        c)      Distribution of large chunks of vested waste land, in these districts, to the
                landless families resulting into adoption of large-scale group Farm Forestry.
        d)      Incentives of sharing 25% of harvested forest produce (poles and not timber) with
                the JFMCs.
        e)      Breaking the barrier, between the forest fringe population and the foresters,
                through micro-planning under Joint Forest management.


The reasons for limited success of JFMCs in North Bengal are as follows:

        a. Absence of conditions (i) to (iii) mentioned above
        b. Most of the forests in North Bengal are Reserved Forests, as per IFA 1927, and
           pressure from the forest fringe population was marginal. Unlike in South Bengal,
           North Bengal forests have long-rotation crops, producing timber. Major theft of
           forest produce is by timber mafia.
        c. Because of above facts, JFM never developed spontaneously in North Bengal, unlike
           in South Bengal, and Forest officials had to introduce the concept, to some extent
           mechanically, amongst the fringe people other than Forest villages.
        d. Other stakeholders, i.e., Forest villagers were already allocated land, for habitation
           and cultivation, on lease-hold basis from the time of their settlement and also they
           were provided with other infrastructural support like village roads, irrigation
           facilities, houses, primary schools by the Forest Dept. with Central Govt. fund for
           Tribal development.


2.2 Scheduled Tribe and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Rights)
Act, 2006

The significance and fundamental contribution of the Act lies in its community orientation,
going beyond the paradigm of individual rights not only in respect of community claims over its
resources but also in overall procedure for recognizing forest rights even at the individual level.
The Act is qualified with construction of a political community at least at the village level, where
sole “responsibility and authority” has been given to the Gram Sabha to settle peoples
livelihoods rights, ensure food security, sustainable use of resources as well as to protect forests
and biodiversity to maintain an ecological balance for strengthening the conservation regime of
the forests. But, unfortunately, the whole process of community building and community
control has been diluted into a mere patta giving process (Sourish Jha, EPW, 14 August, 2010).

This Act brought another major change in the management of the State-owned forests.
Historically, West Bengal had around 170 forest villages, with a registered population of 45000
(approx). These Forest Villages were established by the Forest Department, in the districts of
Jalpaiguri and Darjeeling, in early 20th century on forest land for the purpose of supply of labour
for forestry activities. Each household was provided with 2/ 3 acres of forest land for building
208 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
their huts and for the purpose of cultivation, as their lease-hold rights. Forest Department also
built up rudimentary infrastructural facilities, from time to time, through various schemes and
Projects. All such bonafide forest villagers have been recognized under FRA and patta has been
given to most of them as per the provisions of the Act.

In case of South Bengal, there was no such officially recognized Forest Villages. The applicants
under the FRA were traditionally considered as individual encroachers of forest land and these
cases are also mostly regularized in case of Bardhaman, Birbhum districts. In case of Paschim
Medinipur, Bankura and Purulia districts, left-wing extremism problem in the past had slowed
down the process of recognition of rights under FRA.

Another problem faced in the State is the settlement of Rights for the Other Traditional Forest
Dwellers who are hardly able to provide proof/ documents in support of their claim for
occupation for 75 years or more. Though some guidelines have been issued by the Ministry of
Tribal Welfare, GOI in this regard, yet the problems persist in the field.

As per official records (Department of Backward Classes Welfare Department), around 1,34,000
applications for Individual Rights and another 3,100 applications for CFR rights were received
by the Gram Sabhas in different blocks of 10 districts of the state. Till December 2013, total
individual pattas issued are 31,000 and 312 cases of CFR rights were officially recognized and
pattas were issued (source Department of Backward Classes Welfare, GoWB). Around 78,000
cases were rejected at FRC level. Applications for CFR mostly comprised cases of Playground,
Burning ghats, Primary schools and the members of the community enjoying the benefits, had
applied for the Rights. Pattas had been given to the community (comprising the listed members)
for the specific benefits they had been enjoying earlier.

In most of the cases, the forest land, for which Rights were given, had been demarcated and the
maps were enclosed along with patta documents. Backward Classes Welfare department had
sanctioned purchase of 70 GPS for use by the field foresters to facilitate speedy demarcation of
the land in question.

The question now remains how to provide food security to the patta holders of Forest Land
under FRA, after ensuring their shelter security. Most of the patta lands in South Bengal are
either agriculturally unproductive or unfit to sustain the livelihood of these beneficiaries under
FRA. A mechanism has to be evolved to ensure holistic development of the tribal/ OTFD
beneficiaries under the Act.

Forest Rights Act and LAMPS

1) The 70s saw the emergence of tribal co-operatives, ‘Large Sized Multipurpose Cooperative
Societies’ (LAMPS). They owe their existence to a set of recommendation of a certain Committe e
(Bawa Committee) which sought to harness the co-operative spirit existent among the tribal in
their development. It was also an effort to bolster the Tribal Sub Plan. Tribal Development
Cooperative Corporations came into existence as apex society of these primary societies.

One of the main activities of LAMPS s is collection of minor forest produce (MFP Operation)
and as far as record goes the LAMPS in the districts of Purulia, Bankura and Paschim Medinipur
(erstwhile Medinipur) collected kendu leaves right from the late 70s and early 80s. They also
collected sal seeds in certain pockets, yet this aspect, fizzled out owing to a lack of organized
market.

As per the Forest Rights Act 2006, community forest rights can be claimed in two forms, first as
the right to live or rights of entitlements or uses as is incorporated in Sec 3 (1) of the Act and
second as the right to protect, regenerate, conserve or manage any community forest resource
which tribal people have been protecting or managing traditionally for sustainable use [Sec

209 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
3(1)(i)]. This right to Community Forest Resource is given under Form-C while community
forest right patta is issued through Form B. Alongside under Sec 3(2) central government can
allow diversion of forest land for infrastructure purpose involving felling of trees. An essential
condition for this diversion is the recommendation of Gram Sabha and the quantum of such
diversion should be less than one hectare in each case.

Under Community Forest Resource Rights the LAMPS feature actively as kendu leaf collectors
are predominantly members of these co-operative societies, and they have traditionally been
involved in collection, preservation and management of kendu leaves. Consequently the LAMPS
being the collectors’ co-operatives staked their claims for Community Forest Resource Rights
under this act. In general members of around 25 LAMPS of Paschim Medinipur, Bankura and
Purulia traditionally collect the Kendu leaves and they are in the process of staking their claim to
the competent authorities. Till December 2013, 301 claims have been preferred by the LAMPS
for sanction of this right. West Bengal is somewhat late starter here and only after the
September 2013 round of meeting held by Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Government of India with
the state governments in this regard the LAMPS stepped in. These claims of the LAMPS are in
the process of being enquired into by the FRCs.

WBTDCCL has conducted three rounds of awareness meeting with the LAMPS in this regard.

2) It may also be recommended to the competent authority that the patta issued in regard to
individual rights under FRA, should be issued compulsorily in names of wife and husband, with
the name of the wife featuring in the patta ahead of that of husband. .

3) As mentioned above the amount of Royalty charged is minimal and charging Royalty by an
agreement between Forest Dept. and Backward Classes Welfare Department is a policy matter of
State government which could possibly be reviewed and the beneficiaries in that case will be the
LAMPS, the collectors’ cooperative.

2.2 Critical issues

2.2.1 In West Bengal, only pattas have been issued to the individuals under FRA, 2006. No
action has yet been initiated, till date, to convert the Forest Villages in North Bengal into
revenue villages. However, with amendment of Panchayat Act in the State, in 1990s, all the
Forest Villages have been brought under the Panchayats and are eligible for receiving
development funds like other revenue villages. The villagers are also part of Gram Sansads.

2.2.2 It is true that progress on issue of CFR in West Bengal leaves much to be desired, mainly
due to following reasons, cited by the Forest officials:-

1) All the recorded Government Forest lands are now under Joint Forest Management, with
participation of forest fringe dwellers. The villagers include ST/ SC as well as General category
population, mostly dominated by SC and General Categories who may not qualify under FRA,
2006. Under JFM Resolutions in West Bengal, Community Rights as envisaged in Sec 3 (1)(c) of
FRA, are already accorded to JFM Committees but these Rights are pre-conditional and are not
of statutory nature. Since FRA 2006 over-rides all other previous Acts/ Rules/ Govt. Orders, (i)
the JFM Resolutions of the State can be modified to make the JFM Committees co-terminus
with Gram Sansads so that the Rights given under JFMCs have a legal backing and also covers
the provisions under FRA, (ii) In Sec 2, a sub-section “(aa) community includes forest dwelling
scheduled tribes, other traditional forest dwellers and any other community residing, along
with the previous two categories and are an integral part of the Gram Sabha, in the fringes/ on
the forest land” may be incorporated under FRA 2006.




210 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
2) If the qualifying community only gets the CFR right, then other category of population, who
had also been enjoying rights of common property resources, through the Government
Resolution on JFM/ Eco-development, will be deprived of their rights under FRA, 2006.

3) JFM in West Bengal is mostly apolitical in nature, and are conglomeration of fringe people
irrespective of caste, creed, economic or social status. Implementation of CPR under FRA, 2006
may bring in social division amongst the villagers and will give rise to non-resolvable social
conflict, ultimately threatening the JFM and leading to degradation of the Forest/ wildlife
resources.

4) Undoubtedly, JFM till now had been able to restore most of the degraded forests in West
Bengal. Any sudden change in the existing management practice should be looked into carefully.

2.2.3 However, the ground reality is that the feudal mentality of possessiveness is still present
in the minds of a few foresters at every level, from the field staff to the senior managers.
According to these people Right of ownership to forest fringe people are considered as
synonymous to mismanagement and loss of forest cover. There is a strong need to bring about
this change of attitude of those few foresters who do not believe in empowerment of people
through well defined mechanism and training.

2.2.4 The perception of FRA 2006 at the forester’s level is that the implementation of FRA is
the primary responsibility of Tribal Affairs Department. Forest Department officials at field
level, in general are apathetic towards providing maps/ documents/ evidences in support of the
claims unless the same are specifically called for. Forest Rights Committees at the field level are
not capable enough to handle the bureaucratic processes and unless the field level officials of
line Government Departments take proactive action to provide evidences, it will be impossible
for the FRCs to examine the applications in its right perspective. This may be one of the reasons
for large scale rejection of applications and poor performance of distribution of Forest Rights
under FRA 2006.

2.2.5 It may be mentioned that the State Government has initiated process of reviewing all
rejected applications, at FRC levels, under FRA 2006 so that justifications are given for rejecting
any application, both individual and Community rights.



2.2.6 In order to improve the scenario, there is a need to restructure the entire
mechanism of JFM so as to make it compatible with the provisions of FRA 2006.
The existing dual mechanism of empowerment only acts as counter- productive
whereas their compatibility can be synergistic in effect. Changes in Forest
Governance will definitely strengthen the basic objective of Forest conservation.

2.2.7 Regarding interpretation of the definition of Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (OTFD),
Forest and other State Government officials are of the general opinion that Sec 2 (o) of FRA,
2006 clearly defines the status of OTFDs. Sec 4 (3) of the Act defines the eligibility of Rights of
OTFDs under Sec 3(1)(a). If OTFDs have to be given benefits like FDSTs (defined under Sec
2(c)), then the Act needs to be amended. Forest officials are of opinion that the criteria of 75
years of residence in an area (not necessarily on the plot being claimed), and dependence on the
forest land as of December 2005, and occupation does not have to be for 75 years, will only allow
Right of ownership to those who had encroached Forest land between the enactment of Act and
invitation of applications by the FRC under FRA. The Forest Officers, implementing the Act, do
not desire to interpret the Act in violation of provisions of the Act passed by the Parliament.
They feel that Ministry of Tribal Affairs should do the needful in this regard and the Act
amended suitably to pass on similar benefits to the OTFD also.

211 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
2.3.1 Forest Development Agency: FDAs have been constituted in all the States, under the
guidelines of Min of Environment & Forests, GOI, for empowering the villagers in
implementation of National Afforestation programme and other forestry development activities.
However, in the absence of effective delegation, the FDAs remain mostly controlled by the
Government and have degenerated into another quasi-government department. The present
status is almost analogous to the failure of FDA mechanism. Moreover, the scheme could never
really take off in full swing due to the erratic and late release of fund by GOI, leading to failure of
time-bound works of afforestations. In order to make FDAs sustainable and functional, there is
a need to (i) empower the villagers in technical and financial management of the afforestations/
rural development works, (ii) capacity building of forest officials and the members of JFMCs
and (iii) timely release of fund to allow completion of time-bound afforesation works.

2.4.1 Legal conflict

There is as such no legal conflict between Forest Rights Act 2006, Wild Life Protection Act 1972
and Forest Conservation Act 1980 as the FRA 2006 over-rides other two Acts when in
contradiction. However, the common belief in the minds of all foresters is that, according rights
on forest land to an individual tantamount to loss of control on and lack of management of
forest land leading to degradation and violation of FC Act/ WLP Act/ IF Act 1927 by the patta
recipients under FRA. In practice, once the owner acquires the Right under FRA, Forest Dept.
becomes oblivious of the management practices of the said Forest land. This may result into
diversion of the forest land for some other purpose, sometimes taking advantage of simplicity of
tribal/ backward population, since Forest Department in practice no longer remain the
custodian of the land.

The solution will be to (i) make the forest officials involved in subsequent management of the
land in question to ensure conservation of existing flora/ fauna and to develop the same, (ii)
carry out intensive joint training of the staff of Forest deptt, Tribal Affairs Deptt and the civil
administration for better understanding and implementation of FRA 2006.

However, the following suggestions are again re-iterated:-

    1) Sec 2(a) of FRA 2006 defines the “Community Forest Resources” under the said Act.
       Also, Sec3(1)(c) to (d) of FRA explains the nature of Community Rights under the Act,
       which is of statutory nature.

        Under JFM Resolutions in W.B, Community Rights as envisaged in Sec 3 (1)(c) of FRA,
        are already accorded to JFM Committees but these Rights are pre-conditional and are
        not of statutory nature. Since FRA 2006 over-rides all other previous Acts/ Rules/ Govt
        Orders, (i) the JFM Resolutions of the State can be modified to make the JFMCs co-
        terminus with Gram Sansads so that the Rights given under JFMCs have a legal backing
        and also covers the provisions under FRA, (ii) In Sec 2, a sub-section “(aa) community
        includes forest dwelling scheduled tribes, other traditional forest dwellers and any other
        community residing, along with the previous two categories and are an integral part of
        the Gram Sabha, in the fringes/ on the forest land” may be incorporated under FRA
        2006.

    2) There is as such no legal conflict between FRA 2006, WLP Act 1972 and FC Act 1980 as
       the FRA 2006 over-rides other two Acts when in contradiction. However, the common
       belief in the minds of all foresters is that, according rights on forest land to an individual
       tantamount to loss of control on and lack of management of forest land leading to
       degradation and violation of FC Act/ WLP Act/ IF Act 1927 by the owners under FRA. In
       practice, once the owner acquires the Right under FRA, Forest or any other Deptt
       becomes oblivious of the management practices of the said Forest land. This may result
       into diversion of the forest land for some other purpose, sometimes taking advantage of
212 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        simplicity of tribal/ backward population, since Forest Department in practice no longer
        remain the custodian of the land.

The solution will be to (i) make the forest officials involved in subsequent management of the
land in question to ensure conservation of existing flora/ fauna and to develop the same, (ii)
carry out intensive joint training of the staff of Forest deptt, Tribal Affairs Deptt and the civil
administration for better understanding and implementation of FRA 2006.

2.5 Rural Land Use Regulations

In West Bengal whoever holds land for any purpose whatsoever is called a raiyat. He is the
owner of the land and his right is heritable and transferable. Before 1981 he could change the
use of his land according to his choice. By an amendment of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act
1955 (hereafter WBLR) made in 1981 restrictions were imposed on the change of the use of land
from its present position. The raiyat has been prohibited from making any change in the use of
his land without the permission in writing from the competent authority. Detailed procedure for
obtaining such permission as well as giving such permission has been provided in the WBLR
Act, Rules framed thereunder and the West Bengal Land and Land Reforms Manual, 1991
embodying the policy of the Government.

The application for conversion must be made in prescribed form along with several documents
such as – (1) a copy of the current record of rights which is not readily supplied in respect of
lands in the adjacent villages of the city of Kolkata and other villages in and around the towns;
(2) a copy of the current rent receipt; (3) a sketch map of the plot/plots of land with side
measurement and surroundings including approach road; (4) an affidavit for creation of
compensatory water-body if the land proposed to be converted includes any water-body of any
size and description; (5) a no-objection certificate from the WB Pollution Control Board; (6) a
copy of the detailed project report (DPR) duly vetted by the competent authority under the WB
Town and country (Planning and Development) Act 1979; (7) and an undertaking by way of an
affidavit as to various other obligations.

The authority dealing with an application for conversation has been asked to hold an enquiry to
ascertain: (1) Whether the proposed conversion is likely to cause any inconvenience to the
residents of the locality; (2) if the conversion will interfere with the normal agricultural activities
in the surrounding area; (3) if the conversion will in any way hamper the public easement; (4) if
the conversion will lead to eviction of a bargadar; (5) if the permission for conversion will in any
way prejudice the application of the provision of WB Estates Acquisition Act,1953, Urban Land
(Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976, WB Town and Country (Planning and Development) Act,
1979, East Kolkata Wetland (Conservation and Management) Act, 2006.

It has been mandated that the principal consideration should be whether the proposed change is
likely to affect adversely the interest of any person or have deleterious effects on the
environment. To clear this mandate an example has been given. If permission is given to convert
an agricultural land for setting up an industry then the interests of the bargadar cultivating such
land will be adversely affected.

It has been further mandated that the authority before granting permission for conversion must
make a prior consultation in writing with the Fisheries Department and Environment
Department for clearance.

Conversion of land without permission has been made a cognizable and non-bailable offence
punishable with imprisonment up to three years or with fine up to Fifty thousand rupees or with
both. Land is meant to be used for agricultural purposes only. Agricultural land should not be
used for infrastructure, industry, or urbanization including real estate. This may be pointed out


213 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
that if provision for some water for irrigation is made, any piece of land in this state can be used
for producing this or that crop.

To achieve this end of keeping land in its present use the applicant has been burdened with
obtaining so many no-objection certificates from different authorities including the local people,
the whole process has been made unnecessarily time-consuming, the authority who is none but
the Collector or District Land and Land Reforms Officer if the area of the land proposed to be
converted is more than one acre has been saddled with so many don’ts and left with no
discretion to decide according to the merit of a case, and the penalty for conversion without
permission has been made so harsh.

Before 1981 land under the WBLR Act meant agricultural land only and a raiyat meant a person
or institution holding land for the purpose of agriculture. In the amendment of the Act made in
1981 in which the restrictions on the change of the use of land were brought into existence the
definition of land was changed from agricultural land to land of every description and that of
raiyat was changed from a person or institution holding land for agricultural purpose to holding
land for any purpose whatsoever.

The logic behind these contradictory steps is this. The definitions of land and raiyat were made
wider not for making more land available for various purposes but for bringing all kinds of land
both agricultural and non-agricultural within the purview of ceiling limit. Hence, the
restrictions on the change of the use were simultaneously introduced. Wider definitions of land
and raiyat are good for taking away excess lands from the owners, but bad if they want to use
their lands for purposes according to their choice. One may find similarity in logic with the
approach of the confused intellectuals and activists to the doctrine of eminent domain. The
power of eminent domain is good when it is exercised to abolish Zamindary and take away land
held in excess of the ceiling limit. It is bad when it is exercised to acquire land held within the
ceiling limit for infrastructure, industry and urban development.



Panel 3: Urban Land Use, Planning and Development

Introduction

For the first time in the history more than half of the world’s population lives in urban areas.
Between 2000 and 2030, in developing countries including India the urban population is
expected to double. West Bengal is neither an exception from this trend and Census data
confirms that since 2001 there has been a huge increase in urban centres across the Stateagainst
a decline in the number of villages.

The decadal growth of urban population in West Bengal has been found to be a shade higher
than the national average. While the national average is 31.16 per cent, the decadal growth rate
in the State is 31.89 per cent.

A sharp rise of the number of ‘census towns' since 2001 is a clear indication that people from
rural backgrounds are increasingly discarding agriculture as a livelihood option and opting for
more urban alternatives. A census town is defined as a semi-urban centre with a minimum
population of 5,000 people, a population density of 400 persons per sq km and where over 75
per cent of the male population is engaged in non-agricultural activities.The number of such
‘census towns' has gone up from 255 in 2001 to 780 in 2011 and the nu mber of towns has
increased from 378 to 909. Meanwhile, the number of villages has come down from 40,782 in
2001 to 40,203 in 2011.


214 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
While the rural population has grown by only 7.73 per cent since 2001, the urban population has
leapt up by 29.90 per cent in 10 years with each of the 19 districts showing a higher population
growth in urban areas. Malda district has recorded the highest decadal growth rate in urban
areas at 129.07 per cent and Howrah district has shown the lowest decadal growth rate in rural
areas at (-)16.22 – both indicating cases of rapid urbanisation.

The problems faced by the urban areas seriously impeding the development agenda are
manifold – scarcity of developed urban land, continuously accumulated backlog of housing,
inadequate urban infrastructure and services to match the ever-growing demand, environmental
degradation and alarming increase in the number of urban poor (urbanisation of poverty).

The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 and the flagship scheme of the central
government, Jawharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) brought about
much desired changes in the paradigm of thinking, functioning and implementing urban
planning and development management process. As a result the planning processes are also
undergoing changes where policy decisions are ought to be taken through greater participation
of private sector, non-government organisations, and the civil society in which the marginalised
and vulnerable poor are included. Under the provisions of 74th Amendment, activities such as
urban planning including town planning, regulations of land use and slum improvement and
upgradation and provisions of basic services have been included in the list of municipal
functions.

West Bengal has fully implemented the provisions of 74th Amendment Act by ensuring
decentralized approach to planning and development that would make urban local bodies
responsible for all planning and development activities within the areas of their jurisdiction.

Land use planning is understood as a systematic and iterative procedure carried out in order
to create an enabling environment for sustainable development of land resources to meet
people’s needs and demands. It assesses the physical, socio-economic, institutional and legal
potentials and constraints with respect to optimal and sustainable use of natural resources and
land and empowers people to make decision about how to allocate those resources. Another
definition of ‘land use planning’ is the process of evaluating land and alternative patt erns of land
use and other physical, social and economic conditions for the purposes of selecting and
adopting those kinds of land use and course of action best suited to achieve specified objectives.
Land use planning may be at national, regional, state, district, watershed, city, village or other
local levels.

We shall here discuss about the status of the land use plan of West Bengal in relation to the
State’s urban development policy. The 74th CAA,1992 provides for District Planning and
Metropolitan Area Planning that consolidates plans of both panchayats and municipalities
having regard to spatial (land use) planning. The district plan prepared currently, in general, do
not cover spatial (land), environmental as well as other urban concerns.

In practice though, urban planning (includes land use plan) leaves much space for
improvement. The causes for disconnect between regulations on paper and the reality on ground
include accelerated urban growth and a absence of organic coordination between regional
planning bodies with local ones to streamline uniformity in priorities and actions.

Legal Framework

In West Bengal, land use and development of lands is exercised under West Bengal Town and
Country (Planning and Development) Act, 1979 in the urban areas. Under this Act, land use
planning is mandatory to effectively control urban development in all the cities, areas under
Development Authorities and Planning Areas formed by the State Government. Moreover,
215 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
under Sec 113 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993(amended in 2007), it has become
mandatory for all the municipalities to prepare land use plans while formulating development
plans for the areas concerned. Under the WBT&CP Act, 1979 Land Use Development Control
Plans (LUDCP) are prepared for the planning areas. In the state of West Bengal, the municipal
authorities have been empowered to regulate land use and construction of buildings. In section
63 of chapter VI ibid indicates the obligatory functions of the Municipalities. In sub section (3)
of said section 63, the matter has been dealt with elaborately. It is also worthy to mention that
the municipal authorities in this state are empowered to regulate the building activities through
an elaborate chapter XIV of the said act and the West Bengal Municipal (Building) Rules,2007
framed there under and to prepare detailed plan, inter alia, the land use plan under chapter XIX
of the said act. It may also be mentioned that such power has been vested with the municipal
authorities of this state much before enactment of the 74th constitutional amendment Act.

Criteria for land conversion

Land use in West Bengal is characterised by its intensiveness, the challenge for land use
planning is to achieve concurrently the objectives of protecting and consolidating agriculture,
diversifying agricultural production and enhancing rural development and moving firmly
towards industrialisation and infrastructure development. The policy must take into account the
pressure for urbanisation and the developments of urban environments.

The main sources of new demand for land at present are industry, housing, urban spaces and
infrastructure. The provision of land for each of these purposes will require the conversion of
land from other uses. The factors to be considered when land is converted to any of these uses
from other current use include the following:

    1. The current use to which land is being put and the social costs of land conversion.
       Where land is agricultural, the factors to be considered are the number of crops grown
       on the land, irrigation facilities current levels of employment and income generation and
       the productive potential of land.
    2. The impact of land conversion on the present users of the land, particularly when they
       belong to the working poor. Full and just compensation must be provided for any land
       that is converted to alternative purposes. This is a matter of the people’s entitlement.
    3. The benefits from the alternative uses to which the land will be put, particularly with
       regard to employment and income generation.
    4. Environmental considerations, particularly with respect to fragile or endangered
       ecological zones.
    5. Identify vacant land first. As stated, the Government has initiated action to create an
       inventory of land that is not currently in use

Land Use Data Base

A rational land use policy requires a modern and scientific data base. In particular, the new
demands for land in different spheres of development have brought to the fore the need to
reform and update the systems of land statistics in West Bengal. The State Government intends
to revamp the statistical system with respect to land use and to undertake a three-pronged
medium-term and short-term programme in this regard:

    1. The Government will establish an information system on the land that is based on
       annual plot-by-plot verification of land tenure, land use, irrigation and cropping. It has
       been estimated that such a data base can be built over a period of five or six years, and
       the Government will organise the administration and the arrangements for a change over
       to such a system of consolidated land records in the near future.


216 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    2. Government has initiated a programme to create, in the short run, a land bank. All
       districts have been asked to provide information on vacant land in the districts at the
       disposal of government in the first instance and on significant and unused tracts of land
       in the private sector in the next instance. The objective of the State Government is that,
       in future, when land is required for industrialization, housing and infrastructural
       development the State Government be able to specify land identified through rational
       criteria as being available for industrialization.

    3. The Government of West Bengal will begin an exercise to scientifically evaluate the
       demand for land in the State for different development activities. Evaluation will be
       made, in particular, of the demand for land for cultivation and related activity,
       urbanisation, housing, physical infrastructure, and industry for over a five-year and a ten
       year period.


Background & Best Practices

During early eighties, it was felt by the government of West Bengal that the policy of
decentralization of planning and development activities should be implemented through a
decentralized institutional structure for the municipal governanceand the local bodies are to be
given adequate power and responsibilities to deal with urban problems through legislative
provisions. Some of the important measures which were taken in this regard are:-

       The West Bengal Urban Development Strategy committee was set-up in 1979 to critically
        look into the process of urban development in the state as a whole and to devise strategy
        for state-wide urban development.
       The Town and Country (Planning and Development) Act 1979 was enacted. Statutory
        obligations are to produce Existing Land Use maps and Registers (ELUMR) and land
        Use of Development Control Plans (LUDCP) for the areas under the jurisdiction of
        Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority (CMDA).
       The first Municipal Finance Commission was set up in 1979 in the state.
       A Central Valuation Board was set up to overcome the deficiency of under valuation of
        properties in the municipal areas in 1979 through an Act. Municipal Corporation Acts
        were enacted since 1980 for Calcutta, Howrah, Assansol, Siliguri and Chandernagore.
        These New Acts provided for a cabinet form of local government for civic administration,
        with a Mayor-in-Council set up.
       The Bengal Municipal Act of 1932 was substantially amended and the new W.B.
        Municipal Act 1993 was enacted for cabinet system of government in the manner of
        Chairman –in Council set up.
       In the 1990s, in view of the 73rd and 74th Amendments of the constitution of India, two
        more Acts, namely, W.B. District Planning Committee Act 1994, and W.B. Metropolitan
        Planning Committee Act 1994 along with the W.B. District Planning Committee Rules
        1994 came into force for the purpose of decentralized spatial and socio-economic
        Planning in the state.

This apart, to cope with urban growth, several steps have been taken by the Government
through a process of urban planning by creating Development Authorities and planning areas.
There are as many as 10 such Development Authorities and planning Areas in the state where
the planning process is able to cope with the urban growth. The old municipal cities are also into
such process after the preparation of Development plans has been made mandatory under law.

Draft Development Plans and stakeholders’ participation



217 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The scenario changed when the state government took the initiative of introducing the Kolkata
Urban Services for the Poor (KUSP), a multi-sector urban reforms programme by creating
Change Management Unit with DFID funding. Targeted towards 40 Urban Local Bodies in
Kolkata Metropolitan Area, some of the key objectives of this programme were:

       Improved urban planning and governance
       Enhanced access of basic urban services to the poor and
       Promoting pro poor economic growth

It was decided that the Municipal Affairs Department would be in the lead and other
organizations would provide support at various levels of operation viz.;

       Directorate of Local Bodies(DLB)
       State Urban Development Agency(SUDA)
       Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority (KMDA)
       West Bengal Valuation Board (WBVB)
       Municipal Engineering Directorate (MED) and
       Institute of Local Government and Urban Studies(ILGUS)

Draft development plan (DDP) preparation became mandatory function of the ULBs as per the
Act (WB Municipal Act 1993 amended during 1998-2007). CMU initiated DDP preparation for
40 ULBs under KUSP in July 2005. Subsequently, this programme was rolled out to 126
Municipalities in the state of West Bengal. The common guidelines for DDP development
mentions about two important groups to be constituted with a view to ensuring stakeholders’
participation.

           DDP Policy Group (DPG) – the DPG will provide policy guidance and strategic
            support for preparation and implementation of the DDP and will also coordinate
            with higher levels of the government. Elected decision makers and in some cases
            nominated members are included in the DPG
           DDP Technical Group (DTG) – will be responsible for preparing the project
            proposals and plans for each of the sub-component of the DDP, with overall guidance
            from DPG. The members of DTG are urban planners, engineers, community
            development experts, executive officer etc., depending on the DTG category.

To ensure participation and consultation/ inputs from widest possible range of stakeholders,
ward committees, neighborhood groups (NHG), and community development societies (CDS)
are involved in the process of DDP preparation.

One of the important features of DDP process is to ensure all possible attempts being taken for
assessment of socio-economic needs including housing needs of the poorest and most
disadvantaged living in formal and informal settlements. A transparent process is recommended
to be maintained for prioritizing the issues in DDP.

Land use plan and development is covered under component I of the DDP along with slum
infrastructure, intra and trans-municipal infrastructure and environment development. A study
conducted on ‘West Bengal experience of DDP preparation’ by the Administrative Training
Institute (by Uttam Kr. Roy and Madhubanti Ganguly) in 2009 covering 14 municipal towns
covered under KUSP reveals that DTG was asked to frame the land use development plan in
three subthemes:

            1. Making land available
            2. Development of municipal owned land
            3. Regulatory controls on development of area under jurisdiction of ULBs

218 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Excerpts from the study - The study also mentions that involvement of public and other
stakeholders was made for a) problem identification b) prioritization and c) validation of the
plans. 50% of all ULBs did study the existing situation on the basis of Urban Development Plan
Formulation and Implementation guidelines (1996) which was developed by the Ministry of
Urban Development for assisting the policy makers, administrators and urban planners to
align the future needs of the ever growing population with planned urbanization. It appeared
that the issues related to immediate need of the people were addressed better. For example
existing issues like encroachment, lack of open green space etc. were given priority and land
issues were identified almost by all cases. Further, the prioritization of projects identified by
public has been done in an open and participatory method by all ULBs. Whereas the expected
plan outcome like innovative land assembly system, development control plan, future growth
& land use plan have not emerged. Only 20-40% ULBs (2 to 5) have come up with identified
public land, land assembly procedure, development controls/strategy etc. No single ULB has
come up with a future spatial land use plan. Land acquisition and purchase has been the only
mode of land assembly for only three ULBs. No ULB took any area development projects for
future residential growth. Fragmented small scale projects like beautification of parks,
creation of market complex, ward office or health centre remained as majority. Five ULBs
mentioned or undertook projects on LUDCP enforcement of local revisions. Interestingly, it
was found that the ULBs who got additional advisory or support from university or institute
could address more parameters under the study.

It has been found that, in general, that outcome like ‘existing issues’, ‘priority projects’ have
been better from the bottom up approach of planning. However more proactive planning
objectives could not be fulfilled by adopting bottom up approach. Those are best suited for top
down or conventional approach.

By now most of the ULBs have completed first generation DDP. Review of the plans produced in
a participatory approach has been done. This has helped the ULBs in enhancing their capacity.
This process had also a component called ‘Organizational Development’ which again has taught
the ULBs the concept of ‘Citizens Charter’. Introduction of Citizens Charter enabled the ULBs to
make commitment to the citizens for service delivery while DDP was prepared based on public
input. But despite such best practices and a background of quite a few positive initiatives,
implementation is still hindered for lack of constant monitoring, political will and proper
coordination among the departments. The following paragraph would speak of the barriers to
implementing several Acts especially the land use plan.

Barriers to implementation (urban land use planning)

While there is adequate legal framework (WBT&CP Act, 1979, West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993,
amended in 2007) for implementing land use plans in the overall planning process in urban
areas, it has been observed during last two decades that there are several barriers to such
implementations. The barriers or constraints as envisaged are enumerated below.

       Capacity gap – planned development in cities need smart urban and regional land use
        planning. The 12th Five Year Plan approach paper has identified the capacity gap in this
        area as a major constraint. Shortage of staff, especially technically qualified personnel is
        a real barrier to urban (land use) planning. Dedicated urban planning technical cadres
        should be created, with more Schools of Planning and Urban Management Programmes
        are the need of hours
       Institutional barriers – at the state level better convergence should be sought as
        envisaged in the 74th CAA between the state, district level and metropolitan planning
        (KMDA and alike)
       Financial barriers – to bridge the gap in financing land development and infrastructure
        projects. In order to improve financial health of the ULBs, GIS based land records to be
219 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        prepared to update the property taxation mechanism as per the mandatory reforms
        agenda of JNNURM.
       Political and cultural barriers, and in particular opposition from those who are adversely
        affected. There is lack of adequate policy framing to address these issues. These involve
        lack of political or public acceptance of an instrument, restrictions imposed by pressure
        groups and cultural attributes such as attitude to enforcement, which influence the
        effectiveness of instruments.
       Data and information barrier – creation of GIS and MIS based information database for
        all the ULBs in the state is the most important step to be taken to enable bridging
        information gap to support developmental practices

Proper GIS database provides crucial planning input for infrastructure planning, land use
planning, environment planning, slum development planning, local economic development,
livelihood support and planning related to health and education. GIS database provides
invaluable inputs not only for planning of infrastructure, like road, sewerage and drinking
water, but also helps manage important services to various stakeholders. All these planning
components are interlinked with each other. Moreover, the whole municipal planning is related
with the regional planning and the planning of neighboring municipalities. It is possible to
integrate slum development plan with infrastructure development as well as the local economic
development plan. In a democratic setup, this GIS framework simultaneously provides
transparency to the elected representatives who run the municipalities and to the stakeholders.

Another very important area is disaster management where the DDP planning process till now
failed to utilize GIS although in DDP programme the planning related to disaster management is
clearly specified (Reference – ‘Application of GIS in urban development plan’ by Sujit
Chowdhury).There are though a few ULBs which have adopted this technology to develop
modern and updated plans with difference and better practical, priority options for
implementation.

However, during last six to seven years signs of improvement have been observed in
preparations of Urban Policies to address these issues of constraints. Now, under Sec 29 and Sec
36 of the WBT&CP Act 1979, and under Sec 113 of the West Bengal Municipal Act,
1993(Amended in 2007), land use plans and changes in those plans are based on public inputs
through a process of consultation with the civil societies and marginalised sections of urban
areas. To implement land use plans in the state with right earnest, other than what have been
stated above, three types of integration are needed.

           Horizontal: between sectors within an authority.
           Spatial: between adjacent authorities.
           Vertical: between tiers of Government.

This suggested integration would not only help in implementing land use plans in the state, but
also the overall planning process for which the capacity building of the stakeholders has been
initiated properly. Providing municipal services and proper implementation of development
plans (which are already there) would help the urban local bodies achieving amore citizen-
friendly governance along with improved spatial planning for land use and development.

Security of tenure to urban poor

The UN-HABITAT generalises the most common tenure systems which include freehold leases,
provisional or conditional tenure and group tenure arrangements. Further importance is given
to security of tenure by including as one of the objectives of JNNURM. In West Bengal no policy
has yet been framed to ensure security of tenures to informal section who are residing forcibly
on private land or unauthorizedly on government land in cities and towns. Those who are

220 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
residing in slums or bustees within the first 100 wards of KMC and beyond are bharatias whose
rights are protected under the Perimeses Tenabcy Act, 1997.

It was proposed in the KUSP preparatory studies that the respective ULBs should take the lead
role in improving tenure security of the poor.

The survey (urban statistics and HR assessment survey - USHA) facilitated by State Urban
Development Agency (SUDA) has been completed in the KMA area, a brief look at the result of
the survey indicates that covering 41 ULBs within KMA area (excluding Kolkata Municipal
Corporation), total number of slum households surveyed is 551,501 and the population is
23,40,440 (data source SUDA, survey has been conducted taking into account the ‘whole slum’
where other infrastructures have not been provided as yet).

Housing coverage under JNNURM

So far 1,58,000 dwelling units under BSUP has been sanctioned, out of which 89,000 units’
construction has been completed. Under IHSDP, 52,000 dwelling units have been sanctioned so
far (for other than KMA area), out of which 43,000 are completed.

Conclusion

It is reassuring to note that under RAY, a state level sanctioning and monitoring committee has
been set up under the chairmanship of the Hon’ble Chief Minister. This committee is seriously
considering providing property rights in the form of lease to the beneficiaries in the slums.

It may be mentioned here that West Bengal under the mandatory reforms agenda committed for
leveraging JNNURM resources, has shown remarkable progress and touched upon the
benchmarks set by the reforms issues within stipulated seven years since 2005. The coverage of
property tax has been 95% during the financial year 2012-13 for all 128 ULBs of the state
including KMC. As per the 12th Schedule of 74th CAA decentralization of all departmental
functions excluding fire services have now been transferred to the ULBs by state government.
Enactment of Right to Public Service Act, 2013, has enabled the ULBs to deliver more citizen-
friendly services in a time-bound manner. This committed legislation and initiative has replaced
the early practice of citizen’s charter.



Panel 4: Management of Public Land

Public land in broad sense means lands held by different departments of both the Central and
State Governments, such as the Railways, the Defence, the Irrigation Department, Public Works
Department, the Forests Department, local bodies etc. The land held by the West Bengal
Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation and the government undertakings is also
public land. However, lands held by these departments were generally acquired under different
land acquisition Acts on the requisition of the respective department, to be used for specific
purposes and handed over to them to use the land for the purpose for which such lands were
acquired. Such lands are managed by the departments according to the policies adopted by
them.

However, what by “public land” is specifically meant in this state is the land referred to under
chapter VIII of the WBLR Act 1955– land which is at the disposal of the state government. The
principles of distribution of such lands have been dealt with under section 49 of the LR act read
with Rule 20A of the WBLR Rules 1965 and the WBLR Manual 1991.

Chapter VIII of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 deals with the Management of Lands.
Section 52(2) of the Act and Rule 28A of the W. B. Land Reforms Rules, 1965 states that any
221 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
land belonging to the state or land which is at the disposal of the state government or held under
the state by virtue of the WBEA Act and WBLR Act, and all interests therein belonging to the
state government shall be managed in such manner as may be prescribed by the Collector of the
concerned district. As regards government lands management is entrusted to different
departments who require land for their activities. Management of land entails such activities as
protection of land from encroachment, removal of encroachment, if any, settlement / leasing out
of land. There is specific division of functions and responsibilities in regard to management of
land among the different levels of hierarchy. While specifying the responsibilities the principle
of “subsidiarity” is strictly adhered to. As regards lands belonging to municipalities and the
public institutions those are managed in the same way as government lands.

The state of West Bengal is the absolute owner of all lands lying within its geographical
boundaries. Having regard to their use and potential these lands have been divided into various
categories. All these categories have been clubbed and brought within the ambit of the amended
definition of “land” [sec 2(7), WBLR]. From the management point of view these lands may be
broadly divided into the following two categories:

    (1)     Lands in the domain of the state i.e. lands retained by the state in its own possession
            now described as land at the disposal of the State Government.
    (2)     Lands settled with individuals or institutions known as tenanted lands.


In respect of lands at its disposal the government’s role is that of a manager. As regards tenanted
lands, it acts as a regulator.

Management, administration etc. of khas lands: Role of L&LR Department

The L and LR department is the custodian of all lands and is the nodal department in respect of
matters relating to land. It only acts as a coordinator among the various departments and has no
supervisory power. This dispensation facilitates good land governance. Its main functions, inter
alia, are:

    (i)     formulation of policy regarding land management
    (ii)    settlement of land by way of implementation of land reforms [ sec 49(1), WBLR]
    (iii)   settlement of lands of non-agricultural character to individuals and institutions [
            rules 215 onwards, W.B. Land and Land Reforms Manual, 1991]
    (iv)    Prevention and removal of encroachment on its own lands
    (v)     Transfer of lands to other departments and to act as a coordinator among those
            departments.
    (vi)    Land Acquisition


[The list is illustrative, not exhaustive]

Other Government departments

Almost all departments have some lands at their disposal. Those departments are required to
manage those lands. Some departments, however, have significant roles to play for management
of the lands at their disposal. A few of those departments are listed below with a brief narration
of their functions:

               Department                                      Purpose of Land Use
    Forest department                        :    Afforestation and tree planting, including forest
                                                  cover, issue of pattas to eligible forest dwellers
                                                  under Forest Rights Act, 2006.

222 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    Fishery department                          :    Pisciculture, leasing out water bodies to
                                                     Fishermen’s Co-operatives, development of
                                                     water areas for the purpose of pisiculture.
    Irrigation   and    Waterways :                  Putting up embankments on river banks,
    department                                       leasing out water areas for short periods.
    Public Works department       :                  Issuing short term leases in respect of roadside
                                                     lands
    Commerce          and       Industries :         Issue of license for industrial activities,
    Department                                       providing     infrastructure      for    planned
                                                     development


The land use pattern of West Bengal is shown below:

                              Land Use              Area (in thousands)             Percentage
                                                            (ha)
            Total geographical area                 8875                            NA
            Reporting area for land utilization     8684                            100.00
            Forests                                 1174                            13.52
            Not available for cultivation           1814                            20.89
            Permanent pastures and other grazing 7                                  0.08
            lands
            Land under misc. tree crops and groves 55                               0.63
            Culturable wasteland                    32                              0.37
            Fallow lands other than current fallows 22                              0.25
            Current fallows                         287                             3.30
            Net area sown                           5294                            60.96
Source: India State of Forest Report, 2011

Till December, 2013, vesting of land under different Acts:

    1. WBEA Act :                            26,48,250.86 acres
    2. WBLR Act :                            3,50,990.16 acres
    3. Total vesting till date:               29,99,241.02 acres

Source: Director of Land Records & Surveys

Settlement of agricultural land at the disposal of government

Agricultural lands at the disposal of the government are settled under the provisions of sub-
sections (1) of Section 49 of the W. B. LR Act, 1955 read with Rule 20A of W. B. LR Rules, 1965.
Lands at the disposal of the government include the following:

    a)   Agricultural khas mahal lands;
    b)   Agricultural lands vested under the provisions of the WBEA Act;
    c)   Agricultural lands vested under the provisions of WNLR Act; and
    d)   Agricultural land owned by the government by any other means, e.g., acquired and
         relinquished land not taken over by ex-owner

Such agricultural land settlement by way of distribution has to be made to persons living within
the vicinity of the lands who want to cultivate the lands personally or who want to construct

223 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
dwelling house thereon. Distribution is to be made to a person who together with the members
of his family owns no land or owns less than one acre of land. In case of a bargadar, half of the
land cultivated by him as a bargadar has to be taken into account in computing the area to be
distributed to him. For homestead purpose the quantum of land to be distributed to a person
shall not exceed 0.08 acre. For such distribution no premium is charged and the person is not
required to pay any revenue for the land, but liable to pay cess assessed. The related statistics*
(till December 2013):

    a.   Total agricultural land available for distribution –              12,14,770.62 acres
    b.   Total agricultural land distributed [U/s 49 (1)] –                10,50,984.71 acres
    c.   Transferred to other departments (including panchayats)          - 85,280.41 acres
    d.   Land recorded in the name of bargadar [u/s 14S(3)] –              2088.03 acres
    e.   Total non-agricultural land distributed –                         55,752.12 acres

    *Source: Director of Land Records & Surveys (DLRS)

Land at the disposal of government can be settled with a local body or an authority constituted
or established by or under any law. Settlement for public purpose or for establishment,
maintenance of preservation of any educational or research institution or industry can be made
with any person or institution on terms and conditions as may be decided by the government.

Settlement of non-agricultural land at the disposal of government

Settlement of land for non-agricultural purpose is governed by Section 49 (5) read with Rule
20A (6) of the W.B. LR Rules, 1965. The Collector of the concerned district is authorised, with
prior approval of the L&LR Department, to settle a land of any classification or description
which is at the disposal of the state government. Settlement may take place with a person, a
group of persons, an organisation or a statutory body on such terms and conditions as may be
specified by the department. Some statistics*:

    a.   Net non-agricultural land vested                                  6,43,771.48 acres
    b.   Non-agricultural land distributed                                 55,752.12 acres
    c.   Area found fit for agriculture purpose                            73,250.31 acres
    d.   Area found fit for farm forestry                                  25,368.04 acres
    e.   Area transferred to other departments                             47,394.92 acres
    f.   Area settled as long-term lease                                   6299.63 acres
    g.   Area comprising sairati interest                                  29,232.90 acres
    h.   Area comprising village road/ public road                         56,997.53 acres
    i.   Area kept for development purpose                                 4570.14 acres

*Source: Director of Land Records & Surveys (DLRS)

Lands for non-agricultural purposes are ordinarily settled by the Collector with prior sanction of
the L&LR Department on long-term leases, except when long-term settlement is not possible for
any reason, the land may be settled on a short-term lease. Short–term lease is prohibited for
land in urban agglomerations, to which the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 is
applicable. The long-term settlement shall ordinarily be for a period of 30 years and on
expiration of the period the tenant is entitled for successive renewals of the lease for the same
period. In giving long-term lease for the first time the rent shall be fixed at 4% of the market
value of the land proposed for settlement and salami charged at 10 times the rent equalling to
40% of market price. The L&LR Department may reduce the rent and salami for a land if it is
satisfied that the land will be used for public or charitable purpose. For extended lease period of
99 years, the rent shall be fixed at 0.3% of the market value and salami at 95% of the market
value. For the period covering financial years 2008-09 to 2010-11, a total of 2193.85 acres of
224 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
non-agricultural land has been settled on long-term lease at a total amount of Rs. 185.31 crores
including rent and salami.

Settlement of sairati interest –

    a. Ferries - only vested and khasmahal ferries which are not declared as public ferries
       under the Bengal Ferries Act, 1885, are settled on public auction by the DL&LROs. They
       are empowered to accord sanction to the settlement of ferries with a revenue not
       exceeding Rs. 10,000/-. The Divisional Commissioner is empowered to confirm
       settlement with a revenue not exceeding Rs. 50,000/-. For settlement of ferry with
       revenue exceeding Rs. 50,000/-, the department of L&LR is empowered to confirm.
    b. Fisheries- are settled for a period not exceeding seven years. 25% of the average of the
       net income of the concerned fishery for preceding three years is charged as economic
       rent of the fishery. The DL&LRO is empowered to confirm settlement of fishery at rent
       not exceeding Rs. 2500/-. The Divisional Commissioner is empowered to confirm
       settlement at rent not exceeding Rs. 20,000/- beyond which the L&LR Department is
       empowered to confirm settlement.
    c. Part-vested tank – if less than 50% of a part vested tank is vested then the vested portion
       is settled with private co-sharer(s) for a period of 30 years for salami and rent as in the
       case of settlement of non-agricultural land on long-term lease. If more than 50% of a
       part-vested tank is vested then the tank shall not be settled with the private co-sharers.
       The private co-sharers shall form a Fish Production Group with suitable number of
       fishermen, and if local fishermen are not available, with local unemployed youths
       selected from out of the families living below poverty line and take settlement for a
       period not exceeding seven years.

Land Acquisition

Conceptual and Legal Issues
Land acquisition in the country in the present legal system has its basis in the Doctrine of
Eminent Domain of the State, which in simple terms means the sovereign power of the state to
acquire subject’s property without its consent for purposes of public purpose. Th e principle
underlying appropriation by State of Private Property is that the appropriation must be for
‘public utility’ or ‘public purpose’ as it is called in India. Land acquisition in India since
independence was executed in terms of Land Acquisition Act of 1894 and other Acts made by
different state governments to acquire land for specific purposes. It is only with effect from 1st
January 2014 that the central Act, the LA Act of 1894 has been replaced by a new Act. So it is the
Land Acquisition Act of 1894 (henceforth 1894 Act) is the basis of any discussion on land
acquisition. Since land belongs to concurrent list different states have made amendments to
1894 Act to serve state specific purposes.

The Preamble of the Land Acquisition Act of 1894 explains the reason which led to its
enactment, “for the acquisition of land needed for public purposes and for companies and for
determining the amount of compensation to be made on account of such acquisition”. The word
‘acquisition’ means and includes acquisition of all rights and interests of a tenant in a particular
piece of land by paying fair value or compensation. Under Article 298(i) of the Constitution of
India, the executive power to acquire land for the purposes of a state rests with the state
government concerned, while power to acquire land for the purposes of the Union has been
vested in the central government. The Constitution of India contains articles 31 (omitted in
1978), 31A,31B, 31C and 300A (from 1978) and provides for compulsory acquisition of land.
However, the second proviso to Article 31A clearly lays down that for acquisition of land being
held in excess of the ceiling limit prescribed in any Act compensation need not be paid at the
market value, but for acquisition of land held within the ceiling limit compensation shall not be
less than the market value.

225 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
For setting up of industry or infrastructure facilities land acquisition is inevitable. In a state like
West Bengal there are hardly available large holdings of land under direct government control
or even if available, are available in places which are not endowed with infrastructure facilities.
Infrastructure facilities are available in the areas where land holdings are in private hands,
mostly for agricultural activities. During post independent period a number of Acts were passed
to supplement 1894 Act with the specific purpose of land acquisition in particular context. These
are (a) West Bengal land (Requisition and acquisition) Act, 1948, (b) the West Bengal Land
Development and Planning Act 1948, (c) Calcutta Municipal Act 1951, (d) Calcutta Municipal
Corporation Act 1980 (for acquisition of land and building), (e)The West Bengal Industrial
Infrastructure Development Corporation Act 1974 (for acquisition of land for the purpose of
state govt. undertakings), (f) West Bengal Acquisition and Settlement of Homestead Land Act
1969, (g) West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agriculture Lobourers, Artisans and
Fishermen Act 1975 (for acquisition of land for various public purposes). An amendment to 1894
Act provision was made for giving compensation to the bragadars in addition to land owners.

The 1894 Act has survived the test of time for its superiority in many respects compared to other
Acts even though those were passed in the post-independence period. For example the Act (a)
listed is more draconian than 1894 Act for it applies to acquisition for any purpose (not public
purpose), does not have provision for prior notice or raising any objection or representation;
land can be acquired just by passing an office order. It is after several admonitions by the
Supreme Court that the Act was not further extended. Act (b) was meant specifically for the
rehabilitation of the displaced people of the erstwhile East Pakistan and was used to acquire
small quantum of land against meager compensation.

The 1894 Act has well laid out principles, from notification well ahead of actual acquisition,
compensation criteria etc. However, compensation is calculated on the basis of market price
which is calculated on the basis of the transactions during preceding 12 or even 36 months that
took place in the nearby moujas (revenue villages). Here market price means price at which sale
deed is registered in the office of local registrar. From a set of prices (remember land is not a
product for which there is unique price) obtained from the office of the registrar the very high or
very low prices are excluded as they might be outliers, then an average price is calculated on the
basis of the rest. The Act also requires notification about acquisition well ahead in time; the Act
has provisions for raising objections by potential land losers which has to be heard by competent
authority and people can make representations. However, this has remained a source of
controversy even if all procedures have been fully followed possibly because land acquisition is
considered to be interference in individual’s choice.

To make large quantum of land available within shortest possible time and to expedite the
disposal of land acquisition cases efficiently, the state government issued order No. 1701-LA-
3M-07/06 Kolkata the 6th.June, 2006, and overruled West Bengal Land Acquisition Manual,
1991 and previous executive orders. The order specifies land acquisition is justified on the
ground of public purpose even if government contribution for the project is just Re. One. This
clause of ‘public purpose’ has often been subjected to close scrutiny and explanation when land
is acquired by government and subsequently transferred to private sector for setting up of
industry. Some noteworthy features of the order:

       Consent awards system introduced and thereby reducing one-sided authoritarianism of
        the state machinery
       Collectors empowered financially and administratively
       Formal introduction of bare minimum Resettlement packages to the BPL families
        evicted on account of compulsory acquisition
       Patta-allottees to get full compensation like a free hold rayat
       Rescheduling time table for acquisition and payment of compensation


226 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
By leveraging the public purpose clause of the 1894 Act, the state government before in recent
times acquired land for West Bengal Industrial Development Corporation (WBIDC), a public
sector organization, to be subsequently transferred to private industrial house. The ‘public
purpose’ clause makes land acquisition easier for the government. Hence from the time of
Singur land acquisition the Government of West Bengal under the left Rule first introduced the
practice of acquiring land under the aegis of WBIDC and then transferring the same land to
private sector. At the same time new practices were also introduced for compensation and
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme. But the outcome has not been desirable. Subsequently
after the new Government came to power in the state the state government clearly states that the
government shall not forcibly acquire land.

In December 2012, the Government of West Bengal declared a comprehensive ‘land allotment
policy’ applicable for land owned or held by any department or agency funded by the
government. The L&LR Department is the nodal department for inter-departmental transfer of
land or long-term lease of vested/ khas land. Market value of land to be settled on long-term
lease would be based on the sale deeds of the area or the market price as determined by the
Inspector General of Registration, whichever is higher.

The policy states that land meant for commercial use shall invariably be auctioned to the highest
bidder. To reduce discretion and ensure transparency wide publicity including website
publication for such bidding is done and no reserve price prior to bidding is fixed. For projects
leading to industrial development, the highest price need not be the criteria nor should auction
be the only mode of allotment. The policy states that the department shall prepare and publish a
list of its own land assets with possible indication on what kind of industrial development along
with the tentative price to be determined on the basis of acquisition price, cost of capital,
development charges and premium as applicable.

Auction will not be required for construction of housing for poor, economically weaker sections
and low income group people through developers.

Land and Land Reforms Department is mandated under Rules of Business of the State
Government to manage the Government land. But once the department has transferred/ settled
government land with different departments, the responsibility to manage those land vests with
them. Unfortunately most of land held by the departments is not recorded in the record of rights
of land.




227 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panel 5: Transfer of land for Private Use
1. Background:

Land attains its significance as a factor of production unlike capital in the sense that land supply
cannot be increased either in the short or long run. The area of the state of West Bengal is
88,752 sq. Km with a population density of 1029 per sq. Km (Census 2011) which is the second
highest in the country. Land use statistics in West Bengal at the Block and higher administrative
levels are available by the standard nine-fold classification. Total reported area under different
categories in 2003-04 was 9.69 million hectares.

The main features of the data given in figure below can be summarised as:

    1. Net sown area (or area actually under cultivation) share is shown as 63%, the
       corresponding figure for India was 46%
    2. The share of fallow land, unculturable land and pastures in West Bengal is very low. It is
       noteworthy that in four categories of land use – fallow other than current fallows,
       culturable waste land, permanent pasture and other grazing land, and barren and
       unculturable land combined together constitute 1% of the total land (corresponding
       figure for India is 17.6%)
    3. Fallows and unculturable land in the state are concentrated in specific regions of the
       state. The district level analysis shows that much of the barren and uncultivable land,
       culturable waste land and fallows other than current fallow are concentrated in six
       districts (five Western districts, Bankura, Purulia, Birbhum, Paschim Medinipore,
       Bardhaman and Northern district of Darjeeling).
    4. The area under forest is limited and concentrated regionally. Forests are concentrated in
       Western districts of Paschim Medinipore, Purulia and Bankura, in the estuarine areas of
       South 24 Parganas and in the Himalayan regions of Darjeeling and Jalpaiguri.


                            Table 1: Land according to use (,000 ha)

          Sl. No.   Classification                     2008-09           2009-10        2010-11
              1     Net sown area                        5294              5256           4991
                                                        (61.0)            (60.5)         (57.5)
             2       Current fallows                      287               323            574
                                                         (3.3)             (3.7)          (6.6)
             3       Forests                             1174              1174           1174
                                                        (13.5)            (13.5)         (13.5)
             4       Not available for                   1793              1820          1840
                    cultivation                         (20.6)            (21.0)         (21.4)
             5       Other uncultivated                   136               112            105
                    excluding current fallows            (1.6)             (1.3)          (1.2)
             6      Total                                8684              8685          8684
  Source: Directorate of Agriculture (Evaluation Wing), Govt. of West Bengal, reproduced in Economic Review,
                                                   2011-12

                               Note: Figs. in parenthesis are percentage to total.

Reclamation of land is not very useful method to increase effective availability of land.
Converting forest land for agricultural or non-agricultural purposes is also forbidden because of
environmental concern. But land demand is ever increasing for raising agricultural production
to meet food demand of expanding population in a developing country like India or for
expansion of industrial activities. In recent times use of land for industrial purpose or for the
expansion of infrastructure facilities like expansion of roads, power generation etc. have become
228 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
contentious issue. Nobody denies that industrialization is necessary for the economic and social
upliftment of general population, but it is very difficult to settle the issue of rehabilitation of the
people affected by such changes in land utilization. The gravity of the situation can be assessed
by recent unrest associated with land allotment/ acquisition for industrial or infrastructure
purpose in many states and even change of regime in the political arena. In this context, West
Bengal assumes special importance in view of the highest population to land ratio in the
country. Population per square Km of land in West Bengal rose from 903 in 2001 to 1029 in
2011 as per Census data. The national average is much lower, viz. 382 as per 2011 Census.


Table 1 provides distribution of land according to type. There is very little change in respect of
the categories of not available for cultivation (Category 4), other uncultivated excluding
current fallows (Category 5). This shows the severity of availability of land for transfer to private
use. The problem is further accentuated in the context of West Bengal as the average land size is
very small compared to other states in the country because of fragmentation due to inheritance.
Setting up of industry requires large stretch of land. Another problem is that availability of
infrastructure facility, such as port, power etc. are concentrated in and around the state capital,
Kolkata. So demand for land for industrial purposes is mainly for the land in the vicinity of
Kolkata. But land in the areas close to Kolkata such as in Hooghly, Bardhaman is also very
fertile. So cost of rehabilitation and resettlement will be also very high. Land under public
holding (Khas) is very small and if it is available it is in the places like Purulia or West
Medinipore for which there is no demand. Given the constraints, transfer of land to private
sector involves large scale acquisition in West Bengal. Hence any discussion on transfer of land
to private sector in West Bengal is intricately linked with the issue of acquisition.
                    Fig. 2: Land use in West Bengal 2010-11 (% of Reported Area)




Source: Directorate of Agriculture (Evaluation Wing), Govt. of West Bengal, reproduced in Economic Review,
2011-12

Note: Reported area 87,000 h

Legends: 1. Forests (13.5%) 2. Area not available for cultivation (21.2%) 3. Other uncultivated Land
excluding current fallow (1.2%) 4. Current fallow (6.6%) 5. Net sown (57.5%)

With this background to the realities prevailing in West Bengal we discuss the following issues
in this document. Section 2 discusses the Land Acquisition Procedure, Section 3 Transfer
Procedure to Private Sector and Pricing, Section 4 Rehabilitation and Resettlement Scheme, and
finally Section 5 concludes.
2. Land Management Issues

The notion of eminent domain clause applies in respect of land in India. All land in this country
is owned by the state. In the federal structure of India land is in the concurrent list, i.e. both
states and the union government can pass legislation. If there arise any dispute between the
state and the union law then the union law prevails. Individual land holding whether for
cultivation or for residential purpose is given against rent by the state where the individual land
holder is called raiyat. Over and above such ‘individual holding’ there is land under the direct
ownership of the government which is discussed under the Public Land Management module

229 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
(Panel 4). However, land is not always transferred to private sector via acquisition. Such transfer
is also made out of land under public holding though in the context of West Bengal it is less
important for the reasons already discussed. In any case land acquisition whether for public
purpose or for transfer to private sector takes place through the Land and Land Reforms
Department. We will start with some of the issues of public management discussed below that
are relevant for transfer to private sector.

Prior to independence majority of the land for cultivation or other commercial uses were held by
the zamindars who were intermediaries between the state and the cultivators (there were often
multi layers of intermediaries). State’s direct hold was mainly khas land and forest land. After
independence all the states enacted laws for the abolition of zamindari system. The relevant act
for West Bengal is the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 and subsequently the West
Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955. The basic principle of acquisition is that land over and above
ceiling amount is vested to the government. The ceiling amount is 6.18 acres for irrigated and
8.65 acres for un-irrigated land if family member is one and then ceiling amount increase with
the size of family with a maximum of 17.30 acres for irrigated and 24.22 for non-irrigated land
per family. By and large the maximum holding of 17.30 acres for irrigated and 24.22 acres for
un-irrigated land are considered to be ceiling amount. For raiyat other than family the same
ceiling amount applies. Ceiling amount for tea garden, factory, dairy development, animal
husbandry, religious and charitable trust of public nature may be increased by government.

As a result of vesting of ceiling surplus land by applying reforms Acts, a large amount of land
became public land as at the disposal of the state government. Large amount of vested land has
been distributed to the rural landless labourers, rural artisans and fishermen who are land-poor.
However, there remained a large amount of land that was not distributed. As on June 1979 a
total of 0.95 million acres was available for distribution (Table 5.17, Economic Review, 1979-80,
Government of West Bengal).

WBEA Act 1953 imposed ceiling on indviual holding of 25 acres of agricultural land 15 acres of
non-agricultural land (20 acres together with homestead). The WBLR Act 1955 initially did not
impose any new celling. From 15.02.1971 new ceiling was imposed on the size of a family. For
one-member family the ceiling area is 2.50 standard hectares. For two to five-member family
the ceiling area is 5.00 standard hectares. For a family having more than five members for each
member ceiling area will be increased 0.50 standard hectares subject to a maximum of 7.00
standard heactares. Thus, the maximum ceiling area is 7.00 standard heactares. For any other
raiyat the ceiling area is 7.00 standard heactares. The concept of ‘standard heactare’ has been
introduced to distinguish between the ceiling limits on irrigated land and non-irrigated land.
Standard heactare means one hectare in irrigated area and 1.4 hectare in non-irrigated area.

The total land vested under the EA Act & LR Act plus some khas lands of the government and
lands coming under some minor heads comprise the land at the disposal of the State
Government. Most of such land has been distributed as shown in the table below:



                      Table 2: Amount of vest land and its distribution
                                         (as in July 2013)
                   Vest land -   Vest land –       Agricultural   No of         Bargadars
                   agriculture   all categories land              beneficiaries recorded
                                                   distributed
Estates            1.007 million 2.648 million
Acquisition        acres         acres              1.141 million 3.14 million 1.52 million
Act, 1953                                               acres#      families$     families*
Land Reforms       0.311 million 0.347 million

230 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Act, 1955          acres             acres
Source: Land and Lard Reforms Department, Government of West Bengal

Note: #: Land distributed as on 1979 was 0.615 million acres.
      $: No of beneficiaries as on 1979 was 0.98 million.
      *: No of bargadars recorded as on 1990 was 1.42 million.

Sub-section 52 (2) of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 states that any land belonging to
the state or land which is at the disposal of the state government shall, unless the state
government otherwise directs, be managed by the Collector of the district under whose
jurisdiction the lands are situated. The present system of public land management entirely lies
with the Land and Reforms (L&LR) Department of the Government of West Bengal. Collector or
District Magistrate is the competent authority for looking after all matters relating to land
management including transfer in a district. The actual management takes place through several
tiers of administration of the Land and Land Reform Department down to the Block level. If a
department requires land for some specific purpose it places requisition with the L&LR
department. There is well laid down procedure for the transfer of land from L&LR to the
requisitioning authority. It may be noted that such transfer from L&LR to the requisitioning
authority is specific to the stated purpose; the land so requisitioned cannot be used for any other
purpose. Land required for establishment of industry, infrastructure such as construction of
power station or for any other purpose under private sector management or public sector
management has to be routed through the relevant department to the L&LR department.

The West Bengal land reforms Rules, 1965 describe the procedure for settlement of land for
non-agricultural purposes. Rule 20A(6) authorizes the Collector to settle a land of any category
at the disposal of the state government with a person, or group of persons or any other
organization on terms and conditions set by the L&LR Department. Normally, lands for non-
agricultural purposes are settled on a long-term lease. This part has been dealt with in Panel 4
discussions.

The Government of West Bengal has of late come up with a Land Allotment Policy document
through issuance of Administrative Order (No. 6686 – LP/1A-18/ 2012 dated 26 December
2012) which is applicable to land owned or held by any department of the state government or
agency funded by the state government. The key features:

       Manner of such allotment would be by way of long-term settlement (LTS) for a period
        not exceeding 99 years, with the option of renewal of such lease for the same period with
        same terms and conditions.
       The Land and Land Reforms Department is the nodal department for inter-departmental
        transfer of land and long term lease of vested/ khas (government) land.
       An inter-departmental committee under the Chief Secretary formed for the purpose
        would handle all cases of inter-department land transfers.
       The valuation for LTS would be based on the sale deeds of the area or the market price as
        determined by the I.G. Registration, West Bengal whichever is higher.
       Clear mention about adequate publicity including through internet has been made in the
        order for land meant for commercial use invariably to be auctioned to the highest bidder.
       Commercial use for this purpose will mean use for office, shops, shopping malls, housing
        not meant for economically weaker sections, low income group or poor, Cineplex, theme
        park, hospitals, educational institutions etc.
       To avoid malpractices, no fixing of reserve price by the government will be made. For
        projects leading to industrial development, the highest price needs to be the main
        criteria nor should auction be the only mode of allotment.


231 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       Most importantly, all decisions related to land allotment etc. should be proactively
        disclosed under section 4 of the RTI Act.
       There will be however, relaxations in case of land for housing for the poor, setting up
        educational institutions and medical facilities to be set up by public charitable trusts with
        no-profit motives.
       Considering the impact on tariffs and questions of larger public interest, projects in
        power generation sector, auction route is exempted.


With its policy of no land acquisition from unwilling owners, the state government has put
emphasis on developing industrial parks on public land and transfer of the same to private
sector. The process has been initiated for updating information on land bank, which presumably
would be made available from public land. This information is made publicly available in
WBIDC, West Bengal Infrastructure Development Corporation, West Bengal Small Industries
Development Corporation websites.

The new central act on land acquisition, viz. Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 2013 which replaced the 1894 Act has
come into force with effect from 02.01.2014. However, the state government has expressed its
opposition to the new Act. The present government has also expressed its strong initiative for
industrialization drive. In that case land acquisition cannot be entirely avoided for the reasons
already discussed at the beginning of this document. Some policy changes will be required. But
as of now there is no point in speculating on this issue.


3. Transfer Procedure to Private Sector and Pricing
The transfer of land whether for public purpose or to private sector is made through the L&LR
Department. The West Bengal Land Reforms Manual 1991 provides the necessary guidelines.
The historical evolution of the transfer procedure has been dealt with in greater detail in clause
2.2. The present government has been following the same procedures as laid down in its
administrative order, vide No. 6686 – LP/1A-18/ 2012 dated 26 December 2012 for transfer of
land or modules of the industrial parks. The document is available in the WBIDC website
(http://wbidc.com/images/pdf/Approved_Terms_Condition.pdf, dated 30.12.2013). The
document by and large contains the terms and conditions consistent with the administrative
order of 26.12.2012 for transfer of public land or modules of industrial parks.
The WBIDC website (http://wbidc.com/images/pdf/Pricing_Policy_WBIDC.pdf) also displays
the pricing policy for transfer of land to private sector. This together with the document
mentioned earlier constitutes the pricing policy. The salient features are listed below.
       Price of land should be through bidding system. This may be replaced in some special
        cases.
       For land where bidding process is not used the cost of land is based on amount paid to
        the District Magistrate by WBIDC on the basis of the award of the government +
        infrastructure cost + cost of capital @13% + administrative cost @10% charged on all
        items except infrastructure.
       Some extra charges for lucrative position, such as on the main arterial roads etc.
       If the court order asks the compensation price low in the future then the additional cost
        has to be borne by the leaseholder.
       Operation, maintenance, statutory duties, levies and all other costs will be paid by the
        leaseholder.
       Other terms and conditions follow general lease holder agreement clauses.



232 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
4. Rehabilitation and Resettlement

The 1894 Act had appropriate provisions for compensation, notification, objections etc.
However, the compensation mechanism has often been criticized on the ground that the
government officials have the tendency to calculate average market price after dropping the
higher prices from the list on the ground of outliers. The issue is further accentuated by the fact
that land market is not like other markets in the sense that it does not have a unique price even
after controlling for quality etc. The land losers always find that they are being offered lower
price because they internalize the expected future appreciation of land price because of the
upcoming industrial project in that very land. Additionally absolute government control makes
allotment/ change of use subject to various kinds of arbitrariness, unfair practices and source of
corruption.
It has also been observed that eviction of poor from land deprives them of their safe means of
livelihood. It affects rich also, but rich can make alternative arrangements. The farmers with
inadequate knowledge of investment in bank fixed deposits or other financial assets or in
entrepreneurial activities cannot fruitfully utilize the compensation money. So within a very
short period they fritter away the entire compensation money. Thus history of land acquisition
in this country for poor has been history of destitution for them. With the advent of democratic
institutions it has raised dissent. In recent times the demand for job in the establishment due to
come up on the acquired land, has always been raised. This is in general not viable for the lack of
skill or employment creation for all those displaced. The issue is more pertinent for
rehabilitation than for fair compensation and becomes more relevant because the areas where
land is acquired comprise fertile land. The importance of the issue stems from the fact that
inadequate rehabilitation of the displaced people specially the poor and the marginal sections of
the population who are more vulnerable to destitution, have often happened. This goes against
the principle of welfare state and more importantly becomes a source of social and political
instability.
However, government also brought in some new schemes for rehabilitation and resettlement of
the land losers including share croppers. To this effect WBIDC introduced rehabilitation and
resettlement scheme (R&R Scheme) the final version, dated 28.02.2011 of which is still available
in the WBIDC website and can be thought of as the standing R&R Scheme. After conducting
socio-economic survey for assessing the impact on livelihood of the affected people, R&R
Scheme was formulated under corporate social responsibility. As already mentioned
compensation for land as per 1894 Act has often underestimated the correct market value and
does not have provision for future price appreciation because of forthcoming project. The new
R&R Scheme introduced a process of negotiation to arrive at agreed land price between the land
losers and anchor investor in the presence of political parties, requiring body (WBIDC) and the
district administration. This was supposed to be conciliatory, but in practice has been criticized
on the ground of manipulation by the ruling party. In order to give the land losers the benefits of
land price appreciation it was proposed that a quantum of land to be given back to land owners
form whom 0.33 acres or more land had been acquired. The quantum of land to be given back
depends on the size of land lost. Those who have lost less than 0.33 acres shall receive an
annuity depending upon the quantum of land lost.
The R&R scheme proposes sharecroppers to be paid compensation estimated for three years’ of
income which comprised of 10-12% of compensation for value of land. Additionally they were
paid compensation by the requiring body. Together they constitute around 25% of land
compensation. Landless agricultural labourers are proposed to be paid a compensation
amounting to 250 days’ of wage as per MGNREGA rate. A team appointed by the District
Magistrate is supposed to enquire that nobody was deprived of the compensation package. For
acquisition of homestead land compensation was proposed for land and shifting of structure
depending on size of land acquired.


233 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Over and above the compensation schemes, the requiring body was supposed to arrange for
training for skill development for the family members of the affected families. The investor
should arrange for sanitation, healthcare, educational capacity building in the vicinity of the
project in consultation of the R&R Committee. It was suggested that an R&R Committee would
be set up for the implementation of the package proposed. However, the proposed schemes
other than compensation to land losers, share croppers or land less agricultural labourers other
schemes to be implemented in the future have been evaluated with suspicion.
In west Bengal it has been found that land for project was selected in terms of the choice of the
investor and there was no pre-acquisition survey to assess the land holding pattern of the area
before initiating land acquisition process. There was no study of the impact that a particular
project was likely to make in the lives of the people. Apart from dispossession from land that is
acquired many of the villagers are left with land that are situated on the other side of the
acquired portion and to reach there for cultivation becomes hazardous for them. The investor
puts up boundary wall closing the connecting roads between the villages and even when
alternative roads are built the people have to make long detour to reach the field or the place of
work entailing a lot of inconveniences. Person with small holding in the areas as aforesaid, in
fact find no option but to sell his land compromising his bargaining power in the price of the
land. Moreover, people face serious problems in maintaining the cattle population of the area. A
vast tract of land which was the traditional grazing ground of the cattle for most of the time of a
year when acquired for some industrial concern, throws the cattle and their owners in utter
distress. With sudden loss of grazing ground people are forced to sell the cattle and those who
were earning their livelihood from goattery or animal husbandry are thrown out of the
occupation and are dispossessed of their own mode of living. Most of these people are unskilled
labourers and the modern capital intensive and technologically sophisticated industries that
come up on their land have no place for them for employment.In fact, such problems have now
surfaced in the land acquisition for Aerotropolis Project at Andal and for the projects of Tata
Metalik in Kharagpur . The new Land Acquisition Act of the Govt. of India has made elaborate
provisions for these matters. It remains to be seen how the law is put into operation.
In view of the controversial issues that have always been raised in case of transfer of land from
public holding or through acquisition appropriate R&R schemes should be designed. The
approach should be humanitarian rather than the Doctrine of Eminent Domain of the State. A
very good survey of the literature can be found in Wallace (2010). A well laid procedure for
renegotiation can also be introduced when displacement of population is large scale. Anim-
Odame (2011) has documented the case of Ghana where the scope of renegotiation through
representation of private valuers reduced the difference of agreed and asked price for land
transfer for private interest.


5. Conclusion
Transfer of land for private use, especially if it involves large tracts of land is a contentious issue
in West Bengal as it is elsewhere in the country or throughout the globe. The most controversial
aspect lies in pricing because of the very nature of land market. In the first place land is an asset
that generates income forever. So it is difficult to estimate future income flow. Secondly there is
no unique price for land even after controlling for quality. So any price set for transfer from
government or for acquisition (which is an integral part of transfer in state like West Bengal)
always questions the fairness of compensation scheme. It is further complicated by the fact that
apart from land losers there are other groups who are indirectly dependent on land based rural
economy.

For developmental purpose, be it in the name of public purpose or for setting up of private
industrial sector, land transfer or acquisition involves displacement and as it happens
everywhere economically and socially disadvantaged groups suffer more in the process.

234 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
However, developmental needs cannot be entirely avoided for it is also the condition for the
transformation of a nation from a low income to a high income group. But care has to be taken
that rehabilitation and resettlement schemes are well suited to the needs of the displaced
population. UN Refugee settlement recommendations could be useful starting point with
appropriate amendments to suit local needs.

References

       Anim-Odame, W. F. (2011): Compulsory Acquisition and Compensation in Ghana:
        Principles & Practice, Paper presented at the American Real Estate Society
        Conference, Seattle, Washington, USA.
       Government of West Bengal (1955): West Bengal Land and Land Reform Act, 1955.
       Government of West Bengal (1965): West Bengal Land Reforms Rules 1965.
       Government of West Bengal (1991): West Bengal Land and Land Reforms Manual 1991.
       Government of West Bengal (2012): West Bengal Land and Land Reform, Land Policy
        Branch Order No. 6686-LP/1A-18/2012.
       Wallace, J. (2010): Land Acquisition in Developing Economies, International
        Federation of Surveyors, February, 1-21.


Panel 6: Public Provision of Land Information: Registry and Cadastre

Registry and Cadastre: A Brief History

In West Bengal Land Information System has three distinct divisions, i.e. (a) cadastral map (b)
Record of rights (c) registration of conveyance instruments for land and mortgages. While
cadastral map and record of rights are prepared by the Land and Land Reforms Department,
registration of deed of conveyance for transfer of land and mortgages is administered by the
Finance Department. West Bengal has a chequered history of preparation of accurate set of
cadastral maps and record of rights and registration of land transfer and mortgages through
deed of conveyance.

  a. Touzi Register:

After introduction of Permanent Settlement, British settled the land with Zamindars by an
instrument of Settlement called Touzi. A register was maintained to record the details of land
settled and the revenue payable by the Zamindars and changes of the revenue for increase or
decrease of the area settled for reasons of alluvion or diluvion. Other important information
were duties, towards raiyats (tillers of the land) and undertaking certain type of development
work like flood protection embankments, roads and pathways.

Preparation of Touzi register was the first attempt to prepare land registry, i.e. record the land
rights and revenue assessed for land settled with Zamindars, though details of the parcels and
accurate measurement of areas settled was not recorded in Toluzi register.

The Zamindars got permanent settlement of huge quantum of land spreading over different
districts. They found it impossible to manage the entire land settled with them. Therefore they
started creating sub-tenancy and settling land with other people. In this way an intermediary
system was created with a layered structure of tenancy. To validate this intermediary system,
East India Company passed a Regulation called the Bengal PatniTaluk Regulation in 1819. This
Regulation defined the rights of Zamindars, and PatniTalukders, and gave unfettered rights in
creating subordinate tenure holders in any manner they liked. Though Permanent Settlement
Regulation I of 1793, in terms of Regulation VIII granted proprietary rights to Zamindars, it
safeguarded the interest of the tenants, as Zamindars were required under the Regulation to

235 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
deliver Patta (deed of settlement) to the tenants specifying the area of holding, and rent payable
under the Regulation, the rights of the Raiyats possessing land and enjoying usufruct through
generation by inheritance (Mourasi). They were protected from eviction for temporary default in
payment of revenue (Section 54, 55, 59 and 61 of Regulation VIII).

  b. Khas Mahal Register:

The British kept a large tract of land in different mouzas (revenue villages) outside the land
settled with the Zamindars for the development of infrastructure, i.e., Military and Civil towns,
administrative buildings, civil lines and for other strategic purposes. Some of these land kept at
the disposal of the British were also settled for long term basis i.e. 30 years or 99 years with the
public at a onetime salami (Premium) and annual rent. Details of the land at the disposal of
British and settlement of such land with public, rent at which settled, were recorded in Khas
Mahal Registers maintained by the British.

Touzi Register and KhasMahal Register can be called the first set of land registry in the history
of land administration in India and undivided Bengal, of which West Bengal was a part.

  c. Thak Survey:

Permanent Settlement Regulation and subsequent regulations like Regulation VII and V made
the life of the raiyats i.e. tillers of land miserable due to rack renting and large scale eviction of
raiyats and sharecroppers. This situation led to agricultural depression and potential threat to
law and order. The Court of Directors of East India Company to control the deteriorating
agrarian relation decided in 1824 to make a survey and prepare record of rights for defining and
maintaining right of raiyats. However, there was no map cadastral or any kind for the mouza
(i.e. revenue village) prepared before 1859. In the year 1859 a survey called Thak Survey was
conducted. In this survey boundary of eachrevenue village was correctly drawn by cadastral
method but the configuration of the parcels inside the boundary was approximately drawn.
Every parcel was allotted a number and approximate area of each parcel was calculated. The
Thak survey was the first attempt to prepare cadastral maps in Bengal.

  d. Bengal Rent Act 1859

To regulate the rent payable by the tenants and to prevent eviction of tenants, British
Government enacted Rent Act 1859 (Act X of 1859). In terms of Section 2 of the Act every Raiyat
was to receive from the whom the land was held under rent, a patta clearly mentioning (1) the
quantum of land (2) the number of parcel, the area settled on rent (3) amount of annual rent (4)
installments in which payable, (5) manner of delivery and (6) special condition of
settlement..Section 3 & 4 provided that a Raiyat would get permanent patta if rent of the land
had not changed for 20 years from the time of permanent settlement. Section 5provided that
occupancy Raiyats who were not holding land at fixed rent would be entitled to patta at fair and
equitable rent. Section 5 also declared that every Raiyats who cultivated or held land for a period
of 12 years has a right of occupancy in the land. Provision was also made in Section 10 of the Act
for granting receipts by the landlords to the tenants specifying the amount, the year and years
on account of which rent was paid. However, the tenants were liable to be evicted, by the order
of D Collector of the District, if the tenant failed to clear the revenue payable by 31 stChaitra of
Bengali year. This curbed the rights of the landlords to evict the tenants at their will and
established an independent system of adjudication of dispute over rent by the government
machinery.

But the Rent Act 1859 could not protect the Raiyats from rack renting by the landlords. There
was large scale eviction of non-occupancy Raiyats i.e. Raiyats cultivating land for less than 12
years, as there was no compulsion under the Act on the part of landlord to issue patta or to grant
any form of rent receipts. The non-occupancy Raiyats failed to prove that they were cultivating

236 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
land for 12 years due to non-maintenance of records and ignorance on the part of non-
occupancy Raiyats. Even Poor Raiyats could not approach the judicial courts to press their
grievance as it was very expensive and the process was time taking. The situation became
unbearable for the Raiyats and Bengal witnessed a number of peasant revolts seeking end of it.
British Government sensing the danger enacted Bengal Tenancy Act 1885.

  e. Bengal Tenancy Act (BT ACT) 1885

The Bengal Tenancy Act 1885 for the first time categorized different type of tenants and their
liabilities and put restriction on enhancement of rent.Sections27, 29, 30 and 38 of this Act
provided that a settled Raiyat shall not be ejected by the landlord, unless the landlord can prove
that he is not a settled Raiyat. Ejectment of occupancy Raiyat was also restricted under Section
21 of the Act. The Act provided that an occupancy Raiyat shall not be ejected except in execution
of decree passed by a competent civil court.

  f. Preparation of Cadastral maps and Records under BT Act 1885

The Bengal Tenancy Act for the first time provided (chapter X, section 101-120) the legal basis
for preparation of revenue village maps, i.e., mouza maps following the method of cadastral
survey (CS) and it mandated that only on the basis of such CS maps the record of right be
prepared. BT Act 1885 for the first time made provision for integration of cadastre and registry
in the history of land administration in India and in West Bengal.

On the basis of provisions made in BT Act 1885 first set of revenue village maps were prepared
during the period 1885 – 1940, by theodolite traverse survey following the survey principle from
whole to part. Ground Control Points of high accuracy (1:1000) were first established by
theodolite. Astronomical observation were taken at regular interval for determination of
Azimuth of survey lines in respect of true north and the traverse survey was connected with local
great trigonometrically survey (GTS) Pillars for determination of accuracy of survey. GTS Pillars
are Pillars established by a nationwide survey throughout India during 1802-1876, which acted
as reference points to which ground control points established by theodolite survey were linked
to ensure accuracy of survey. On the basis of the ground control points parcel details on the
ground were plotted on revenue village map sheets by plain table and chain survey (accuracy
1:200). Different scales were chosen for different areas depending on the size and density of
parcels and all parcels within the boundary of the revenue village were featured in the map.
Plots were numbered from north-west corner and ended in south-east. The area of each map
was measured with the help of instrument acrecomb. Land other than agricultural were
featured in the map with separate standard alamat (legend): river, road, water body,
homestead, drinking water tube wells, wells, temple, mosques, telegraph posts, etc. were
featured with fair degree of accuracy with separate legend. Each revenue village was given a
number police station wise starting from north-west to south-east. This number is called
Jurisdiction List Number (JL No.). To identify a parcel in any revenue village, Jurisdiction List
Number (JL No.) and Parcel number is necessary. The scale of the map was 16”=1 mile. Record
of rights was for the first time prepared on the basis of cadastral maps prepared under BT Act
1885. The record of rights were prepared in a number of stages i.e. (1) Khanapuri (preliminary
record writing) (2) Bujharat, (local explanation) (3) Attestation, (4) Draft Publication, (5)
Hearing of objections, (6) correction of record of rights on the basis of decision of hearing of
objections, (7) final publication of record of rights and (8) Inviting application for correction of
mistakes if any in the finally published record of rights. In each stage citizens and Government
departments participated to make the record error free. The record of rights featured the names
of the land owners, their tenants, share of the land parcel, area of the land against parcel
number, incidence of tenancy, easement rights, common property rights, share cropper’s right
to cultivate the land and description of boundaries of the parcel.

237 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Though the BT Act took care of agricultural tenants, there was no specific provision to protect
the rights of non-agricultural tenants. As a result, non-agricultural tenants could be evicted after
expiry of the period of lease and landlords could also increase the rent at the time of renewal of
lease.



  g. West Bengal Non Agricultural Tenancy Act 1949

To protect the rights of the non-agricultural tenants, independent India enacted its first Act on
Tenancy Reforms: West Bengal Non Agricultural Tenancy Act 1949. This Act provided (1) Lesees
who got leases after 1882 and are in occupation of the land for more than 12 years or lesees who
are in occupation by constructing buildings or in occupation after expiry of the lease, cannot be
evicted (2) only the tenants holding land less than 12 years but more than one year, can be
evicted after paying compensation and by giving prior notice and (3) rent fixed at the time of
creation of tenancy will remain fixed for 15 years. In Chapter VI (section 27-32) of West Bengal
Non Agricultural Tenancy Act provision was made for preparation of record of rights and
settlement of rent. However no Survey and Settlement operation was taken up for preparation
for record of rights for non-agricultural land or for revision of record of rights prepared under
BT Act 1885.

The Bengal Tenancy Act 1885 did not provide adequate protection to the sharecroppers, who
constituted one third of agricultural tenants from eviction and rack renting. A strong “Tebhaga”
movement by the sharecroppers to secure three fourth of the share of the produce compelled the
Government of West Bengal to enact West Bengal Bargadar Act 1950.

  h. West Bengal Bargadar(share cropper) Act 1950

The act laid down principles for the division of produce.

    (a) The share cropper or the owner as the case may be will be entitled to an amount of share
        of the produce equivalent to quantum of seed supplied.
    (b) The remainder of the produce will be divided between the share croppers and the owner
        in proportion to their contribution to the cost of cultivation including supply of plough
        cattle, agri-implements, fertiliser,cost of protection of crop.

The above mentioned stipulated principles of division of produce were in no way any radical
principles. The Act could not bring any benefit to the exploited bargadars (sharecroppers).

  i. West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act 1953

From the early part of 20th century it was felt that Permanent Settlement was an obstacle to the
growth of agriculture and rural economy. Ultimately in 1937, a Commission was set up under
the chairmanship of Sir Francis Floud to study the agrarian situation prevailing in the country.
On the basis of the recommendation of the Floud Commission, Government of Wet Bengal
enacted Estate Acquisition Act 1953 with the following objectives:

        (a) Eliminate interest of Zamindars and other intermediaries by acquisition on payment
            of compensation.
        (b) Permit the intermediaries, raiyats and under raiyats to retain possession of their
            khaslands up to certain limit (individual ceiling) and to treat them as tenants holding
            directly under the state.
        (c) Acquire interest of Zamindars and other intermediaries in mines.
        (d) Update cadastral maps and records.


238 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Section 4 of the Act empowered State Govt. to issue notification for vesting all       estates and
rights therein of all intermediaries in the state free from all encumbrances. The statutory date of
such vesting was 15.04.55.

Though initially raiyats and under-raiyats were not brought under the ambit of the Act,
subsequently they were brought in the same footing of intermediaries under the Act. The date of
vesting in this case was 14.04.1956.

This landmark piece of legislation brought every one, holding land i.e. intermediaries and
tenants under the management and control of the State Government. Ceiling on individual land
holding was introduced and ceiling surplus land was vested by the state.

Preparation of Record of rights and Cadastral maps under Estate Acquisition Act
1953

Implementation of provision of the Act required preparation of Record of rights for each
intermediary showing details of his rights and interests and other incidences. Provision for
preparation of Record of rights was made in chapter V of the Act (section 39-46) Section 39
provides that subject to the provision of subsection (4), the State Government may, for carrying
out the purposes of the Act ,make an order directing-(a)that record of rights be prepared in
respect of any district or part of a district (b) that record of rights prepared and finally published
under chapter X of Bengal Tenancy Act,1885 in respect of any district or a part of the district be
revised. Cadastral maps and Record of Rights (RoRs) prepared under The Bengal Tenancy Act
1885 were revised and updated by abolishing zamindary rights under the West Bengal Estate
Acquisition Act,1953. Maps and RoR revised and updated under the Act are known as Revisional
Survey (RS) maps and RoRs. The record of rights so prepared contained following particulars:

       the name of each tenant or occupant of the land or sharecropper
       the class and classes of tenant
       the name of each tenant’s or occupant’s land lords
       the situation and quantity of land by each tenant, occupant or share cropper
       easement rights or right of way(f)rent and cess payable(g)rights and obligation of each
        tenant and landlord etc.


  j. West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955

In the West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act, 1953 there was no provision for (1) distribution of
ceiling surplus land vested under the Act to the land-poor or the landless persons (2) protection
of the rights of the sharecroppers. Considering the limitation of the West Bengal Estate
Acquisition Act 1953, the West Bengal Land Reform Act 1955 was enacted to complement and
improve upon the provisions made in the West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act 1953. The main
features of the Act are –

    1) The rights and obligation of the Raiyats are clearly defined. The raiyats can inherit the
       land and transfer the land through registered deed of conveyance only but raiyats are not
       allowed to lease out the land or claim sub soil rights i.e. rights of minerals beneath the
       land [Chapter II, Section 4 – 14].
    2) Restrictions are imposed on transfer of land of Scheduled Tribes to people other than
       Scheduled Tribes, except with the permission of Revenue Officer and except on certain
       purposes like (a) improvement of land (b) investment etc. [Chapter IIA, Section 14A –
       14I].
    3) Family ceiling and institutional ceiling on land was introduced. Ceiling surplus land was
       vested to the State. Maximum ceiling allowed was 7 standard hectares.[chapter IIB
       section 14j-14z]
239 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    4) As the West Bengal Bargadar Act 1950 could not protect the rights of sharecroppers, and
       the principle of share of produce between the land owner and the sharecropper was not
       rational one, the West Bengal Bargadar Act 1950 was repealed and provisions were made
       in the West Bengal Land Reform Act 1955 to (a) record the name of the sharecroppers in
       the RoR (b) stop illegal eviction of sharecroppers (c) make sharecropping rights
       heritable (d) fix the share of produce between land owner and sharecropper . Total
       number of sharecroppers recorded in the RoR is 15,20,366 as on October 2013 (Source:
       Report published by Directorate of Land records and Surveys) [section 15-23, chapter
       III].
    5) Provision has been made to settle vested agricultural land with landless, and land poor,
       and sharecroppers up to 0.4047 hectares if the person together with member of the
       family owns land less than 0.4047 hectare.. Provision has also been made to settled land
       up to 0.0335 hectares with the person, for homestead purpose if he has no homestead
       land of his own. Preference is given to persons belonging to scheduled castes or
       scheduled castes during such settlement. [Section 49(1) of Chapter VI].

Preparation and maintenance of record of rights under Land Reforms Act 1955

In West Bengal Land Reforms Act1955provision has been made in chapter VIIA (section 50-
51A) for preparation or revision of record of rights. Procedure for revising or preparing record of
rights has been laid down in rule 22-25 and schedule A of West Bengal Land Reforms Rules
1965.Stages involved in preparation of record of rights include:

         (a)   Traverse Survey
         (b)   cadastral Survey
         (c)   preliminary record writing (khanapuri)
         (d)   local explanation (Bujharat)
         (e)   Attestation
         (f)   Publication of record of rights in draft
         (g)   Disposal of objections
         (h)   Preparation and publication of the final record of rights.


A record of rights prepared under the Act has following particulars:

    a) Name of each raiyat or occupant or sharecropper
    b) Class, quantity and shareof land held by each raiyat, occupant or sharecropper
    c) Revenue and cess payable
    d) Private encumbrances like irrigation rights, user rights for road, pasture rights, caracas
       disposal rights, cremation rights, user rights of tank, pond and such other easement
       rights, possession with or without consent of the raiyat
    e) Public restriction like restriction on transfer of land beyond ceiling limit without
       approval of revenue officer, long term government lease, short term government lease,
       terms of settlement, settlement with land poor by patta (deed of settlement) and non-
       transferability of such land, land allowed to be retained beyond ceiling limit for
       industrial and such other purpose specified in WBLR Act 1955 which cannot be
       transferred to private individual, land revenue chargeable, violation of statutory
       provisions of WBLR Act 1955 etc.


Provision has also been made in chapter VII for maintenance and updating of record of rights on
account of (a) mutation as result of transfer or inheritance (b) partition, exchange, consolidation
of land (c) new settlement of land (d) variation of revenue (e) alteration in mode of cultivation
for example by a sharecropper (f) such other causes as necessitates a change in record of rights.
Cadastral (maps and RoRs prepared under West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act 1953 were
240 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
updated under provision of Chapter VIIA and VII. One man one RoR (One-man one-khatian)
concept was introduced to record tenancy details, parcel details, parcel number, share, area
easement right etc. for each land owner in respect of all land held by him in one record of right.
The scales of cadastral maps are now 16” = 1 mile for rural areas, 32”=1 mile for semi urban
areas and 64”=1 mile, 128”=1 mile and 1” = 50 feet for urban areas. West Bengal has now 42042
revenue villages and 68328 revenue village sheets. The average revenue villages consists of 2-3
sheets each sheet covering 250 to 300 acres. Cadastral maps and records presently accounts for
all the parcels, areas and tenancy details of whole of West Bengal in a very accurate manner.

Formalization of land possession by the poor in rural areas

  i.    West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955

Under Section 49(1) of Chapter VI, provision has been made to settle land with landless, and
land poor, and sharecroppers up to 0.4047 hectare if the person together with member of the
family owns land less than 0.4047 hectare. Homestead land is also settled with the person, for
homestead purpose if he has no homestead land of his own. The maximum quantum of land to
be allotted is 0.0335 hectare. Priority has been given to the persons belonging to Scheduled
caste and Scheduled tribes communities in allotting vested lands. The land so allotted is
heritable but not transferable. A detailed procedure of settlement of vested land with land poor
or landless persons and sharecroppers has been laid down in Clause 187 to 208 under Chapter
XIII of West Bengal Land and Land Reform Manual 1991. As on October 2013, 11,41,345 acres of
land has been distributed to 31,41,232 persons. But the number of persons recorded inRoR is
24,57,347 [Source: Report published by Directorate of Land Records and Surveys, Govt. of West
Bengal.

 ii.    West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourers,
        Artisans and Fisherman Act 1975

State Government with the objective of recognizing the rights of landless agricultural labourers,
artisans and fisherman, occupying homestead land of others as on June 1975 enacted West
Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourers, Artisans and Fisherman Act
1975. Under this Act landless person mentioned above were given ownership rights over
homestead to the extent of 0.08 acres, by acquiring land from the land owners. The Land
owners were given compensation for such acquisition. Under this Act ownership right was
formalize in respect of 3, 26,725 families [Source: Report published by Directorate of Land
Records and Surveys, Govt. of West Bengal.

iii.    Chas O BasabaserJanyaBhumidanPrakalpa Homestead and Kitchen Garden
        Scheme) and Nijo-Griha-Nijo-BhumiPrakalpa (My Home My Land scheme):

Distribution of land to be used for homestead under the WBLR Act and formalization of
occupation as on a particular date under the Act of 1975 could not cover all the homeless
persons.      To cover such homeless people the State introduced Chas- O-
BasabaserJanyaBhumidanPrakalpa (Homestead and kitchen garden scheme) in the year 2005-
06. Under this scheme land up to 0.16 acres were allotted to the landless people for homestead
and kitchen garden purpose. This micro- plot distribution is unique in the sense that Govt.
purchased the land form landowners at market rate and distributed to the landless people. But,
this scheme was not seriously implemented by the State Govt. Under the scheme, State granted
tenancy right to only 5034 families over 579.79 acres of land [Source: Report published by
Directorate of Land Records and Surveys, Govt. of West Bengal]. The present Government
introduced a new scheme NijoGrihoNijoBhumiprakalpa in Oct 2011 (My Home My Land
scheme) to settle land up to 0.05 acre to 5.5 lakh homeless persons. The land to be settled will be
provided from the land at the disposal of State Government and land to be purchased by the
State Government from land owners at market rate. The settlees are to be given land in cluster
241 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
and will be provided with all essential amenities like drinking water, sanitation, electricity, road
and livelihood support by convergence of Govt. schemes. The entire 5.5 Lakh homeless people
will be covered under the scheme by 2015-16. As on December 2013 86,883 families were
allotted land [Source: Report of Directorate of Land Records and Surveys, Govt. of West Bengal.]

Formalization of homestead land held by the poor in urban areas

State government issued a circular in 2010 [circular no-1469-6E(M)/L-20/10 dated 17.03.2010]
for formalization of government land occupied by urban poor for at least 20 years. Provision has
been made in this circular to settle land with urban poor on lease for 99 years at a token salami
(premium) of Re. 1 provided beneficiary house hold has monthly income not more than Rs 6000
and the land has not been earmarked for any government project. The beneficiary house hold
has to pay land revenue to be fixed under west Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955 or Kolkata Land
Revenue Act 2003 as the case may be. Most of the beneficiaries are slum dwellers.

West Bengal ThikaTenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act 2001: In 1949 Calcutta
Thika Tenancy Act was enacted to regulate a very special type of tenancy in the twin city of
Calcutta and Howrah. Thika Tenant was defined to mean any person who held whether by a
written lease or otherwise, land under another person and has erected or acquired by purchase
or gift any structure on such land for residential, manufacturing or business purposes and
includes the successors in interest except (a) who holds land under another person in perpetuity
(b) who holds land under another person under a registered lease for more than 12 years (c)
who holds land for another person and uses occupies such land for Khattal. What makes a Thika
tenancy special is that the owner of the land and owner of the structure raised on the land are
two different people as opposed to normal tenancy. This act of 1949 was repealed and replaced
by Calcutta Thika Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act 1981. In this Act definition of Thika
Tenant was broadened to bring in to its fold the persons who were excluded from the definition
of 1949 Act. What is most significant is that this Act for the first time provided for (a)
acquisition of interests of the superior landlords against compensations and (b) recognizing
Thika tenants as tenants directly under the state. This Act of 1981 was again repealed and
replaced by West Bengal Thika Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act 2001 to extend
jurisdiction of The Act beyond Calcutta and Howrah. The declared objective of the Act was to
abolish intermediary, bring tenants directly under the state, utilise the Thika land vested to the
state under the Act for development purpose and to serve common good .It need be mentioned
here that most of Thika landhas turned into slums and shelters the urban poor. Thika tenancy
Act 1949, 1981, and 2001 recognized the rights of tenants who were basically lessees (by written
lease or verbal lease or occupying the land otherwise) and formalized their rights over the land
as tenant.

Modernization of Registry and Cadastre: Digitization of land record of rights and
cadastral maps, digitization of Land Transfer Registration Offices, integration of
record of rights and cadastral maps digitally and      interconnectivity of Land
Reforms Offices and Land Reforms Offices under National Land Records
Modernization Programme (NLRMP): Present Status

In the year 1990 West Bengal started digitizing the record of rights. Presently the record of
rights are completely digitized except record of rights of 1473 odd revenue villages of Purulia,
North 24 Parganas and South Dinajpur districts, where updation of cadastral maps and record
of rights are in progress and is expected to be completed within two years. The cadastral maps
have been digitized and integrated with record of rights digitally. The digitized maps and records
of rights are being updated and managed by software named “Bhuchitra”. The map data and
textual data of records of rights are available in website http://www.banglarbhumi.gov.in, which
can be accessed by the interested citizens. Cadastral maps and record of rights are accepted
carry statutory presumption of correctness and are admissible in evidence as public documents.

242 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Cadastral maps and record of rights are available for all the parcels of land in the state except
first 100 wards of the city of kolkata. But land data is a dynamic data, because changes in the
land ownership, area, share of land and use of the land are incorporated in there. In the State,
registration of transfer of land and management of record of rights are administered by two
separate departments. Since such changes are not regularly incorporated in the records to keep
the records up to date government may think of a special drive to make mass mutation.

Measures have been taken to connect the Registration of Land offices with Land Reforms
offices dealing with cadastral maps and record of rights, through dedicated intranet
connectivity to track the cases of land transfer ,update the records on the basis of such land
transfer and to make the record of rights real time records.60,665 map sheets out of 68,328
revenue village map sheets have been digitized and land records of 40,196 revenue villages out
total 42042 revenue villages of the State have also been digitized and updated. The digitized
map data have been integrated with RoR. West Bengal is first State to integrate digitized
cadastral maps with related RoR which has been accepted as model by the Department of Land
Resources, Government of India. Presently under MPLS-VPN Project of Finance Department,
all the service locations i.e. 346 Block Land and Land Reforms (BL&LRO offices), 63 Sub-
divisional Land and Land Reforms (SDL&LRO )Offices and 18 District Land and Land Reforms
(DL&LRO0 )offices of Land & Land Reforms Department are expected to be interconnected by
March, 2014. As on November, 2013, 94 BL&LRO Offices, 45 SDL&LRO Offices and 15 DL&LRO
offices have been interconnected through MPLS-VPN having 2Mbps connectivity. Land records
database of the State will be collocated in State Data Centre (SDC). Procurement of hardware for
such collocation will be completed by March, 2013. Presently land database of 11 BL&LRO
offices went live from central server located at Survey Building at Kolkata. All 271 service
locations of directorate of Registration are digitized. Out of 271 service locations of Directorate
of Registration, 159 service location i.e. Additional District Sub Registrar (ADSR) office,
District Sub Registrar(DSR) office, Deputy Inspector General, Registration( DIGR )and
Inspector General registration (IGR) office are interconnected up to November, 2013. The
service provider is providing 2Mbps bandwidth in each site dedicatedly. Both database of land
records and property registration will be collocated at SDC. When a person will approach for
registration of property, the Sub-Registrar may view the land records through his system and
allow property registration. On registration, such information will be electronically transferred
to concerned BL&LRO office and BL&LRO office will generate notice for hearing and thereby
will initiates mutation process. This will ensure mutation of land transferred instantly in the
record of rights.

In Howrah district a pilot project e-integrating land records with property registration is
running successfully and during the current financial year (2013-14) this facility will be rolled
out in another four locations involving 11 BL&LRO offices additionally. In next financial year
such e-integration will be rolled out throughout the State. Such integration will help in
mutation on registration instantly and curb fraudulent registration greatly.
The State has recently amended sec. 50(2) of West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955to facilitate e-
delivery of land records by affixing digital signature. This will help in operationalizing ‘anytime,
anywhere’ service in tune with National E-Governance Plan (NeGP). The State has rolled out
OTC-Information services (Over the Counter Information service) to provide copy of RoR, Plot
Information and Plot Map from counter within 5-15 minutes through process re-engineering.
This has enhanced speed of service delivery to great extent. During 2011-12 on an average about
2.00 lakhs copies of RoR, Plot Information and Plot Map per month were delivered but in 2012-
13, it increased to 4.50 to 4.97 lakhs per month. To reduce the response time of transaction
services i.e. mutation, conversion of land etc., BLE (Block Level Entrepreneurs) were engaged in
pilot basis at four BLLRO offices. BLES receive and enter the application received from
persons into system instantly to ensure service delivery on First in First Out (FIFO) basis. Rs10
is chargedper application as per provision of Information Technology Act, 2000 in addition to

243 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
existing application fees and processing fees. Such fee for service delivery is deposited in Project
Management Unit (PMU) account.BLES are paid Rs.5/- per application and Rs.5/- remains in
PMU account for sustenance of computer infrastructure.
Four Modern Record Rooms were set up in four BL&LRO Offices and based on such experience
MOU was signed with M/S Webel Technology Limited, a State Government undertaking to set
up Modern Record Room in another 178 BL&LRO offices located in Departmental Office
Building in the State. It expected the work will be completed by June, 2014. Further under
Modern Record Room project all legacy record i.e., Revisional Settlement (RS) record are being
digitized to increase its self-life and provide e-delivery to citizens, institutions etc.
Measures have also been taken to update the cadastral maps by High Resolution Remote
Sensing Imagery (HRSI) and by ground truthing using Electronic Total Station and
Geographical Positioning System (GPS). This will take 2-3 years.

Cost for the survey and preparation of cadastral maps and record of rights is provided by the
Government. A very small part of the cost is realized from the citizens as cost of copies of the
cadastral maps and record of rights. Recently over the counter services (OTC) has been arranged
at Block level offices where citizens are being provided copies of record of rights and cadastral
maps at a very nominal cost. Measures have been taken to provide these services on-line.
Government of West Bengal has constituted Project management unit to implement the
programme of modernization of cadastral maps and record of rights on real time basis and to
extend on-line service to citizen under National Land Records Modernization Programme
(NLRMP) .But Government of India is yet to decide on the cost effectiveness and sustainability
of the programme. Also no decision has been taken so far to determine the fee for sustainability
of the programme.



Analysis of present status of cadastre and registry

    1. Real time land parcel cadastral map, record of rights and valuation of land reflects the
       current status of location, area, ownership, land use and value of land. Since transaction
       in land changes the actual boundaries, area, ownership, use and value of land parcel,
       there is a lag between current parcel status and that published in cadastral maps, record
       of rights and valuation of land. In West Bengal cadastral maps of land parcel were
       updated(revised)and record of rights prepared in last land reforms survey and
       settlement operation under West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955 started in 1974. But
       cadastral maps and record of rights of 1473 revenue villages are still to be updated even
       after 39 years of starting of survey-settlement operation. Digitized cadastral maps are in
       Everest Datum. Cadastral maps can be updated and made dynamic if High Resolution
       Satellite Imagery (HRSI) or ground survey by Electronic Total Station (ETS) are used or
       aerial survey is done or combination of above methodologies are adopted. This will
       require conversion of Everest Datum to WGS 84 Datum. West Bengal Land and Land
       Reforms Department has taken steps to update existing digitized cadastral maps by
       using HRSI and ETS. Record of rights also do not reflect the real ground situation as
       there is lag between recoded ownership data in the record of rights and legal transaction
       of land taking place. This is due to the fact that (a) it is not mandatory for registering
       authorities to verify if transferor is the recorded owner of land being transferred as per
       the record of rights. (b) transferee is not required by law to get his name recorded in the
       record of rights. There is also a lag between value of land in land valuation register
       maintained by the registering authorities and value at which land transaction takes place
       because valuation of land is updated sporadically. Unless ownership status is verified by
       the registering authorities before registering conveyance of land and it is made
       mandatory to mutate the name of transferee in record of rights land records will never be

244 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
         dynamic. Since two different departments are involved in preparing cadastral maps,
         record of rights & registering land transaction through deed of conveyance and valuation
         of land, there is a gap in the coordination of activities of these two departments. It is to
         be maintained that in most of North Indian States, better coordination has been
         achieved by bringing all these activities under one single department. However inter
         connectivity of Land Reforms Offices and Registration Offices by intranet through SDC
         will help to achieve better coordination
    2.   Though Land and Land Reforms Department is mandated under Rules of Business of the
         State Government to manage the Government land, different departments have
         Government land at their disposal which is managed by the respective departments.
         Most of Land held by the departments is not recorded in the record of rights of land,
         though it is the responsibility of these departments to get the land at their disposal
         recorded in the record of rights. There is also a gap between the quantum of land at the
         disposal of the Land &Land Reforms Department and land recorded in the record of
         rights, particularly Government land settled with the land poor people under Section
         49(1) of West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955 and land settled through lease with private
         individual and institutions.
    3.   Area under city of Calcutta (Kolkata) was never taken up for preparation of records of
         rights at it was excluded from the purview of the Bengal Tenancy Act 1885, West Bengal
         Estate Acquisition Act 1953 and West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955. Though cadastral
         land parcel map was prepared by Mr. R. B. Smart, a British survey officer during 1903-
         14, no record of rights of land parcel was prepared and subsequently updated. Calcutta
         Municipal Corporation maintains ownership record of land parcel on premises basis
         which is different from the records of rights prepared for the rest of the state. Other
         Municipal Authorities also maintains ownership records on premises basis though there
         is record of rights prepared by the Land & Land Reforms Department for those
         municipal areas. Therefore the land records maintained by the Kolkata Municipal
         Corporation are inconsistent with land records maintained for rest of the state.
    4.   The record of rights prepared first time under Bengal Tenancy Act 1885, clearly indicated
         the rent payable by owner of the land and the same was revised in revisional survey
         under West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act 1953. But important information regarding
         land revenue payable by the owner is missing from the record of rights prepared under
         West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955. The state witnessed a high growth in urbanization
         of rural areas. High rise buildings with complex land use are mark of urbanization. No
         consistent practice to prepare cadastral map and record the ownership rights of the high
         rise buildings with common area rights has been put in place to manage such land.
    5.   The latest cadastral maps and record of rights are derived from the old cadastral maps,
         record of rights, land conveyance deeds. In case of any dispute over ownership, area,
         boundary and land use these legacy data help to resolve the disputes. Though legacy
         records relating to conveyance of deed for land transaction have been digitized by the
         registering authorities, legacy data of cadastral maps and record of rights are in the
         process of digitization and will take 2 to 3 years.
    6.   Managing an integrated cadastral parcel map data, text data of record of rights, legacy
         data, conveyance deed, registration data, and valuation of land parcel, updating the same
         and providing information require variety of technical skill and trained manpower. As of
         now, digitized cadastral parcel map data and text data of record of rights, land valuation
         & land registration information are being managed by officers, in addition to their host
         of other duties.
    7.   Transfer of land owned by scheduled tribe to person other than scheduled tribe without
         permission of competent Revenue Officer is prohibited in West Bengal Land Reforms
         Act1955. But this restriction is not recorded in the RoRs of ST raiyats. Unless this
         restriction is formally recorded in the RoRs of ST raiyats, illegal transfer of land owned
         by this marginalised community cannot be detected and stopped.

245 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    8. Government of India is funding the digitization of cadastral parcel maps, record of
       rights, land valuation data, legacy records under National Land Records Modernization
       Programme on sharing basis with the States. Once this programme will be over there is
       no assurance that Central Government will share the cost of updating, maintaining and
       providing information to the public. Also no decision has been taken either by Central
       Government or State Government with regard to funding mechanism i.e. either
       Government funding the project and realising the cost from user or by Public Private
       Partnership mode and collecting the cost from the user on sharing basis.


Source:

    1.    Permanent Settlement (Regulation I of 1973)
    2.    Bengal PatniTaluk Regulation 1819
    3.    Rent Act 1859(Act X of1859)
    4.    The Bengal Tenancy Act 1885
    5.    Report of Floud Commission
    6.    West Bengal Non Agricultural Tenancy Act 1949
    7.    West Bengal Bargadar Act 1950
    8.    West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act 1953
    9.    West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955
    10.   West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead land for Agricultural Labourers, Artisans and
          Fisherman Act 1975
    11.   Chas O BasabaserJanyaBhumidanPrakalpa (Homestead and Kitchen Garden scheme)
    12.   NijoGrihaNijoBhumiPrakalpa (My Home My Land)
    13.   Publications of Directorate of Land Records and Surveys
    14.   Circular No:1459-GE(M)/L-20/10 dated 17.03.2014
    15.   Calcutta Thika Tenancy Act 1949
    16.   Calcutta Thika Tenancy(Acquisition and Regulation) Act 1981
    17.   West Bengal Thika Tenancy(Acquisition and Regulation) Act 2001


Panel 7: Land Valuation and Taxation

Land valuation

The levy and collection of stamp duty and registration fees on land/ property transfer are
regulated under the Indian Stamp (IS) Act, 1899 and the Indian Registration (IR) Act, 1908 and
the Rules framed thereunder as applicable in West Bengal. Instruments to be registered under
the Acts are chargeable to stamp duty and registration fees at the rates prescribed by the State
Government from time to time. The rate is applied to assess the stamp duty. The West Bengal
Stamp (Prevention of under-Valuation Instruments) Rules, 1994 came into effect from
31.01.1994 to control under valuation of properties vis-à-vis government dues. The Registering
Officers (RO) were empowered to determine the market value of the properties which are
subject matter of the deed of sale, gift, exchange, partition, settlement and certain other classes
of instruments.

At present in West Bengal the market value of any property (land, building) is determined
through the system of the Computerisation of Registration of Documents (CORD) software
started in the year 2000. In the computerized scenario digistised base market value database
covering all the plots under the jurisdiction of the registering officer has been created as a
database and is interlinked with CORD software. A person desiring to transfer or acquire a
property shall have to submit the particulars of the property in the appropriate requisition form.
Such particulars are fed in the computer database and the system automatically generates the

246 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
market value of the property as per parameters provided in the Requisition Form. The digitised
market values are periodically revised for this sensitive issue. For this purpose the “Market
Value Monitoring Committee” headed by the District Magistrate has been formed at the district
level. This committee recommends any such value change periodically annually or bi-annually
as per demand of the situation.

Present status of computerization process

CORD software developed by NIC, West Bengal State Centre is being used to automate the
entire process of registration starting from presentation of deed, stamp duty and fees calculation
leading to scanning of Registered Deed and finally delivery of the Deed to the party. The entire
process has been streamlined and it takes about half an hour to complete a Deed Registration
and its delivery to the party.

As stated earlier Market Value Data Base (MVDB) for all registration offices has been prepared
and is used for assessment of market value by CORD. Predefined appreciation and depreciation
factors were incorporated in CORD for use with MVDB during such assessment to avoid
subjectivity in assessment of market value. The system is now working in all 241 registration
offices of the state in a PPP model with three technical support providing private partners. The
factors so considered are:

    A. Type of property:
           Vacant land
           Land with structure
           Flat/Apartment
    B. Appreciation/depreciation factors:
           Proposed use of property and nature as in ROR
           Closeness to road and width of approach road
           Age of structure
           Tenanted or not
           Litigated or not
           Availability of facilities like lift, swimming pool, gymnasium etc.

The newly developed computerized system helped in the following manner:

               Citizens are getting their Deed registered in the same day.
               Quality of Deed Registration has improved considerably
               Cost of such service has reduced considerably
               Very less space requirement for storing of records (digital records)
               Saving cost of maintenance of records,
               Complete elimination of pendency of Deed Registration
               Searching is almost immediate by click of a button
               Substantial increase of collection of Government Dues as at a time all dues are
                being collected.
               E-payment of Stamp duty (e-stamping) has made the hassles of payment almost
                nil

Standard user-charge based on the number of pages in the deed is collected from the public and
is deposited into a separate account maintained in the name of registering officer. The private
partners are paid from this account.

MVDB is revised every year and also as per the need. A committee called District Level
Monitoring Committee has been formed in every district for verification, modification (if
required) and approval of the revision proposal submitted by the registering officers within that
247 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
district. Since the introduction of the system, facilities are being added to make it more citizen
centric. In November 2011 online assessment of market value and e-payment of Stamp duty and
registration fees have been introduced.

The present system working in the registration officers are of decentralized architecture and
hence are working in silos. The State Government is planning to introduce centralized
registration system connecting all the registration offices to a central server. This will help in
providing registration related services electronically and over the web to the citizen in a better
manner.

Property tax

Section 46(1) of the West Bengal Panchayat Act, 1973 provides that a Gram Panchayat shall
impose yearly tax on lands and buildings within the local limits of its jurisdiction at one or two
percent of annual value of such lands and buildings depending on such value either within one
thousand rupees or more. There are provisions of exemptions also in respect of imposition of tax
on the basis of equity or religious, charitable, public purposes etc. Annual value in relation to
any land or buildings is calculated at six percent of the market value of such property at the time
of assessment.

Section 93 of the West Bengal Municipal Act 1993 provides guidelines about the power to levy
Property Tax on lands and buildings within the areas of urban local bodies (ULBs). Property tax
is one of the main sources of internal revenue of the ULBs. Provisions have been made to
determine such property tax on the basis of a formula. But such tax (annual) shall not exceed
30% of the annual value of the land or building concerned.

    a. Present system of assessment:

        Presently in the Urban Local Bodies of this State the following two systems of assessment
        of lands and buildings are followed:

           i.   Annual Rental Value (ARV) System: In this system tax is calculated on annual
                rent that is actually or reasonably be fetched by a property. Here Annual Rent
                (AR) = Monthly actual or reasonable rent X 12. In this system Annual Value (AV)
                = AR minus x% (in case of Kolkata Municipal Corporation value of this x is 10%)
                statutory deduction for maintenance. A percentage of AV is determined as the
                annual Property Tax. In case of Kolkata Municipal Corporation this tax = (AV
                /600 + 10)% of the AV subject to minimum of 11% and a maximum of 40%.
          ii.   Capital Value Method: In this system tax is calculated on Annual Value derived
                from cost of construction added to cost/ market value of the land. Here AV =
                (Construction cost + Market value or cost of the land) X a percent as laid down in
                the statute minus statutory deduction. Annual Tax = AV X a percentage of AV. In
                Kolkata Municipal Corporation AV of vacant land is determined at 7% of the
                market value of the land.

    b. Flaws in the existing system of valuation:

        Since enactment of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1923 these two systems are being
        followed for assessment of lands and buildings in the municipal areas. With growing rate
        of urbanization and change in the socio-economic scenario the flaws in these two
        systems are being surfaced, and due to these flaws the system of assessment of lands and
        buildings is getting more complex and as a fall out the rate of collection of Property Tax
        is dwindling and simultaneously the scope of tax management is growing. These flaws
        are as follows:

248 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Flaws in Annual Rental Value (ARV) System:

       Subjectivity: "Reasonable Rent" is a completely subjective term, and creates considerable
        scope for using discretion at even lower level.
       Discrepancy: This system creates wide spread discrepancy by placing similar properties
        in dissimilar tax pattern.
       Non transparency: Non transparency of this system leads to mutual mistrust and
        misunderstanding. Apart from this the system creates ample scope of tax management
        and entry of middleman in the system.
       Wastage of time of officials: Officials remain busier in arguing with the tax payers,
        cumbersome and lengthy hearing process and file / document management, than to do
        the duty related to tax administration.
       Non reflection of actual revenue potential: Subletting, subdivision and collusive rent
        have been hiding the actual revenue potential. Apart from long term tenancy and Rent
        Control properties lead to low valuation for low rent.

Flaws in Capital Value (CV) System:

       Limited availability of sales data and unregistered instruments.
       Under reporting of Transaction Price especially for old buildings.
       Freezing of Tax base.
       Need for qualified staff to assess cost.
       Uncertainty of what assets should be covered.
       Scope for subjectivity and discretion and hence non transparency.
       Inequity between similarly placed properties assessed at different points of time.
        Subjective element of these systems leads to non-transparency, wastage of time of the
        civic personnel in cumbersome processes, and above all difference of opinion leading to
        excessive litigations, and thus wastage of efforts of civic personnel and fund in fighting
        the court cases.

    In this situation to ensure a dynamic process of a transparent tax administration a decision
    has been taken to switch over the system of valuation of properties in Urban Local Bodies to
    Unit Area System of assessment.

    The general valuation of holdings under WBM Act, 1993 shall be made, unless
    otherwise directed by the State Government, by the Central Valuation Board,
    established under the West Bengal Central Valuation Board Act, 1978, (West Ben. Act
    LVII of 1978) and the preparation of valuation list, amount of property tax determined
    under section 96 on the basis of such valuation list, and disposal of all applications for
    review shall abide by the provisions of that Act.

    c. West Bengal Valuation Board and Property valuation in ULBs

The West Bengal Valuation Board was constituted after the enactment of West Bengal Central
Valuation Board Act, 1978 to bring about a uniform and rational system of valuation of
municipal properties throughout the state. The activities of the Board mainly comprise of
undertaking valuation work in specified urban local bodies notified by the state government
keeping an eye on overcoming inter-ULB anomalies. Annual valuation of a holding is
determined as per provisions of Section 106 of West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993. At the present
system valuation for a municipality takes place every five years following a resolution to this
effected being adopted by the ULB. The draft valuation list is published for the ULB inviting
objections within a specified period. The objections are heard and disposed within six months
249 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
following which the final valuation list is published for the ULB. The state government under
section 9(2) of West Bengal Valuation Act, 1978 issues notification indicating the date from
which the list will come into effect. Starting from 1988-89 till 2006-07, first time valuation has
been done for 117 ULBs, 68 ULBs are covered with second time valuation and third time
valuation done for 16 ULBs (Total ULBs in the state 126).

    d. Property valuation in Kolkata Municipal Corporation area – Unit Area Assessment
       (UAA) system

Keeping in parity with most other cities of India, Kolkata Municipal Corporation has undertaken
Unit Area Assessment (UAA) System. The entire city is divided into 293 blocks and these blocks
are classified into seven categories (A to G) on the basis of market value, infrastructure, facilities
etc. corresponding to each category, (viz. A, B, C, D, E, F, G) an Annual value / sq. ft. i. e, Base
Unit Area Value (BUAV) is assigned, category 'A' having the highest BUAV while 'G' having the
lowest BUAV. It ensures equity at the macro level of the properties lying within the same block
or similar category block.

However, in order to remove hardship bustee / slum / thika-tenanted area are categorized as 'G',
for the purpose of assessment, irrespective of their geographical location under any block or
category. Similarly, all recognized RR colonies including settlements under Government notified
EWS (economically weaker sections) and BSUP (Basic Services for Urban Poor) Schemes have
been categorized as 'E' irrespective of their geographical situation under any block or category
unless it belongs to a block whose category is lower than that of 'E'.

To account for the wide heterogeneity among properties within a block, Multiplicative Factors
(MFs) are introduced. MFs would account for variations in terms of size, purpose of use, age of
the property, location of the property within the block, nature of occupancy and type of
structure, which would be clearly notified and used to increase or decrease Base Unit Area
Values of different properties as applicable or to keep it same.

As opposed to the current system, a flat tax rate percentage within min-max limit of 6% to 20%
would be used and notified in the UAA system which does not depend on the Annual Valuation
of the property. Already tax rate for developed bustee is fixed at 8%. Also, in this system, rate of
tax of individual ordinary flat will not depend on cumulative AV of all flats in the premises
concerned.

Further, before finally fixing the block division and categories a draft notification was published
in official Gazette to get suggestion and objection from the citizens. This facility will similarly be
extended to the citizen while fixing category wise Base Unit Area Value(s) of properties.
To determine such divisions of blocks with different categories, concerned BUAV, MF values,
Tax rate etc. a Municipal Valuation Committee is formed which is constituted by expert from
different fields of the society. Similarly an Anomaly Review Committee has been formed to
consider citizen's feedback towards such categorization. Such categories and values will be
revisited once in five year.

A percentage of annual value will be fixed as the property tax. Assessment of property is done by
the assessee himself as opposed to the prevalent system where assessment inspectors are
responsible for assessment. It is envisioned that the UAA system would be non-discretionary,
transparent, equitable, easy to administer and empower the citizen by providing opportunities
for self-assessment.

    e. Exemption from property taxes payment

250 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
As per provisions of sections 99 to 105 of West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, Diplomatic
Missions, places of public worship, Government or Government aided educational institutions,
holdings used for charitable purposes, welfare homes run by the Government and the buildings
with a valuation of Rs. 500/- or less are exempted from payment of property tax. In every five
years the periodic assessment of holdings is done. Detailed procedure for such assessment is
made in the Act.

Similarly the West Bengal Panchayat Act, 1973 states under section 46(2) states about
exemptions from imposition of tax by the Gram Panchayat in the area of its jurisdiction. Lands
and buildings used exclusively for public purpose, religious, charitable and educational purposes
and when the annual valuation of land or buildings is not more than 250 rupees.

Land Revenue

Chapter IV of the West Bengal Land & Land Reforms Act, 1955 contains provisions for
determining and payment of revenue to the Government of West Bengal, the landlord of all the
lands of the state by the tenants – the raiyats. Under the EA Act, the state acquired the rent
receiving interests of the intermediaries against compensation. Detailed provisions were made
in the Act regarding assessment and payment of compensation. It was therefore, necessary to
obtain first what was the amount that an intermediary was actually collecting as rent from his
tenants as on the date of vesting with effect from which his rent receiving interests vested in the
state. Keeping this purpose of the Act in view when the land records were revised under the EA
Act the rent that was actually being paid by the tenants to their immediate landlords were noted
in the records. The Act however, provided for determination of revenue during revisional
settlement operation in respect of only the lands for which no rent was paid ( niskar land or rent
free land) or rent was paid in kind. The basis of such determination – the average yield per acre
of the class of land concerned prevailing in the vicinity – was provided in the Act. The Act also
provided for determination of rent for different classes of land held by tea-gardens.

When the LR Act with chapter IV containing provisions for determination of revenue came into
force on 30 March 1956, no determination was made till 14.04.1981 and revenue was being
collected on the basis of the rent that was recorded in land records revised under the EA Act in
the fifties. Obviously the rate was very low - rupees 3/4 per acre. If we trace the history of why
the rate of rent in Bengal was low compared to that prevailing elsewhere in the country when
India became free we get an interesting story which establishes that nothing in this world is an
unmixed evil. Since Bengal was a permanently settled area it was the Zamindar’s prero gative as
a proprietor of land to induct tenant thereon at a rent fixed by him. It was again his prerogative
to enhance the rate of rent. The government did not gain thereby because the government could
not claim anything more than the revenue at which the estate was settled. The government could
at best curb the tendency of indiscriminate enhancement of rent as they did by the Rent Act
1859 and the BT Act of 1885. But in raiyotary areas, since the government settled the lands
directly with the tenants at rent fixed by the government it was open to the government to
enhance the rate of rent when the government needed more money and land revenue remained
principal source of income of the government. Hence the government freely enhanced the rate
of rent. This is how the rate of rent soared in raiyotary area whereas in Bengal the average rate
of rent remained low because some Zamindars were more sensible than others and considered
tenant’s ability to pay, but the revenue officials and tahasildars of raiyotary areas mechanically
collected rent at enhanced rate.

From 15.04.1979 the government exempted the raiyats owning land up to 6 acres from paying
revenue. Only the raiyats owning more than 6 acres of land were to pay the revenue, and the
number of such raiyats after implementation of two ceiling laws is not great in this state. This
can be safely said that only a few persons in this state pay land revenue.


251 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Exemptions to small land owners gave rise to a practical problem. The Rent Act of 1859 gave
occupancy rights to cultivating tenants and the BT Act of 1885 systematised the rights of such
tenants on land. In a dispute between the landlord and the tenant the stock plea of the landlord
was that the contestant was not his tenant. Since the tenant was not armed with a patta (a
document of creation of tenancy) which the landlord seldom granted in clear violation of legal
provisions the tenant was at a serious disadvantage to prove his tenancy. The civil courts in
course of time and in acknowledgement of the hapless condition of the tenants to contest the
denial by the landlords of the creation of tenancy and applying the provision of the BT Act which
made granting of rent receipts and maintenance of counterfoils mandatory titled in favour of the
tenants and accepted rent receipts as a proof of tenancy. This is how rent receipts came to be
regarded as a valuable document to the tenants.

As a result of exemption the tenants holding lands up to 6 acres were not to pay revenue and so
not to get any receipt. They apprehended that exemption of revenue which was a paltry sum in
any case was going to rob them of the valuable document which receipt to them is. The
government took notice of this apprehension and provided in the Act that the tenant would pay
different kinds of cess as before and get receipts and such receipts would be as good as the
revenue receipts.

The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue Act, 1979 with comprehensive provisions for
determination and payment of revenue came into force with effect from 14.04.1981. This
independent Act dealing with revenue matters omitted chapter IV of the LR Act as a logical
corollary. But the Act met a road block in the Calcutta High Court and was never implemented.

In 2000, the LR Act was amended and chapter IV was reintroduced by repealing the Land
Holding Revenue Act 1979, and the amended provisions were given retrospective effect from
14.04.1981. In 2003 and 2005 chapter IV of the LR Act was again amended. The latest table of
the rates at which land revenue is to be paid with effect from 17.12.2005 was provided by the
amendment of LR Act in 2005.

Meanwhile, during the long period between the fifties of the last century when records revised
under the EA Act recorded the rent the tenants were actually paying to the landlords and the
end of 2005 land use pattern had undergone a sea-change. The traditional classification of land
as agricultural land and non-agricultural land no longer holds good. There have been a lot many
stratifications under both the heads. Land has been put to various forms of commercial and
industrial uses, as will be evident from the table containing categories of land and the rates at
which revenue is to be paid, provided in the Act. Obviously, the rates vary between Rs. 20/- per
acre and Rs. 17,500/- per acre. Main features of the table are the following:

Determination of the rates at which revenue has to be paid is not left with any official of the
government. The Act has not only laid down the rates at which revenue has to be paid but also
categorized the lands to which such rates apply. What is left is only simple arithmetical
calculation. Hence, manipulation at the lower level has thus been minimized, if not fully
eliminated.

A clear distinction has been made between the lands within municipal areas and lands in non-
municipal areas. Although for lands used for the purpose of agriculture in both the areas is the
same – Rs. 20/- per acre (to be paid by the raiyats holding more than 6 acres of land), for other
categories of land in municipal areas the rates are much higher than the rates of similar
categories of land in non-municipal areas.

A new concept of “activities allied to agriculture” meaning fisheries, poultries, piggeries,
potteries, floriculture, horticulture, sericulture, dairies, livestock breeding and other land based
bio-mass production activities – have been introduced and a slightly higher rate of Rs. 30/- per

252 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
acre has been fixed. For land used as homestead and non-agriculture purposes other than
commercial and industrial practices double the rate of agricultural land has been fixed.

Another new concept of the principle of the ability to pay has been introduced. For the same
category of land if it is held by an individual or a cooperative society the rate is much lower than
the rate if such land is held by a company. While for land used as homestead or for non-
agricultural purposes an individual will pay at Rs. 40/- per acre, a company will have to pay at
Rs 150/- per acre, and for land used for brackish water fisheries the individual or a cooperative
society will pay at Rs. 200/- per acre but a company will have to pay at Rs. 400/- per acre, and if
land is used for multi-storied building by a cooperative society the rate is Rs. 600/- per acre,
while for the same land a company will have to pay at Rs. 800/- per acre.

Land in municipal areas has been categorized under five heads – categories A to E, according to
the size of the population, plus a special category such as land in Municipal Corporation has
been made. While the rate at which revenue is to be paid for land in category E municipal area is
the lowest it has graduated upwards and for land within a Municipal Corporation area the rate is
the highest.

It is clear from the provisions as to revenue contained in chapter IV that a modern approach has
been adopted in determining the rates of revenue for various categories of land. The approach is
fairly comprehensive and the principle of equity according to gains a raiyat as defined in the Act
including an individual as well as a company makes for putting the land to different uses has
been followed.

The revenue for which provisions have been made in chapter IV discussed above is to be paid by
the tenants who own lands and pay revenue to the government as landlord because the
government acquired the rent receiving interests of the landlords of such tenants. For the lands
owned by the government, the approach is absolutely different. When land is settled for non-
agricultural purposes how the rent has to be assessed and at what rate premium or salami is to
be charged, when sairati interests such as hats, bazars, fisheries etc., are settled what is the
procedure to be followed and what should be the rate of rent for such settlement – have all been
extensively dealt with in the West Bengal Land and Land Reforms Manual, 1991, under
respective chapters. Below table provides the details of land revenue collection in the state for
the last four years: (source – DLRS)

            Year                                       Amount
            2009-10                                    244.06 cr
            2010-11                                    276.54 cr
            2011-12                                    380.16 cr
            2012-13                                    483.71 cr
            2013-14 (till Dec ’13)                     236.11 cr

Land valuation for compensation purpose

For acquisition of land in West Bengal, alongside the application of Land Acquisition Act 1894
(Act-I), Land Requisition & Acquisition Act of 1948 (Act II) was extensively applied up to the
nineties of the last century. Presently, much of the land which was requisitioned under LA Act-II
have either been acquired under 9 (a) & 9 (b) of LA Act (Act-I) or derequisitioned and its
possession given back. Regarding the determination of compensation for the acquisition of land
under Act-I, there are detailed guidelines in Act I of 1894. Broadly, the valuation of land to be
acquired is fixed by determining the market value of the land proposed for acquisition. This is
done on the basis of consideration of the value for the transfer of lands of a similar nature in the
same locality or any nearby locality. Along with this market value, 30% is added as solatium, and
12 % is added as interest per annum for a period from the publication of Notice under Section 4
253 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
to the declaration of onward or possession of land, whichever is earlier. This is how the amount
granted as compensation is fixed. There are also provisions for computing the value of
structures or buildings, if any, on the lands proposed for acquisition. There are also provisions
for granting suitable compensation to the bargadars of such lands.

The land acquisition manual prescribes the procedure for arriving at the market value of land
being acquired through the LA Act 1894. The market value of the land is arrived at by taking an
average of prices paid for a number of land transfers in the area over a period prior to the date of
publication of section 4(1) notification. Usually transactions reflecting abnormally high and
abnormally low land prices are ignored for arriving at market value of land. The process
naturally does not capture the possible future price of land considering the fact that even with
the announcement of any project launching or the purpose of land acquisition (industry or
infrastructure) the prices will appreciate in the area.

Coverage of compensation for labourers of the lands proposed for acquisition is not taken into
account in Act I. Also, when any piece of land is acquisitioned for setting up industry/township,
laying of railway lines, market value of lands lying with raiyats in the vicinity of these lands soar
up due to the infrastructural improvements in the surrounding areas. The future prospects are
generally not taken into account while evaluating the price of the land fixed for compensation.
However, this stands to be a policy decision of the State Authority.

The Government of West Bengal, in supersession of all relevant provision laid down in Land
Acquisition Manual, 1991 and previous executive orders, issued a revised procedure and
administrative rearrangement order dated 6 June 2006, for various land acquisition related
purpose including compensation purpose. The following procedures are to be followed for
fixation of appropriate market value of each type-class of land:

    1. For each of the specified type-class of the land as separately mentioned for rural and
        urban land, at least 10 and up to 20 current sale data from the concerned mouza to be
        collected and placed chronologically in the prescribed format. The sale figures from
        nearest time up to 12 months back time which can be extended up to 36 months as may
        be required to get minimum 10 sale data for the relevant class-type of land in the mouza.
        For the extended period from 12 months to 36 months sale price can be increased by 5%
        per annum. In case at least 10 sale data for the relevant mouza is not available from the
        office of the sub-registrar, sale data from adjacent mouza for same type-class of land
        needs to be considered.
    2. Using the sale data collected for each type-class of land in each mouza in prescribed
        format, fixation of average market value for the type-class of land is done with a
        reasoned analysis available. This “value assessment sheet” is prepared, signed and
        countersigned by the designated officials in the district and used for the purpose of both
        long-term lease and land acquisition purpose.
    3. For such fixation of market value of any type-class of land as stated above, abnormally
        high or abnormally low value (above or below 200% of the average value reflected in
        majority of sales) are carefully discarded.
    4. For awarding compensation of each plot of land or for fixing up salami for giving long-
        term settlement of land, additional valuation is determined on the basis of certain
        prescribed formulae.
    5. In cases of developed urban centres, municipalities and corporations, belting method is
        applied
    6. Fixation of value of land located in rural areas: each mouza is divided into seven type-
        class of land
            a. Non-irrigated agricultural land
            b. Irrigated agricultural land
            c. Homestead

254 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
              Danga, patit, fallow and other unused vacant land
             d.
              Land under commercial or industrial use
             e.
              Tanks, ponds and other water bodies
             f.
              Government land including vested land, departmental land and public-utility
             g.
               cum common property land
    Each of the above seven type-classes of land in rural areas shall get value addition over and
    above up to maximum of 10% on the average market value determined.

    7. Fixation of value of land located in municipalities and corporations: the classes of land
       are categorized as under
           a. Land under residential use
           b. Land under commercial and industrial use
           c. Water bodies
           d. Public utility land (public roads, parks, cremation ground, burial ground, land
               under departmental use)
           e. Land not covered under above four types-classes
       Each of the above type-class of land in municipalities shall get value addition over and
       above up to maximum of 10% on the average market value determined

Following are some parameters which presently form the basis of valuation of land in West
Bengal:

1. On the basis of following criteria, rates of revenue to be collected from the raiyats are fixed
   (Section 22 & 23, Chapter IV, West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 as amended in 2005).

    (i) Use of land. For example, for agriculture purposes, for commercial and industrial
        activities, homestead, fisheries & tank fisheries and so on.

    (ii) Location of the piece of land, i.e., whether it lies in a rural area, municipal area, or
         municipal corporation area and so on.

2. Consideration value for the transfer of pieces of land between individuals is calculated on the
   basis of the consideration values for transfer of land in the vicinity over the past 6 months or
   a year. (Section 23, the land acquisition Act, 1894 an Clause 33 of Chapter III Executive
   Instructions by Govt. of West Bengal).

3. For collection of stamp duty & registration fees from the transferors, lessees, etc., the State
   Govt. has classified the land into different mouzas& determined the valuation for similar
   plots of land in the same belts using the Belting Method & prepared a rate card. The basis of
   these classifications is the location of land, present use of the land, nature of land, etc. In
   cities and big towns where the values of lands largely depend on their shape, size, depth and
   road frontage, belting system is adopted in determining their values in comparison with
   another plot of known value. For instance, the land from the road is divided into three belts,
   the first to a depth of 60, 80 or 100 feet, the second belt is one and half time the depth of the
   first belt to a further depth of 90, 120 or 150 feet and the third consisting of all lands behind.
   The value of second belt is 2/3rd of the first belt and that of the third belt is ½ the value of
   first belt or 3/4th of the value of the second belt. With the aid of these relative values of the
   three belts the land under consideration/ acquisition is valued by comparison with known
   value of a neighbouring land and the average land value is determined. While adopting
   belting method of valuation, the appraisal should be done judiciously.




255 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Land valuation as has been said is not a tailor made process. Each land has to be treated as a
special and specific case and valued in most appropriate manner so as to arrive at an
appropriate market value. It is an opinion of valuation expert and has to be justifiable as such.

Statement of expenditure vis-à-vis collection of stamp revenue and registration
fee

                  Year           Collection (Cr.)      Expenditure (Cr.)       % of exp. over
                                                                                 collection
           2002-03                    683.38                 32.99                 4.83%
           2003‐04                    766.90                 32.82                 4.28%
           2004‐05                    964.28                 34.97                 3.63%
           2005‐06                   1087.02                 48.38                 4.45%
           2006‐07                   1168.54                 32.65                 2.79%
           2007‐08                   1352.00                 38.51                 2.84%
           2008‐09                   1501.31                 37.88                 2.52%
           2009-10                   1916.27                 60.48                 3.15%
           2010-11                   2418.59                 64.77                 2.67%



Panel 8: Dispute Resolution and Conflict Management

Background:

For analyzing the system of dispute resolution and conflict management in land matters in West
Bengal, it will be relevant to briefly discuss about the evolution of land laws in the State since the
British Raj, as the extant land laws have a direct link with the previous ones. In this context, it
may be mentioned that the four States of Eastern India ie. West Bengal, Bihar, Odisha (part)
and Assam (part) formed the Bengal Presidency during the Rule of the British East India
Company and Permanent Settlement Regulation was imposed in 1793 for land management and
Revenue Collection in this Presidency by introducing the Zamindary or Intermediary system for
collection of revenue. As such the land laws and land management of these four States have a
strong similarity because of this legacy. But such Regulation was not applied in the rest of the
country. It may be mentioned here that in the Northern States of India, there is Mahal-wari
system and in the Southern States it is Raiyat-wari system, which are different from the states in
Eastern India.

2.     The following are the principal land laws since 1885, which recognized the rights of
tenants or raiyats and record of rights were prepared accordingly.

    i) Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885
    ii) West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953
    iii) West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955.


The Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885 contained provisions for dispute resolution at Revenue courts in
certain matters like preparation of record of rights etc but in most other matters like settlement
of rent rolls etc the appellate forum were civil courts for dispute resolution. Though the BT Act
has since been repealed, the first series of RORs were prepared in the District Settlement
operation under the BT Act in the State during 1907 – 08 to 1939-40. These RORs were revised
in the Revisional Survey & Settlement operation under the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act,
1953 and subsequently under the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955.


256 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
It is a well-known fact that cases filed for resolving disputes in judicial courts go through a long-
drawn process and as such the legislature in the State incorporated provisions in the subsequent
Land Laws, which have kept most of the causes of land disputes beyond the jurisdiction of civil
courts. Better dispute resolution mechanisms are available in the provisions in these Laws and
connected Rules in West Bengal. On one hand, extensive bar to civil jurisdiction regarding land
disputes has been introduced, especially in the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955, as well as
in the earlier West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953, on the other hand there are provisions
in most of the chapters of the WBLR act, for dispute resolution in the Revenue Courts which are
quasi judicial in nature and much less time consuming so that litigants may have faster relief.
This will be evident if we analyze the relevant provisions in the Land Laws and rules in the State.

3. Analysis of provisions in the Land Laws for dispute resolution:

A) WBEA Act 1953:

        (i) Sec 57B – Bar to civil jurisdiction in respect of certain matters, including preparation or
            revision of Record of Rights, any alteration of any entry in the ROR etc.

        (ii) Appeals in certain matters like determination of compensation etc were to be preferred
             to a special judge or tribunal appointed for this purpose, and not in civil courts.

These provisions were obviously incorporated for faster conflict resolution than civil courts.

Section 44(2)(a) of the WBEA Act provides for correction of RORs, finally published during 1954
– 1960. The force of the provision is being extended from time to time (presently till 2017) for
providing relief to the raiyats in case of dispute in EA RORs in the Revenue court.

Bar to civil jurisdiction is there in almost every chapter of WBLR Act and also bar to engaging
advocates point to the wish of the legislature to provide easier, faster and less costly mode of
dispute resolution to the litigants.

B) WBLR Act, 1955

Provisions to bar the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts:

   i.      Chapter IIA – Restriction of Alienation of land by Scheduled Tribes - Bar to civil
           jurisdiction u/s 14I
  ii.      Chapter IIB - Ceiling Laws - Bar to civil suits regarding determination of land ceiling u/s
           14X
 iii.      Chapter III – Bargadars - Bar to civil jurisdiction u/s 21 regarding matters u/s 17, 18, 19B
           & 20B. U/s 21(3), Civil or Criminal court will refer the matter regarding determination of
           Bargadarship to the Authority u/s 18(1).
 iv.       Chapter VIIA – Preparation or revision of ROR - Bar to civil jurisdiction u/s 51C(1) & (2).
  v.       Chapter IX- Bar to civil court u/s 61 reg. determination of the Revenue Officer in land
           matters under provisions of this Act.

Cases related to Title determination (Title Suits) are disposed of by Civil Courts.

Provisions for dispute resolution in Revenue courts during preparation or revision of record of
rights (RORs) under the WBLR Act, 1955:

For Preparation of land records in West Bengal the unit of survey and settlement is a mauza or a
revenue village. When an order is passed by the Revenue Authorities on behalf of the
Government that the record of right of any mauzabe revised or prepared u/s 51 of the WBLR
Act, the RORs are prepared or revised by following the process under Schedule A of Rule 22 of
the WBLR Rules, 1965:

257 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    i)      Theodolite Traverse Survey
    ii)     Cadastral Survey
    iii)    Preliminary record writing ( Khanapuri)
    iv)     Local explanation (Bujharat)
    v)      Attestation
    vi)     Publication of draft record of rights (RORs)
    vii)    Disposal of objections
    viii)   Preparation and publication of final record of rights (RORs)


Provided that any of the steps referred to any of the items (i) to (v) may be omitted or
amalgamated with previous permission of the Government.

Let us now discuss in brief about the work done at individual stages as noted above, to examine
the scope of dispute resolution from the very beginning of record preparation in
the State:

    A) We have already stated that the mapping and recording system in West Bengal are
        different from the States in Northern, Western or Southern India. In those states, maps
        are prepared for individual plot/ holding / survey numbers showing dimensions of each
        side of the plot/ holding / survey numbers , where as the unit of cadastral mapping and
        preparation records in West Bengal is an entire mauza or a revenue village, area of
        which may vary fro 100 acres to 10,000 acres. No dimension of the plots are shown on
        the map as the survey is done by engineering survey method, in which maps are
        prepared in a particular scale, so that the area of individual plots are extracted from the
        map itself. Theodolite Traverse survey is first conducted to establish control points
        of high accuracy in and around the mauza and then detailed survey is conducted by
        cadastral survey methods to survey all plots inside the mauza, using those control
        points to maintain accuracy to prepare the cadastral map of the mauza. Each plot is
        then numbered for preparation of record of rights by field verification in presence of the
        Raiyats.
    B) In the stages called Khanapuri and Bujharat, Preliminary records are prepared in
        presence of the Raiyats, and the contents of the records are explained to them. There is
        scope for dispute resolution as necessary corrections are made both in
        maps and records if any objection is raised at this stage.
    C) During Attestation stage, a proclamation is issued in the concerned mauza requesting
        all raiyats to be present during attestation of the records by the Revenue Officer, who
        incorporate changes in the map and records wherever objections are raised by giving
        opportunity of representation to all interested parties, thereby allowing the raiyats to
        have opportunity of resolving disputes during Attestation.
    D) After Attestation, The total record of rights of the mauza are placed in Draft
        Publication at the office of the Revenue Officer and kept open of one month
        for public inspection and inviting objections if any. The Revenue Officers dispose
        of the objections by giving opportunity of hearing to all interested parties and
        incorporated corrections in the maps and records accordingly and resolve any
        dispute raised before him.
    E) After disposal of all objections at the Draft Publication stage, the RORs are then placed
        for Final Publication and again kept open for public inspection for one month.
       There are provisions for preferring objection even after final publication of RORs u/s
       51A(4) and 51A(5) to superior Revenue Officers, including the Collector.

    F) Orders passed by the district revenue authorities were challenged previously at the High
       Court of Calcutta. As disposal of the appeal cases in High Court was very slow and a
       large number of cases piled up, West Bengal Land Reforms & Tenancy Tribunal

258 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       was created in 1997 by enacting the West Bengal Land Reforms & Tenancy Tribunal Act
       1997, which started functioning in 1999 for expediting disposal or disputes under six
       specified Acts, including the WBEA Act 1953 and WBLR Act, 1955. This was done in
       pursuance of the amendment of the Constitution of India under Article 323B. This
       Tribunal has the power of the single Bench of the High Court with article 226 and 227 of
       the Constitution of India. The Tribunal has so far disposed of more than 30000
       Transferred Appeal cases from the High court.
    G) There is sanctioned strength of four Benches at the Tribunal, out of which two are
       functioning now. As per record, 4101 Original Applications (appeals) were
       filed during 2012, out of which 2015 cases have been disposed of within
       2012. Had the other two Benches been functioning then the pending number of cases
       would have been minimal. (Source: Report of the WBLR&T Tribunal to the
       Government.)
    H) The total number of post Final Publication cases pending before the Revenue
       Authorities is 4,29,601. Though apparently the number appears to be very large, but
       taking into consideration the total number of Finally Published Mauza being 39,838,
       the average number of disputes pending per mauza comes to about 11. However, the
       cases should have been disposed of earlier. (Source: Directorate of Land Records,
       West Bengal report to the Government for October 2013).


4.     During the investigation in the assigned area in the theme of Dispute Resolution and
Conflict Management in Land matters, different aspects of land dispute resolution mechanism
have been looked into and analyzed, as stated above and suggestions for remedy on weak points
have been made as follows:

A. Time taken for Dispute Resolution on land related matters in Courts:

The percentage of litigations related to land and property matters in respect of overall number of
cases in the State is approximately 20%, taking into consideration of the cases pending in
different courts, from the District Courts to the High Court. On a comparative study of Revenue
Court cases with Civil Court cases on land related disputes, it has been observed that a litigation
is disposed of at an average period ten months in a Revenue Court while in a Civil Court a Title
Suit is seldom resolved before two years in the earliest.

A Case Study of a Revenue Court: Mutation Case No. MT/ 3652/13 u/s 50 of the WBLR Act
revealed that the case was filed on 04.02 2013 for mutation of the applicant’s name in the
Revenue Records, which was disposed of on 10.05. 2013. Thereafter, Revenue Appeal was filed
by the concerned party on 01.07.2013 and the appeal was disposed of 31.12.2013. Thus it took
about ten months for dispute resolution, including appeal, in the Revenue Court.

This is the general time frame for disposal of record correction /mutation cases in Revenue
Courts.

In a Case Study of a Civil Court Case, it was found that Title Suit No 54 of 1981 was filed
before the Ld. Munsiff in the month of January 1981 and it was disposed of on 19.08.1983, after
18 hearing dates.



B. Suggestions for early disposal of Land related disputes:

i) Early disposal of record correction cases, mainly Mutation cases, by the Revenue authorities,
is impeded when difference exists between the facts in the Land Records maintained Revenue
authorities and that in the records of the Registration Department. As such, a system should be

259 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
introduced for interlinking the two departments so that simultaneous updation of Land Records
can be done when any transfer is executed (through the Registration Department). This is
possible in West Bengal as Land Records maintained by the Revenue Department (i.e. the Land
Reforms Deptt.) have all been computerized, and the functioning of the Land Registration
Department has also been fully computerized. The bridging between the two systems will keep
the records updated and thereby reduce the scope of disputes in this sphere to the minimum.

ii) In other Revenue cases, the litigants are served notices by the office and it becomes quite time
consuming for various reasons. In civil courts, the litigants are asked to serve notice to all
interested parties and the plaintiff, in his own interest, takes all steps to make it a good service
to other parties. Similar system of service should also be introduced in the Revenue courts for
reduction of time for servicing of notices. Also no unnecessary adjournments should be granted.
There should be specific time frame for disposal of cases (say, within two months in normal
cases).

iii) For early disposal land dispute related cases, which are mainly Title Suits, adjournments
should be avoided, if sought on unreasonable or filmsy grounds. In some cases it has been
observed that more than 50 dates have been given before final disposal. There should specific
provision in the laws that a suit be disposed of within a year, if not earlier. For this purpose,
necessary amendments in the relevant rules of the Civil Procedure Code are required.

C. Classification of land related disputes:

On a study of different types of litigation related to land in the State, especially cases instituted
before the Land Reforms Tenancy Tribunal, it appears that the average percentage of cases
instituted for different causes in land disputes may be classified as follows:

       i.   Incorrect measurement of land - 05%
      ii.   Erroneous apportionment of share - 33%
     iii.   Incorrect Mutation - 25%
     iv.    Sale / purchase related issues - 10%
      v.    Inheritance issues - 20%
     vi.    Encroachment on Govt. land 07%

D. Suggestions for improvement in dispute resolution:

Procedure with time schedule for preparation and revision of record of rights has been
prescribed in the WBLR Rules. There are several stages during the preparation / revision of land
records when the litigants have scope for participation in the proceedings. But fact remains that
non-participation or absence of the parties during the relevant stages of preparation of land
records is one of the causes of faulty recording in land records. Lack of awareness on the part of
the stake-holders is a major reason for such absence. Steps should be taken for awareness
development by wide publicity through local print media or electronic media, which would
ensure greater public participation. This will help in reducing future litigations.

However, the present provisions of the Law have provided scope for resolving any dispute, if the
litigant approaches the Revenue Authorities.

E. Rate of filing cases:

The West Bengal Land Reforms and Tenancy Tribunal was constituted in 1998 as per provisions
of the WBLR&TT Act, 1997, which was enacted under the guideline of the Article 323 B of the
Constitution of India. The rate of filing of cases in the Tribunal is around 4000 per annum. The
number of cases filed in the year 2012 was 4101 and the number of cases disposed of was 2015,
i.e. approximately 50% of the cases filed.

260 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The Tribunal has a sanctioned strength of four Benches, out of which two are operational now.
The other two are not functioning because of shortage of Tribunal Judges.

(Source: Report of the WBLR&T Tribunal to the Government.)

F. Suggestions for improvement:

The other two Benches, each with one Judicial Member and one Administrative Member, are
required to be made functional in the earliest, so that achievement in dispute resolution may be
almost 100% at this forum.

G. Cost of litigation:

The cost of litigation borne by the litigant varies from court to court. In cases before the Revenue
Authorities, the cost of both the litigant and the Government is minimal, as the litigant can
plead his case in person or through his representative, who may be a lawyer.

However, in Civil Courts, a litigant has to bear a considerable amount of cost towards the fees of
lawyers for pleading his case. Poor litigants may take the help of Legal Aid Services, but the
prevailing system in the State does come to much of a help for them. The cost of litigation in the
Civil Courts, including that of the Tribunal or the High Court may vary from Rs 5000/- to Rs
50,000/-, depending upon the status/seniority of the Ld Advocate.

H. Suggestion for Redressal:

The function of the Legal Aid Services is to be improved so that the poor litigants can avail the
aid in true sense and spirit, enabling them to protect their interest on their lands.

I. Long Pending cases related to land disputes:

On study of long pending cases in the Land Reforms Tenancy Tribunal, the grounds for such
pendency appear to be:

          i.   Repeated adjournments sought by the applicant,
         ii.   Non-availability of the Lawyer because of his otherwise engagements in other courts
        iii.   Non-submission of proper records or papers by interested parties, including the
               Government.
        iv.    Evidence of good service of notices to interested parties (especially when there is a
               large number involved) etc.

J. Suggestions for remedial measures:

The above- mentioned grounds mainly relate to court cases and rarely to Revenue courts.

For remedial measure, the following steps may be taken:

   i.      There should not be any unnecessary adjournment, even on lawyer’s ground
  ii.      The concerned Departments should ensure timely submission of proper records and
           papers.
 iii.      The number of dates for disposal of a case should be limited, preferably three dates and
           those should also be allowed within a short span.

K. Importance of Training in speedy Resolution of Land Disputes:

Training plays an important part in the speedy and effective system of dispute resolution in the
State, both in respect of functionaries in the revenue courts and in the civil courts. State
Government should design and take up an intensive, continuous and comprehensive training
261 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
and capacity building programme for all Revenue Officers, who are engaged in dispute
resolutions at different stages.

Similarly, training on land laws and rules should also be an important component of the training
programme of Judicial Officers, who may play a positive role in expediting resolving land
disputes. Even there are instances where Civil Courts have passed orders in land matters, where
there are specific Bars to Civil Jurisdiction as per extant Land Laws, thereby complicating the
disputes.

From the above discussion and analysis it transpires the extant land laws in West Bengal have
in-built mechanism of dispute resolution at Revenue Courts which take much lesser time to
dispose of cases than Civil courts, which mainly dispose of Title cases (Title Suits), including
partition, pre-emption cases etc in land related matters.



Panel 9: Institutional Arrangements & Policies

    A. Institutional mapping

Land continues to be of enormous economic, social and symbolic relevance in West Bengal and
across the country. Most of the population in the villages depends on land. Therefore, land is
very important and dear to the villagers who constitute 70% of the population of West Bengal.
The total land in the state is 86,87,540 hectares, out of which the net cultivated area is
54,63,678 hectares. This land is about 63% of the total area and is held by 430 lakh land
holders/ raiyats.

Board of Revenue, the apex administrative body, which was active in colonial state formation
during the company period, played a crucial role in revenue management prior to the
departmentalisation of state affairs. The establishment of the Calcutta Revenue Council and
Patna Revenue Council in 1770 heralded the colonial state formation. Both the councils were
planned to be co-ordinated by an apex body called the Board of Revenue in Calcutta. Since then
it was reconstituted and reorganized in 1786, 1793, 1822, 1829, 1861, 1889 and 1913 to meet the
growing demands of State revenue administration. After Independence, Land and Land
Revenue Department was reconstituted to augment agrarian reforms including tribal welfare
and revenue collection. However, in 1952, a separate department of the Tribal Welfare was
formed. From 1977 the department was renamed as Land and Land Reforms Department.

Till 1996, the Board of Revenue, West Bengal, a branch of the Land and Land Reforms
Department with independence in some matters exercised and discharged the following powers
and functions, namely :-
           (a) The recovery of agricultural and land improvement loans;
           (b) The administration of Acts relating to the collection of public demands and sums
               recoverable as a public demand;
           (c) The management of Government estates, attached or encumbered estates, the
               Murshidabad Estate and the administration of Acts relating to –

                        i.   Land Records,
                       ii.   Survey, Settlement and Colonisation,
                     iii.    Alluvion and Diluvion,
                      iv.    Waste Lands,
                       v.    Government Lands and Estates,
                      vi.    Partition of Estates,
                     vii.    The assessment and collection of Land Revenue,

262 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                    viii.    Miscellaneous revenue subjects such as treasure trove, escheats,
                             money orders, revenue agents;

            (d) Supervision and control of all establishments employed in the discharge of the
                functions referred to in clauses (a) to (c ) above, save in respect of services for
                which any other appointing authority is prescribed, and the appointment,
                posting, transfer, promotion, punishment and discharge or dismissal of, and the
                promotion, punishment and discharge or dismissal of, and the grant of leave to
                persons so employed, in accordance with the rules and principles laid down by
                Government in this behalf.

In the year 1996 Board of Revenue was abolished and merged with the Land and Land Reforms
Department. At present the L&LR Department administers agrarian reforms, land management,
collection of land revenues and cess.

    1. The Land & Land Reforms Department of Government of West Bengal is the basic
       department entrusted with all activities relating to land and land reforms of the state. It
       is one of the biggest departments of the state.
    2. Directorate at state level: Under the L&LR Department lies the Directorate of Land
       Records & Surveys. This Directorate is also one of the biggest Directorates of the state.
       The Director is responsible for preparation and revision of maps, preparation, revision
       and maintenance of records of rights and implementation of all land reforms activities
       laid down in the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 and West Bengal Land
       Reforms Act, 1955 and the Rules framed thereunder as well as the other Acts and Rules
       the implementation of which are entrusted to the DLR&S.
    3. District level: Each district has a District Land & Land Reforms Officer who is assisted by
       one or more Deputy District Land & Land Reforms Officers and other technical and non-
       technical staff. The DLL&RO enjoys all the powers of the Collector of a district. He works
       under the direct supervision and control of the DLR&S and in charge of all land and land
       reforms activities of the district.
    4. Sub-Divisional level: There is a Sub-Divisional Land & Land Reforms Officer, who works
       under the supervision and control of the DL&LRO. The SDL&LRO directly supervises the
       works of the Block Land & Land Reforms Officers within the respective sub-division.
    5. Block level: At each block there is a Block Land & Land Reforms Officer. He is the main
       functionary in the hierarchy of the land and land reforms administration. His job relates
       to:
           a) Preparation and revision of maps, and preparation, revision and maintenance of
               records of rights, and custodian of such records
           b) Implementation of land reforms measure, such as application of the ceiling
               provisions, distribution of vested land, protection of bargadars etc., management
               of land at the disposal of state government falling within his jurisdiction and
               utilisation of land
           c) Quasi-judicial matters – implementation of regulatory provisions of the Acts and
               Rules, disposing of disputes between the bargadars and land-owners, harvesting
               disputes etc.

        He is assisted by two/ three Revenue Officers to look after the respective branches of
        work under his overall supervision.

    6. Gram Panchayat level: At this level there is a Revenue Inspector whose job is to collect
       revenues and cesses and other government dues, to do crop survey and agricultural
       census and do such other jobs relating to preparation and revision of maps and
       preparation, revision and maintenance of records of rights, land management and land
       utilisation as may be assigned to him by the higher authorities.

263 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    To meet the various requirements of other departments and agencies, acquisition of land
    under different Acts is also made by the Land & Land Reforms Department which acts as the
    appropriate government in the state.

    For acquisition of land within the city of Kolkata comprising the first 100 wards of Kolkata
    Municipal Corporation, the First Land Acquisition Collector, Kolkata acts as the agent of the
    state government.

    For acquisition of land in the districts, the Collectors of the districts act as the agents of the
    state government. Each Collectorate has been provided with a separate land acquisition wing
    with a number of Land Acquisition Officers. This wing of the Collectorate carries out the
    instructions of the state government at different stages of land acquisition.

    Therefore, all activities relating to land and land reforms and acquisition of land are carried
    out in this state under the unifying command of the Land & Land Reforms Department. And
    all such activities are to be carried out in accordance with relevant Acts, Rules made
    thereunder and Land & Land Reforms Manual and Land acquisition Manual. All these taken
    together give out the policies of the government.

    So, there is hardly any scope of overlapping in land and land reforms administration in the
    state. The lands held by other departments, like the traditional Irrigation and Waterways
    department, PWD department and Forest department and the new ones like the Kolkata
    Metropolitan Development Authority (KMDA), a statutory authority under the Urban
    Development Department, and West Bengal Industrial Development Corporation, a
    corporation under Commerce and Industries Department as well as West Bengal Industrial
    Infrastructure Development Corporation, were given to them for utilisation for specific
    purposes. KMDA holds lands for construction of township, vital roads in and around the city
    of Kolkata and WBIDC and WBIIDC are given land for the purpose of making lands
    available for industrial purposes.



Some of the important Acts administered by the Land & Land Reforms Department

State laws

    1) The West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953
    2) The West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955
    3) The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (now repealed and replaced by The Right to Fair
        Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act
        2013
    4) The West Bengal Land Reforms and Tenancy Tribunal Act, 1997
    5) The West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1997
    6) The West Bengal Land Development & Planning Act, 1948
    7) The West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourers, Artisans and
        Fishermen Act, 1975
    8) The West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land Act, 1973
    9) The Kolkata Land Revenue Act, 2003
    10) The Bengal Survey Act, 1875
    11) The West Bengal Public Land (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1962
    12) The West Bengal Thika Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 2001

Central laws

    1) Contract Act, 1870

264 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    2)   Transfer of Property Act, 1882
    3)   The Registration Act, 1908
    4)   Indian Stamp Act, 1899
    5)   The Limitation Act, 1963
    6)   The Indian easements Act, 1882

Major Field level functions relating to land and land reforms

               Settlement of land u/s 49(1) W.B.L.R. Act and issue of pattas (Deed of
                settlements)
               Recording of bargardars
               To ensure that the restrictions imposed by law on the use of land are not violated
                by the raiyats
               To ensure that protection to the tribal raiyats given by law is not violated
               To adjudicate disputes / conflicts between land owners and bargadars in relation
                to share of produce, termination of barga cultivation, eviction etc.
               Assessment of land revenue and collection thereof.
               Maintenance of r-o-r.

    B. Rural Framework

India became independent in 1947. In the debate of the Constituent Assembly on the right to
property, it was unanimously resolved that the cultivators of land should be conferred with the
rights to hold land directly under the state by abolishing the estates and eliminating the
intermediaries. The Constitution of India came into force on 26.01.1950. The articles 31, later
31A, 31B and 31C provided for acquisition of estates and all pre-existing rights of the
intermediaries.

In pursuance to these Constitutional provisions different States passed legislations to abolish
Zamindary. In this State, the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act 1953 (EA Act) was passed. It
came into force on 12th February 1954.

The EA Act had two objects:

    e) To abolish Zamindary - that is all rent receiving interests;
    f) To impose a ceiling on land held by individuals.


To carry out purposes of the Act records of rights were revised to obtain the position of land as
on 15.4.1955 or 16.4.1956 as applicable – the dates with effect from which all lands and rights
therein vested in the state. Those who held land on and from that date became tenants directly
under the state.

The West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955

As a follow-up of the EA Act by a comprehensive measure of land reforms so as to remodel the
system of land tenure, the West Bengal Land Reforms Act 1955 (LR Act) was passed. It came
into force on 30.03.1956. According to the present definition of a raiyat under the Act whoever
holds land for any purpose whatsoever is a raiyat and land as defined in the Act means land of
every description.

The LR Act deals with the following:

     Chapter                                     Subject dealt with
       II             Rights and obligations of the raiyat, right is heritable and transferable, but
265 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                      without any sub-soil right
         IIA          Restrictions on alienation of land by a Scheduled Tribe
         IIB          Ceiling on land held by a raiyat
         III          Rights and obligations of bargadars (share croppers)
         IV           Provisions for determining and payment of revenue to the Government of
                      west Bengal by the raiyats
            V         Provides for consolidation of plots of land and formation of co-operative
                      farming societies (post reform measure)
            VI        Deals with principle of distribution of land at the disposal of the state
                      government
         VII          Maintenance of records of rights up to date
        VIIA          Provides for preparation or revision of record of rights
        VIII          Management of land

Implementation of the reforms: an overall assessment

Thus the two Acts – EA and LR Act form the legal framework for West Bengal land reforms with
focus on the following:

                Abolition of Zamindary and all rent-receiving interests [WBEA]
                Imposition of ceiling on land held by individuals [WBEA]
                Bringing all the tenants directly under the State with equal status [WBEA]
                Imposition of new ceiling according to the size of a family [WBLR]
                Distribution of ceiling surplus land (WBLR)
                Abolition of distinction between agricultural land and non-agricultural land
                 [WBLR] and Non-agricultural tenants treated as raiyats [WBLR]


Hiatus between policy and implementation

Gap between legislation and implementation: Some land reforms measures provided for
in the WBLR Act such as consolidation of holding, formation of Co-operative Farming Society
and Co-operative Common Service Society have not been implemented by the successive
governments.

Gap between programme and implementation: The Directorate of Land Records and
Surveys is the main agency through which all the provisions of the WBLR Act are implemented.
One of the main programmes is to revise the records of rights to record the updated position of
land:

                 Item                  Programme             Implementation           Short fall

       *1. Final publication         42042 (villages)           [ Aug, 2013]              1505
          of record-of-rights                                  40537(villages)

       *2. Recording of                   3136297                  2455961              680336
       pattadars in the
          ROR


The gap in case of (1) is not large, but for (2) it is quite significant.

266 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Land records and updation: The provisions under Sec.50 to keep the RoR up-to-date have
not been implemented. All the changes that are taking place regularly are not being
incorporated in the records. According to the present system the onus is on the successor to take
action for recording the changes. Since it is the obligation of the government also to keep the
records up-to-date ways have to be found out to make the government take the initiative.

In all the record of rights –taken up from the first decade of 1900 under the BT Act, revised in
the fifties under the EA Act and again revised under the LR Act taken up from 1975 possession of
land of whatever kind has been recorded faithfully.

Persons possessing government land without being legally inducted on such land have been
recorded as “unauthorized occupiers”. Persons forcibly occupying the lands of another private
person have been recorded as “forcible occupiers”. Persons possessing lands on permission from
the owners of such lands have been recorded as “permissive possessors”. Legally speaking, such
possessions differ in character and import. But the fact remains that possession of any kind has
scrupulously been recognized in this state. However, recording of possession of government
land that is unauthorized possession has not been recorded in recent times to avoid legal
complications.

    C. Urban framework

Premises tenancy - Before the wounds of the World War II could be fully healed up came the
partition of India bringing lakhs of displaced persons from the erstwhile East Pakistan. Housing
problem took a new shape and assumed a new dimension. The new state government of
Independent India thought of a comprehensive measure, not only to control profiteering in rent
but also regulate landlord-tenant relationship and provide protection against eviction on
landlord’s pleasure. Temporary measures taken in 1948 and 1950 paved the way for more
comprehensive and precise West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956. However, this pro-tenant
law created its own problems. The landlords did not maintain the buildings and no new
investment was made in housing sector. Since this became an all-India phenomenon the Central
government took the initiative in changing the bias of the rent control legislation. A model act
was drafted and sent to the states to consider. West Bengal decided to change the Act of 1956.

The policy of the state government was to provide protection only to the relatively poorer
tenants and restrict the heritable right. Eventually the government succeeded in enacting the
West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1997 replacing the 1956 Act. The main features of the Act
are: (a) a cut-off rent was fixed. Tenants paying rent above that would not come within the
purview of this Act; (b) Some restrictions have been put on the right of inheritance of tenancy;
(c) Civil Courts’ jurisdiction has been ousted; (d) Provisions have been made for automatic
increase of rent.

Thika Tenancy: Right from the early days of the city of Calcutta and its sister town Howrah there
existed a precarious tenancy popularly known as thika tenancy meaning a tenancy in which the
interests of the tenants are not permanent. In a premises tenancy, the landlord is the owner of
both land and the structures made thereon, but in a thika tenancy the landlord remains the
owner of the land and the tenant becomes the owner of the structures.

The thika tenants were virtually tenants at will and hence could be evicted any time. An
ordinance stopping eviction was promulgated in 1948 and the next year the Calcutta Thika
Tenancy Act, 1949 was passed. It extended to the city of Calcutta and the municipal areas of
Howrah. The main object of the Act was to restrict the landlord’s right to evict the tenants. 1981
saw the emergence of completely a new legislation- The Calcutta Thika and other Tenancies and
Lands (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 1981. Under this Act the lands and interests therein of
the landlords vested in the State and the thika tenants became tenants directly under the State.
Rights of the thika tenants thus became secure. Eventually the Government replaced the Act of
267 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
1981 by West Bengal Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 2001. The Act was amended in
2010 to bring within its fold “certain other tenancies”. This Act as its title suggests was extended
to all the municipal areas of the State.

The Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976: As the title suggests this is not a landlord
tenant law. Its objectives are the following-

    (1) To prevent concentration of urban property in the hands of a few persons and
        speculation and profiteering in such property;
    (2) To bring about socialisation of urban land to sub serve the common good by ensuring its
        equitable distribution;
    (3) To discourage construction of luxury housing leading to conspicuous consumption of
        scarce building material;
    (4) To secure orderly urbanisation.

To achieve these objectives the Act provides for imposition of ceiling on vacant land, acquisition
of excess vacant land by the state governments with powers to dispose of the vacant lands thus
acquired to subserve the common good, regulation of the transfer of vacant land within the
ceiling limit and also land with building and restriction on the plinth area of the residential
buildings to be constructed in future.

For equitable distribution the Act provided for the following:

    (1) To allow a person to hold excess vacant land if such person intends to utilise such land
        for construction of dwelling units for weaker sections of the society;
    (2) To empower the state government to allot excess vacant land that has vested in the state
        for providing residential accommodation to the employees of any industry;
    (3) To empower the authority under the Act to have first option to purchase vacant land
        sought to be transferred by a person holding land within the ceiling limit.

In West Bengal, no action under the above three heads has been taken.

The object of prevention of concentration of lands in fewer hands has also turned out to be a
failure. Under the Act the extent of land occupied by a building, land appurtenant thereto
meaning the spaces to be compulsorily kept open for the enjoyment of such building and
additional extent of 500 square meters of land if such building or any part thereof is used for
residential purposes- is not vacant land. No part of such land will vest in the state. Therefore,
any rich man intending to purchase all the lands with buildings of the city of Calcutta can do so
without breaking the law. The Act therefore has failed to achieve its main objectives

In respect of land to which only the WBLR Act applies (such land consists more than 99% of the
total land of the state) severe restrictions have been imposed on change of use from its present
position, and particularly from agri-use to non-agri-use, without thinking of the need of land for
infrastructure, industry or urbanization. It was thought that agriculture would provide the best
employment opportunities to accommodate those who live off land. Moreover, it would also
provide total food security and maintain ecological balance. These were the public purposes as
conceived of by the policy makers in the 1980s, and the restrictions on land rights served such
purposes. But now it is found that there is need for more infrastructure, industry and
urbanization in the state. Agriculture can no longer sustain all the rural people; and employment
opportunities have to be created by developing infrastructure etc. One may very well question
whether the existing restrictions are serving public purpose or not anymore?

Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 was enacted to bring parity between the holders
of agriculture land already subject to ceiling law and the holders of urban land. However, the


268 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
public purpose of meeting the increasing demand for housing has been hindered. There is a
mismatch between the supply of and the demand for urban housing in the state.

The importance, however, has been paid to ensure planned urban development, of course within
the framework of ceiling provisions under the WBLR Act and ULCR Act, as the case may be. The
West Bengal Town & Country (Planning and Development) Act, 1979 and the rules framed
thereunder in 2008 and 2010 have made detailed provisions relating to the use of urban land for
various purposes. There are regulatory measures meant to prevent haphazard and unplanned
urban development. Since government’s role in building infrastructure, setting up of industry,
constructing housing projects has become limited there is no alternative to bringing in private
enterprises to these fields of economic development. The restrictions and regulating measures to
ensure planned development is definitely welcome for public good, but the ones that hamper
development can never bring any good to the people in the long run.

    D. Land disputes

The Revenue Officers attached to the Block Land & Land Reforms Office act as the primary
authorities to resolve dispute between the raiyats, between the raiyats and their bargadars. They
also implement the ceiling provisions of the Act and other regulatory provisions. They enjoy
exclusive jurisdiction to decide such cases at the primary level. Persons aggrieved with their
decisions may prefer appeal before the DLLRO. Against the orders of the appellate authority
people may approach the West Bengal Land Reforms &Tenancy Tribunal (WBLRTT), created
under the WBLRTT Act, 1997 in pursuance to the provisions of Article 223B of the Constitution
of India by excluding the jurisdiction of the High Court as a Court of the first instance. Since the
Tribunal does not have to maintain the court formalities that the High Court maintains and
since all the benches of the Tribunal are division benches of which one member is technically
equipped by virtue of his experience of work in land reforms organisation disposal of cases is
much quicker, and the process is much cheaper.

Appeal against the decision of the Tribunal can be filed only before a Division Bench exercising
writ jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 and so a separate bench has been earmarked to
hear such appeals. The result is quicker disposal of appeals.

Before the Tribunal was created, cases remained pending in the High Court for years together.
As a result of the creation of the Tribunal barring people from approaching the High Court as a
court of the first instance the people have benefited immensely from cheaper process and
quicker disposal of cases.

    E. Land use change:

In West Bengal whoever holds land for any purpose whatsoever is called a raiyat. He is the
owner of the land and his right is heritable and transferable. Before 1981 he could change the
use of his land according to his choice. By an amendment of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act
1955 (hereafter WBLR) made in 1981 severe restrictions have been put on the change of the use
of land from its present position. Conversion of land can be made only on permission from the
DLLRO who has to consider thousands of things before granting permission.

Conversion of land without permission has been made a cognizable and non-bailable offence
punishable with imprisonment up to three years or with fine up to Fifty thousand rupees or with
both. Even for a change in the mode of use of the non-agricultural land, such as from residential
to commercial or from commercial to industrial or from industrial to residential etc. permission
is necessary.

    F. Preparation of records of rights and mutation


269 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
In West Bengal Land Reforms Act provision has been made in chapter VIIA (section 50A-51A)
for preparation or revision of record of rights called khatian. It is mouza or village based. Each
land owner shall have a Khatian having unique khatian number in the Mouza. The document
contains the details of the owners like his/her name, address, status of ownership, details of
plots (quantity and classification of land, revenue and cess payable). Other interested groups
like share-croppers, exchange possessors, and adverse possessors are also recorded against each
plot. A Plot is defined by its plot number which is an 5 digit integer and unique in the
mouza, by a unique area. Plots are depicted in the cadastral map of the Mouza which are
normally prepared ubder 1:3960 scale. Procedure for revising or preparing record of rights has
been laid down in rule 22-25 and schedule A of West Bengal Land Reforms Rules 1965.

Provision has also been made in section VII for maintenance and updating of record of rights.

    G. Land related programmes

National Land Record Modernisation programme: The Government of India supported
programme has three major components – a) computerisation of land records, b) survey/ re-
survey and c) computerisation of registration. Till March 2013, a total of 36.70 million records
of rights for 46.54 million land parcels have been digitised and integrated with cadastral maps
which has prompted to start Over The Counter (OTC) information service system in July 2012 as
a measure of citizen centric service. The process of digitisation and updation in West Bengal was
initiated in early 2011 and till December 2012, land records of 40,196 out of 42042 mouzas are
digitised and updated. Presently under MPLS-VPN Project of Finance Department, all the
service locations i.e. 346 Block Land and Land Reforms (BL&LRO offices), 63 Sub-divisional
Land and Land Reforms (SDL&LRO )Offices and 18 District Land and Land Reforms
(DL&LRO0 )offices of Land & Land Reforms Department is expected to be interconnected by
2014. As on November, 2013, 94 BL&LRO Offices, 45 SDL&LRO Offices and 15 DL&LRO offices
are interconnected through MPLS-VPN having 2Mbps connectivity. Land records database of
the State will be collocated in State Data Centre (SDC).

Homestead land for landless: In spite of the provisions made in the West Bengal Land
Reforms Act 1955 and West Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agricultural Labourers,
Artisans and Fisherman Act 1975, large number of landless people remained outside the benefit
provided by the Act. To cover these landless people the State introduced Chas- O-
BasabaserJanyaBhumidanPrakalpa (Homestead and kitchen garden scheme) in the year 2005-
06. Under this scheme land up to 0.16 acres was allotted to the landless people for homestead
and kitchen garden purpose. This micro- plot distribution is unique in the sense that Govt.
purchased the land form landowners at market rate and distributed free to the landless people.
But, this scheme was not seriously implemented by the State Govt. Under the scheme, State
granted tenancy right to 5034 families over 579.79 acres of land [Source: Report published by
Directorate of Land Records and Surveys, Govt. of West Bengal]. The present Government
introduced a new scheme NijoGrihoNijoBhumiprakalpa in Oct 2011 (My Home My Land
scheme) with purpose to settle 5.5 Lac landless poor people of the State up to 0.05 acre of land.
The land to be settled will be provided from the land at the disposal of State Government and
land to be purchased by the State Government. The settlees are to be settled in cluster and will
be provided with all essential amenities like drinking water, sanitation, electricity, road and
livelihood support by convergence of Govt. schemes. The entire 5.5 lac landless people will be
covered under the scheme by 2015-16. As on December 2013, 86,883 families have been allotted
land. [Source: Report of Directorate of Land Records and Surveys, Govt. of West Bengal]

    H. Women’s land rights

When a woman, be it a Muslim or a Hindu is the established owner of the land from before the
time of preparation or revision of record of rights there has been no problem in getting her name
recorded. But there has always been a problem in getting the name of a female heir recorded
270 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
because the Revenue officials have to depend on the oral evidence of the persons present
comprising the male members of the village concerned at the time of recording.

Personal law of the Muslims in Bengal gives the woman the right of inheritance although
unequal between the sons and daughters – the ratio being 2:1.

The native Hindus are governed by the Dayabhaga School and those who have come from
outside Bengal are governed by the Mitakshara School. No school gave right of inheritance to
women except life interest to the widow. The Hindu Women’s Right to Property Act came into
existence in 1937 when preparation of the record of rights for the first time in Bengal under the
Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885 was almost over. Moreover, the Act was found defective and so not
enforced in right earnest. Hence the original record of rights under the BT Act did not record the
names of female heirs. The Hindu Succession Act giving the right of inheritance to the women
and converting life interest into absolute interest came into existence in 1956 when the record of
rights under the BT Act were being revised under the EA Act. Before the implications of the
revolutionary Hindu Succession Act could be fully understood, the revisional operation was
almost over. Moreover, the thrust of revisional operation under EA Act was to obtain the
position of land and all pre-existing rights therein as on 15.04.1955 or 14.04.1956, the dates of
vesting under EA Act. Naturally recording the names of women according to the new law did not
get the importance it deserved.

The latest revision of the records was taken up in 1975 under the LR Act, when the women’s
legal right to property stood fully established. Hence, attempt was made to record the names of
women owners of land. However, the same problem of ascertaining the truth has been faced.
The male heirs who normally attend the place where record-writing is done have been found to
be reluctant to give out the names of female heirs particularly when they have been married off
to a distant place. Brothers are still not reconciled to the sharing of paternal property with the
sisters. In a male dominated society where the mind-set of even the persons entrusted with
preparation or revision of records is not women-friendly as far as married women’s right to
paternal property is concerned it has been difficult to elicit information about the existence of
female heirs.

Since revisional operation under the LR Act has almost come to an end the effect of the
amendment Act of 2005 giving more rights to the Hindu women belonging to a family governed
by the Mitaksharaschool has not featured in the records.

In 1993 the government of West Bengal decided to distribute land (the amount of land yet to be
distributed was insignificant) in the joint names of husband and wife and issued an order to that
effect. In a survey made in 2003 it was found that less than 6% of the total pattas issued during
the 10 years between 1993 and 2003 were issued in the joint names of husband and wife.

This is a concrete evidence of the anti-woman mind-set as far as property right is concerned of
the persons entrusted with protecting women’s right to property

    I. Land Acquisition

The Doctrine of Eminent Domain is, primarily, a source of power of the state. It means the
power of the Sovereign to take the subjects’ property without his consent for public purposes.
The concept of public purpose is therefore an essential ingredient in just and appropriate
exercise of this power. Payment of compensation though not an essential ingredient is a
condition inherent in the doctrine of eminent domain and essential in just exercise of such
power. This power under eminent domain is being exercised by almost all the countries of the
world and stands firmly established.



271 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (Act I of 1894) applied only to British India. The native states
had their own Acts more or less modelled on the 1894 Act.

Section 299 of the Govt. of India Act 1935 provided for compulsory acquisition of land for public
purpose. The use of the Act of 1894 therefore continued as before.

Adopting the Doctrine of Eminent Domain the Constitution of India contains articles 31
(omitted in 1978), 31A,31B, 31C and 300A (from 1978) and provides for compulsory acquisition
of land. However, the second proviso to Article 31A clearly lays down that for acquisition of land
being held in excess of the ceiling limit prescribed in any Act compensation need not be paid at
the market value, but for acquisition of land held within the ceiling limit compensation shall not
be less than the market value. By dint of these constitutional provisions the Act of 1894, which
was adapted along with many other Acts made during the British rule, could withstand many
onslaughts against it before the courts even when the right to property was a fundamental right
till 1978 and became a Constitutional right thereafter and came out unscathed.

In West Bengal, immediately after Independence two Acts were passed for acquisition of land -
(a) the West Bengal land (Requisition and Acquisition) Act, 1948, (b) the West Bengal Land
Development and Planning Act 1948. Provision for acquisition of land and building were also
made in the Calcutta Municipal Act 1951 and Calcutta Municipal Corporation Act 1980.The West
Bengal Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation Act 1974 contained provisions for
acquisition of land for the purpose of this state govt. undertaking.Besides, many other Acts
including West Bengal Acquisition and Settlement of Homestead Land Act 1969 and the West
Bengal Acquisition of Homestead Land for Agriculture Lobourers, Artisans and Fishermen Act
1975 were passed for acquisition of land for various public purposes. By way of a state of West
Bengal amendment of the 1894 Act provisions were made for paying compensation to the
bargadars (share croppers) in addition to the compensation to be paid to the owners of the land.

Article 31A of the Constitution of India lays down that compensation for acquisition of land held
within the ceiling limit shall not be less than its market value. The 1894 Act says that
compensation shall be assessed on the basis of the market value. It is evident that neither the
constitution nor the 1894 Act prevented any Govt. from paying higher compensation or
providing any other relief over and above cash compensation. As the facts stand out different
states adopted different procedures for assessing market value and paid solatium at different
rates. The procedure hitherto followed in this state has been with an eye to keeping the market
value as low as possible to serve Govt. interest. None ever cared to bother whether market value
thus assessed was just or not. However, to the land- losers compensation was invariably much
less than the price at which land changed hands from a willing seller to a willing buyer.

The protest movement at Singur and Nandigram had a seismic effect affecting land acquisition
in other parts of the country, West Bengal issue thus became an all-India issue. The Central
Govt. and the leaders of different political parties were forced to take notice and relook at the
way 1894 Act was being implemented. However, the Central Govt. decided that instead of full-
scale amendment of the 1894 Act a new Act should be made.

After a long deliberation for a few years The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 2013 has been passed. This Act seeks to
ensure -“a human participative , informed and transparent process for land acquisition for
industrialization development of essential infrastructural facilities and urbanization with the
least disturbance to the owners of the land and other affected families and provide just and fair
compensation to the affected families and make adequate provision s for such affected persons
for their rehabilitation and resettlement and for ensuring that the cumulative outcome of
compulsory acquisition should be that affected persons become partners in development leading
to an improvement in their post-acquisition social and economic status and for matters
connected therewith or incidental there to “.
272 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The Government of West Bengal, opposed to the passing of the new Act and has declared that
the government is not going to acquire any land from unwilling land owners even for
constructing a power station or widening national highways, let alone acquisition of land for
industry, which should purchase land from the open market. Hence, this state, for the present,
has nothing to do with the new Act.

    J. Land policy and consultation

It can be inferred from the WB Land Reforms Act, 1955, the Rules made thereunder and the WB
Land and Land Reforms Manual 1991 dealing with all kinds of land beyond the city of Kolkata
comprising the first 100 (one hundred) Wards of Kolkata Municipal Corporation, and the WB
Thika Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 2001 and Rules made thereunder dealing with
tenancy within the city of Kolkata that this state has comprehensive land policies on all kinds of
land and land related matters.

These policies have come into place through a process of evolution. Some of the landmarks of
this process may be discussed to know how the policies came into place.

Unlike in other parts of the country lands were permanently settled with proprietary rights in
1793 with the Zamindars who had hitherto been mere collectors of revenue by robbing the
peasants of their right of ownership of land in Bengal, Behar and Orissa.
Right from the beginning of the 19th century the peasants started agitating against the
oppression of the Zamindars. Peasant wings of all the political parties were organizing
movements after movements. With the joining of the left parties in the 1930s the peasant
movements gained much more momentum and became more intensive. The British
Government set up Flaud commission to examine whether permanent settlement had outlived
its utility. The Commission recommended abolition of zamindary in its report submitted in
1940.

Provisions were made in the Constitution of India for acquisition of estates. In pursuance to the
constitutional provisions different states made laws for abolition of Zamindary. In this state, the
WB Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 was passed vesting all the rent receiving interests. Thus this
legislation took its shape as a result of continuous movements against the Zamindary system
keeping in view the interests of the principal stakeholders – the tillers of land – the man behind
the plough.

Imposition of ceiling is another landmark. The socialist elements in the Indian National
Congress and the left parties from 1930s started pleading for abolition of large holdings and the
redistribution of surplus lands. In recognition of such demand it was decided in the Constituent
Assembly that ceiling should be imposed on the holding of lands. Provisions were made in
Article 39(b) and (c) of the Constitution of India to ensure that the ownership and control of the
material resources of the community are so distributed as best to sub-serve the common good
and that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and
means of production to the common detriment.

To fulfill the constitutional obligations the WBEA Act, 1953 imposed ceiling of 25 (twenty five)
acres on agricultural land and 15 (fifteen) acres on non-agricultural land [maximum 20 (twenty)
acres including homestead] on the holding of an individual.

When those who were going to lose land came to know of the ceiling provisions they did all they
could do to evade the provision. They resorted to various designs to circumvent the law and
displayed rare ingenuity. Since then one of the principal items of work of the land reforms
administration of this state has been to detect lands held clandestinely and vest such lands by
drawing up proceedings in accordance with law. All such actions were challenged in courts
273 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
giving rise to a lot of litigations involving thousands of acres of land. It took years to dispose of
the cases.

In 1971 came the new ceiling on land on the basis of the size of the family by amendment of the
WBLR Act which was again amended in 1981 and 1986 to bring within the net of the ceiling
provisions the lands of the non-agricultural tenants and all other kinds of land. The
amendments of 1981 and 1986 were challenged, and appeals are still pending before the
Supreme Court. The Writ Petitioners armed with the Stay Order till the disposal of the appeals
are enjoying surplus lands. But it should be pointed out that due to the constant vigilance of the
prospective stakeholders no owner other than the insignificant few enjoying the benefit of
injunction has been able to hold on any land in excess of the ceiling area.

For distribution of surplus land due care has been taken to involve the representatives of the
landless and land-poor – the stakeholders for whom the ceiling was imposed to take away lands
from those who had much more than they needed. Panchayet representatives and land reforms
officials hold enquiries jointly to identify the vested land. The Panchayat functionaries then
identify and select the beneficiaries. On their recommendation land is finally settled. This is how
participation of the stakeholders has been ensured and for this no landowner has been able in
this state to prevent an allottee of vested land from taking over possession of such land. No
instance of paper allotment.

Over the centuries lands have been cultivated by bargadars (share-croppers) who cultivate
others’ lands on condition of paying a share of the pro duce. The Flaud Commission noted in its
report that 22.5% (twenty two point five percent) lands were cultivated by bargadars. 1941
Census corroborated this figure. But the bargadars had no right. BT Act ignored them except
describing them with a negative mandate that they are not tenants. The left parties made several
movements all over Bengal to air the grievances of bargadars. The most famous one was the
Tebhaga Movement. After abolition of Zamindary,LR Act sought to protect their right of
cultivation to some extent. But since most of the bargadars were not recorded their eviction
could not be stopped. Towards the end of 1970s the Government resorted to a special drive
called “operation barga” to record those bargadars who, for fear of incurring the wrath of the
owners of land failed to get their names recorded. A few lakhs of bargadars in addition to six
lakhs which stood recorded from before were thus recorded. Thereafter, by the amendments of
the LR Act made in 1981 and 1986 bargadars’ right to cultivation was made heritable and fully
secure. This is how policies with regard to bargadars were framed. Within the city of Calcutta
there exists a tenancy known as thika tenancy. The tenant took land from the landlord on rent
and constructed structures to be used for manufacturing or commercial or residential purpose.
Since such tenants did not enjoy any legal right the landlords used to evict them at will. To stop
eviction Calcutta Thika Tenancy Act was passed in 1949. Eviction could not be stopped. In 1981
Calcutta Thika and other tenancies (Acquisition and Regulation) Act was passed. Landlords’
rights were acquired and the thika tenants became tenants directly under the state. Rights of
thika tenants have thus been made secure. For removing some defects pointed out by the
Supreme Court the Act of 1981 has been replaced by the Act of 2001, but acquisition of
landlords’ interests under the Act of 1981 and the thika tenants becoming tenants directly under
the State have been duly protected.

The principles of equity and redistribution of land have been the driving forces behind the
legislations embodying the policies of this state discussed above. The policies seek to safeguard
the interests of the downtrodden who over the centuries have been at the receiving end. There is
not a single instance of twisting policy in favour of the more privileged.


    K. Property registration and tax

274 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
The levy and collection of stamp duty and registration fees during the land/ property transfer
are regulated under the Indian Stamp (IS) Act, 1899 and the Indian Registration (IR) Act, 1908
and the Rules framed thereunder as applicable in West Bengal. Instruments to be registered
under the Acts are chargeable to stamp duty and registration fees at the rates prescribed by the
State Government from time to time. Under the IS Act, the stamp duty to be paid depends on
the real nature or substance of the transactions recorded in the instruments and not on any title
or description or nomenclature given by the parties who execute the instruments. The
Registering Officer (RO) is empowered to ascertain the market value of the properties which is
the subject matter of the instrument and to compute proper stamp duty chargeable thereon in
the prescribed manner as provided in the Act. At present in West Bengal the market value of any
property (land, building) is determined through the system of the Computerisation of
Registration of Documents (CORD) software started in the year 2000. The West Bengal Stamp
(Prevention of Under-Valuation of Instruments) Rules 2001 was introduced with effect from
1.3.2001.

Property tax is one of the main sources of internal revenue of the ULBs. Provisions have been
made to determine such property tax on the basis of a formula. But such tax (annual) shall not
exceed 30% of the annual value of the land or building concerned.

Present system of assessment:

Presently in the Urban Local Bodies of this State the following two systems of assessment of
lands and buildings are followed:

           i.   Annual Rental Value (ARV) System: In this system tax is calculated on annual
                rent that is actually or reasonably be fetched by a property.
          ii.   Capital Value Method: In this system tax is calculated on Annual Value derived
                from cost of construction added to cost/ market value of the land.

The West Bengal Valuation Board was constituted after the enactment of West Bengal Central
Valuation Board Act, 1978 to bring about a uniform and rational system of valuation of
municipal properties throughout the state. The activities of the Board mainly comprise of
undertaking valuation work in specified urban local bodies notified by the state government
keeping an eye on overcoming inter-ULB anomalies. Annual valuation of a holding is
determined as per provisions of Section 106 of West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993. At the present
system valuation for a municipality takes place every five years following a resolution to this
effected being adopted by the ULB.

    L. Environment and ecology

Most of the land related major Acts in West Bengal were enacted much before ecology and
environment issues came in the development discourse. However, the WBLR Act, though not in
an expressed manner but in an environment protection notion captures following provisions:

A raiyatis required to maintain and preserve his land in such a way that – (i) its area is not
diminished; or (ii) its character is not changed; or (iii) it is not used for any purpose other than
the purpose for which it was settled, without the permission of the collector. Again by virtue of
sec 4A(i) of the Act the collector of Darjeeling district may issue directions to the raiyats of the
three hilly subdivisions of Darjeeling, Kurseong and Kalimpong as to the form of cultivation to
be adopted by them. The collector is also empowered to prevent araiyat from cutting more than
one tree from his land without the former’s permission. These regulatory measures are intended
to prevent soil erosion or landslides so that ecological balance may be maintained.


275 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Sec 4C(1) requires a raiyat to obtain permission from the collector for any change of
classification of his land. If the change sought for is to establish an industry or brick field etc.
which may result in noxious waste products which may adversely affect environment, the
collector may withhold permission of conversion [rule 164(i), W.B. Land and Land Reforms
Manual, 2003]

In November 2005 West Bengal government promulgated the landmark environmental
notification, the East Kolkata Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Ordinance (enactment
in 2006) to safeguard the 12,500 hectares (comprising 46% water body and 39% agricultural
land) fragile wetland located in the eastern fringes of the city of Kolkata. These wetlands are well
known over the world for their multiple uses. The wetlands are man-made and the system of
wastewater treatment is the largest in the world. It has saved the city from constructing and
maintaining a wastewater treatment plant. The East Kolkata Wetlands Management Authority
formed under the provisions of the Act is chaired by the Chief Secretary, has been entrusted with
the statutory responsibility for conservation and maintenance of the wetland area by
maintaining the existing land use practices. For any change in land use within this area the
appropriate authority under WBLR Act has to take permission from the concerned wetland
authority.




276 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Annexure 2: Panel Reports (Aide Memoire)

                                   Panel 1: Land Rights Recognition

                                             10 February 2014
                                           Landesa, West Bengal
                                        Venue: Senator Hotel, Kolkata

    I. Introduction

The Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF), developed by the World Bank in
partnership with FAO3, UN Habitat, IFAD4, IFPRI5, the African Union, and numerous bilateral
partners, is a diagnostic tool to assess the status of land governance at the country level in a
participatory process that draws systematically on local expertise and existing evidences from
the field of works. It relies more on the practical experiences from the insiders’ perspectives
rather than building upon on outsiders views. In India, it is being implemented through
invitation of Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development, Govt. of India and
State Governments in about 7 states – Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha, Gujarat,
Karnataka and West Bengal. Globally the exercise is being undertaken in 35 countries of the
world.
The LGAF process is guided by a framework of 27 ‘Land Governance Indicators’ (LGI) covering
5 core thematic areas. Each indicator is further broken down into a number of ‘dimensions’ with
pre-coded statements (on a scale from A to D). There are in total of 116 dimensions in the
LGAF.

In 2012, the Government of West Bengal (GoWB) requested the World Bank to carry out a
comprehensive analysis of the State’s land sector to identify issues and policy implications of
their land tenure systems. Recommendations and findings from the LGAF assessment would
enable policymakers to adopt regulatory and institutional measures necessary to strengthen the
land governance system. As per the guideline from the World Bank, the whole work was divided
into nine panelsand experts for each panelwere engaged for in-depth study on the dimensions.

Landesa, India is the implementing agency of LGAF at the country level with its Technical
Advisory Group at place in New Delhi. The first meeting of the Panel 1 that dealt with the points
related to the issue ‘Land Rights Recognition’ was discussed on February 10, 2014 in Kolkata.
The meeting was organised by the State Coordinator –Landesa West Bengal and the Project
Team leader –State Director, Mr. Pinaki Halderat conference hall of the Senator Hotel. Eminent
personalities, representing different fields of works and a ‘panel of experts’ participated in the
discussion. The panel of experts was comprised of personalities with exponentially rich
experiences of working on the Land Governance issues in the state and at national level. The use
of Panels to form consensus on the assessment of a set of LGAF dimensions is crucial to
implement the work.

The current document deals with the discussions conducted during the first meeting of sharing
the findings of the Panel 1 and arrive at a general consensus regarding the analysis and
recommendations suggested by the panellists.

3FAO-Food  and Agriculture Organisation
4IFAD- International Fund for Agricultural Development
5IFPRI-International Food Policy Research Institute


277 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Panel 1- Recognition of a continuum of Rights: the law recognizes a range of rights
held by individuals

As mentioned earlier, the LGAF is expected to initiate an open, comprehensive discussion on the
country’s land issues, and to serve as a critical step forward in their efforts to improve land
governance. With specialists from different fields coming together for the first time, people look
forward to building consensus.

II. Context

Being a multidimensional concept, poverty is tough to define and there are quite a few
indicators of poverty. Among these, landlessness is a key predictor of poverty. Different aspects
of poverty, such as social security, food security, and family nutritional status are directly related
to landlessness of a family. In rural areas, and particularly for poor families, ownership of land,
even as small as a homestead plot makes a huge difference in their lives and helps them to
initiate their journey towards prosperity.

The achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) necessitates progress in all
major areas related to the well-being of the people, including poverty reduction and
improvements in education, health, gender equality. This may require setting priorities in terms
of dealing with various dimensions of poverty.

Landesa deals with the core rural poverty issue related to the landlessness. Household access to
and control over land and secure rights to it have impacts beyond the level of individuals and
families. Research has helped to develop a positive relationship between equitably distributed
land and poverty reduction.

Landesa’s involvement in LGAF could be considered as a step towards initiating a wider
discussion in the context of land governance. This organised discussions and follow up
discourses would hopefully help in strengthening its global discussion for pushing the ‘Land’
issue to be included in post 2015 MDG (Millennium Development Goals). Analysing and
assessing the land governance would provide the government with crucial recommendations to
revise its policies or build new policies aiming at more efficient and equitable land governance
system.

III. Purpose

The first panel discussion in West Bengal State of India provided a valuable opportunity for a
collective learning on “legal provisions for the recognition, enforcement and mechanisms to
provide secure land tenure for the population” in the state. The broad objectives of the meeting
were to discuss and arrive at a consensus regarding the following critical issues attached to the
first dimension:

            a) Gaps in existing evidences
            b) Areas for regulatory or institutional change to make the situation better
            c) Piloting new approaches and interventions to improve land governance on a
               broader scale (e.g. by strengthening land rights and improving their
               enforcement); and
            d) Criteria to assess the effectiveness of these measures.


The special feature of this process is that-

278 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       It follows a self-assessment process
       Having a comparable format to highlight good practices
       Having an increased profile of land governance; improved communication
       To publicize & mainstream state-level innovations nationally
       It provides a basis for participatory monitoring

IV. Expectations

The expectations from the discussion for Panel 1: Land Tenure Recognition were

       Panelists would discuss over the analysis of each parameters and arrive at a consensus to
        finalize the gradations
       Gaps would be identified against each parameter and recommendations will come out to
        bridge those gaps
       Provide policy suggestions/ recommendations on the related issues on land
        governance

V. Participation

The discussion was attended by the ‘panel of experts’ on relevant f ields and a few very eminent
professionals from areas other than direct implementation of land governance.
   1. Mr. Anil Kumar Chakroborty, Expert Investigator- LGAF;
   2. Mr. Tapan Kumar Shome, Ex- Directorate of Land Records and Survey (DLRS),
       Government of West Bengal
   3. Mr. KrishnapadaShandillya, Ex- Special Secretary, Government of West Bengal
   4. Mr. Sukumar Banerjee, Ex- Officer, LR Department, Government of West Bengal
   5. Mr. Apurva Mukherjee, Professor, Netaji Institute for Asian Studies, West Bengal
   6. Ms. Swati Bhattacharya, Chief- reporter- District, AnandabazarPatrika
   7. Ms. ReshmiGanguly, Program Officer, Action Aid Association (Kolkata Region)
   8. Mr. Biprodas Bhattacharjee-Professor Vivekananda Institute of Science and Technology,
       West Bengal
   9. Mr. Pinaki Halder, State Director, Landesa, State Coordinator and Project Team Leader-
       LGAF- West Bengal

Landesa Kolkata team members were also present to aid the uninterrupted flow of the panel
discussion. The names of those present were-

       Mr. Supriya Chattopadhyay, Communications Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
       Mr.Sudipta Biswas, District Program Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
       Mr.Anindya Dey, Office Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
       Ms.Udita Chatterjee, Research and Documentation Officer, Landesa- West Bengal
       Mr.Debasis Mondal, Office Assistant, Landesa- West Bengal

VI. Discussion

Mr. Pinaki Halder, LGAF- West Bengal Project Leader and State Director, Landesa West Bengal
welcomed all present and started the day’s proceeding with a power point presentation
delineating the purpose of the panel discussion, about LGAF, the core thematic areas of LGAF
before venturing into the detailed discursive discussion on Panel 1 : Land Tenure recognition.

The panel has two indicators as follows:

Indicator 1: Recognition of a continuum of rights: the law recognizes a range of rights held by
individuals (incl. secondary rights of tenants, sharecroppers, women etc.)

279 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Indicator 2: Respect for and enforcement of rights

Under Indicator 1 there were four dimensions and within Indicator 2 there were seven
dimensions. Each dimension has four gradations-ranked by the panel from A to D. The
dimensions were explicitly discussed in great detail to get the panelists’ inputs to incorporate
changes in the gradations and analysis.

The dimensions under indicator 1 were:

1.1. a. Individuals' rural land tenure rights are legally recognized
1.1. b. Individuals' rural land tenure rights are protected in practice
1.2. Customary tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in practice
1.3. Indigenous rights to land and forest are legally recognized and protected in practice
1.4. Urban land tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in practice

At the outset of the meeting, it was mentioned that Dimension 1 of indicator 1, has been sub-
divided into two parts - (a) Individuals' rural land tenure rights are legally recognized and b)
Individuals' rural land tenure rights are protected in practice.

The dimensions under indicator 2 were:

2.1. Accessible opportunities for tenure individualization exist
2.2. Individual land in rural areas is recorded and mapped
2.3. Individual land in urban areas is recorded and mapped
2.4. The number of illegal land sales is low
2.5. The number of illegal lease transactions is low
2.6. Women's property rights are recorded
2.7. Women's property rights to land are equal to those by men both in law and in practice

Points discussed under the land governance indicators:

The panel head, Mr. Anil Kr. Chakroborty mentioned that while conducting the study and
analyzing the data for categorizing them under the grades as mentioned in the LGAF format,
some level of estimations were used. For example, for the first dimension under indicator 1, it
was found that almost all the land tenure rights are legally recognized in case of West Bengal
suggesting almost 100% of cases. In that case, the first grade (that says more than 90% of cases
are legally recognized) was identified though some level of estimation was involved in that
selection. In all cases, the analysis included the explanations for selecting.

The statement mentioned under the gradation level for dimension 2- Customary tenure rights
are legally recognized and protected in practiceunder indicator 1stirred confusion where it was
raised that it might not be a justified idea to mention that customary rights are legally
recognized.This followed a range of interactions between the moderator, the panelist,
representatives from media and civil society organization where the important inference drawn
was that if customary rights are not codified then it will not come under legislation. Some field
examples like customary rights of fishermen community in Sunderban Delta came up and it
fueled the debate that all customary rights are not legally recognized or protected. Finally,
panelists drew inference that until and unless customary rights are not codified then it will not
come under legislation.

The last phrase ‘protected in practice’ in dimension 3 Indigenous rights to land and forest are
legally recognized and protected in practice under Indicator 1 was the point of ambiguity as
stressed by the member of the civil society organization for she said that the Forest Rights Act
280 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
(FRA) 2006has laid down rights for protecting the rights of the forest dwellers but there are
gaps in implementation. Citing experiences from the field of vulnerability of tribal people in
mine areas of Birbhum district, she further pointed out that such a generalized statement would
leave very less / no scope for addressing this gap and / or making policy recommendation. Panel
experts mentioned that adequate explanations will be given in the analysis section and suitable
recommendation points will be made for addressing this situation.

A pertinent question was raised by the civil society organization representative while discussing
Dimension 1Accessing opportunities for tenure individualization under LGI 2. Her point of
concern was that there is a contradiction of individualization of tenure when considered in case
of individualization of community rights and that of women’s rights. To this o ne of the panelists
shared that individualization of individual tenure and individualization of common land are
different and that point will be taken care of in the consolidation of the learnings from the LGAF
exercise in West Bengal. The ranking of the specific dimension will also reflect this.

Discussion as against the dimension 2 Individual land in rural areas is recorded and mapped
under Indicator 2, Mr. T.K Shome, ex-DLRS mentioned that a survey conducted by the
Directorate of Land Records and Survey, Government of West Bengal suggests that the work
related to this is done with a great perfection in West Bengal. The study shows that the recording
and mapping of land is done almost with 99% perfection, i.e. the no. of plots in the LR map can
be tallied with the no. of plots in the RoR (Record of Rights) very easily.

All the dimensions under each of the two indicators were discussed in detail and the final
gradation and recommendations corresponding to the gradations are finalised as follows:

Indicator 1: Recognition of a continuum of rights: the law recognizes a range of rights held
by individuals (incl. secondary rights of tenants, sharecroppers, women etc.)
           Dimension                    Grade              Change in Grade
1.1.a: Individuals' rural A: Existing legal framework No change in Grade
land tenure rights are recognizes and protects rights held
legally recognized        by more than 90% of the rural
                          population
Observation:

       Expert Investigator referred to the analysis report and mentioned that Bengal
        Tenancy Act, 1885 clearly identified the rural tenures and provided a set of rights and
        safeguards for the tenures (Sections 23,23A, 52 to 55, 161-163 etc.). The WBLR Act
        has comprehensively laid down the rights and duties of a tenure holder. He stressed
        that almost 100% land rights are legally protected (as a result of Land Reforms
        measures taken in the State).
       Mr.Shome and other panelists supported that as per existing legal framework in the
        state, land tenure rights are almost 100% recognized. Rights of the Riyats are defined
        in the Acts.
       As per query of Prof. Mukherjee and Ms.Ganguly, EI further explained that rights of
        tenure includes the rights of bargadars (sharecroppers) which are also clearly defined
        in Acts.The term ‘tenure holder’ includes raiyats and bargadars.
       One of the panelists rectified that ‘rights of heritability’ mentioned in analysis report
        will be under Sec.4 (1), not Sec.2.

Recommendation:
     Since the tenure rights are 100% recognized by law, no further recommendation
     was made.

281 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
          Dimension                     Grade              Change in Grade
1.1.b:Individuals' rural A: Existing legal framework No change in grade
land tenure rights are recognizes and protects rights held
protected in practice    by more than 90% of the rural
                         population
Observation:

       EI mentioned that rights granted by the Act are protected in practice. The laws of the
        land provide remedial measures against interference with lawful exercise of the
        rights. If somebody comes with valid documents, government takes step to protect
        his rights. Even policy administration and Panchayats provide necessary protection.
       One panelist added that once a riyat or bargadar gets his rights recorded, he is
        provided full protection in practice. There is no ambiguity.
       All other panelists agreed the points mentioned by EI and accepted the ranking.

Recommendation:
     To record one’s name as a raiyator bargadars so that he can get protection under
     law.

          Dimension                     Grade               Change in Grade
1.2. Customary tenure A: There is legal recognition and No change in grade
     rights are legally effective  protection   of   all
     recognized    and customary rights
     protected       in
     practice
Observation:

   Referring to the background report, EI shared that there are two customary rights – (a)
    Any right of way or other easement attached to the land comprising the tenure and (b)
    Fishing right which is also an easement right. He further added rights of people over
    natural resources, fishing rights which are very much applicable in Sunderban areas are
    considered as customary rights. These are legally recognized and protected in practice.
   The Moderator pointed out that the term ‘customary right’ has not been used in any
    legislation. He requested Prof. Mukherjee to share his views. Prof. Mukherjee explained
    that until and unless any right is codified by law, it cannot be considered as customary
    right. Community rights and to some extent forest rights can be taken into consideration
    as customary rights in our context. Here the framework is focused on individual rights.
   One panelist suggested that occupancy rights may be considered as customary rights in
    this context. Mr.Shome added that all customary rights enjoyed by people from time
    immemorial have been recognized by law when Bengal Tenancy Act came into being. He
    further explained that though there is no provision of customary rights in WBLR Act but
    Easement Act describes what kind of rights can be enjoyed by whom. He further cited
    some example of customary rights. The land which is used by people as graveyard,
    playground or grazing ground etc. are considered as customary rights though it is
    recorded by the name of individuals. It is mentioned in the record also that the land can
    be used for the common purpose.
   Ms.Ganguly pointed out that the areas which are recognized as non-revenue or delta
    region in Sunderban where the fishermen communities are working for their livelihood,
    are not recognized as their customary rights. Then how can we claim that customary
    rights are 100% recognized or protected? Mr.Shome explained that there are two types of
    land – government land individual land. Individual land again may be under the category
    of institutional or cooperative or group. If the land is being used by the fishermen
    community customarily (in practice) and it is recorded in the name of individual, they
282 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    are entitled to enjoy the customary right. They only need to approach to the government
    and get it recorded. Once it is recorded, this easement cannot be ignored any way.
   Considering the fact that customary tenure rights are legally recognized and protected in
    practice, all panelists agreed to accept grade A.


           Dimension                         Grade               Change in Grade
1.3. Indigenous rights to A: Recognition and effective Ranking was changed from
     land and forest are protection of all indigenous rights A to B.
     legally recognized
     and protected in
     practice

Observation:

       The moderator explained the term indigenous rights as a sub-category of customary
        right which is generally undocumented rights held by “original” or very long -term
        occupants of that land, often associated with less density of population and shifting
        cultivation, and/ or the prominence of forestland.
       Prof. Mukherjee wanted to know that does ‘protected in practice’ mean it is protected
        by the government only or it is protected from the entire socio-economic fabric.
        Ms.Ganguly cited the example of Deucha in Birbhum district where government is
        going to allow mining and tribal community are going to be evicted. They will be
        rehabilitated in some other place which is uncertain. In that case, can we say that
        their indigenous right is protected? IE explained that if it is acquisition then
        indigenous rights cannot be protected. For the purpose of acquision there is provision
        that permission should be taken from concerned Gram Sabha.
       She again raised a point that tribal people may not have capacity to take decision in
        the Gram Sabha or their participation in Gram Sabha is also doubtable. Though as
        per legal framework their rights are protected but there is huge gap between policy
        and practice. All other panelists accepted that.
       One panelist pointed out that the implementation of FRA 2006 is very sluggish in the
        state. Recently, it has got some pace. Till December 2013, 31000 individual and 312
        community pattas have been issued. Mr.Shome added that since there is no survey
        data within forest mouza, Forest Department is giving patta by making a notional
        map and recording their rights. Government should conduct a survey for mapping
        the habitations within forest areas. It should be brought under record then only their
        indigenous rights will be protected.
       Ms. Swati Bhattacharaya shared some grey areas in policy which causes dispute
        between Forest department and forest dwellers regarding their rights over NTFP. But
        other panelists opined that in those cases their rights are recognized by law but due to
        attitudinal problem of particular Forest Officials it causes dispute. These cases can be
        considered as their rights are not protected in practice.
       All panelists came to a conclusion that though the indigenous rights are recognized
        by law, it is protected partly in practice. Hence they decided to grade the dimension
        as B instead of A.

Recommendation:

       There is a need to functionalise the mechanism of protecting the customary tenure
        rights by conducting a thorough survey of forest habitation and include them in the
        land record.
       All customary rights need to be codified in order to ensure protection under law.

283 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
          Dimension                       Grade                                  Change in Grade
1.4. Urban land tenure A: Existing legal framework                               No change in grade
     rights are legally recognizes rights held by more than
     recognized    and 90% of the urban population
     protected       in
     practice

Observation:

       The EI stated that the WBLR Act 1955 is applicable in the entire state of West Bengal
        except the area described in Schedule I of the Calcutta Municipal Corporation Act,
        1980 (Ward No.1-100). So the WBLR Act extends to the entire state including the
        ULBs except old Calcutta. So, it can be claimed that urban land tenure rights are
        legally recognized. He also mentioned that land record survey was not conducted in
        old Calcutta area.
       Addressing the queries from other panelists Mr. Banerjee shared that government
        officials proposed for survey but it was not accepted by political government. EI
        added that a proposal was submitted to the government for inserting a separate
        section by amending WBLR Act. Due to lack of political will notification has not been
        issued till date.
       The panel came to the conclusion that as per amendment in WBLR Act (1980) all
        urban households holding land are equally recognized as raiyats like that of rural
        raiyats. In addition to that the rights of tenants are protected by Thika Tenancy Act
        2001. Different categories of urban raiyats are recognized by different Acts. Hence, as
        far as legal framework is concerned, it recognizes and protects the rights of urban
        tenure holders.


Indicator 2: Respect for and enforcement of rights
          Dimension                         Grade                                Change in Grade
2.1.           Accessible D: Although there is demand, the                       No change in grade
opportunities for tenure law provides no opportunities for
individualization exist   those    holding      land under
                          customary, group, or collective
                          tenures to fully or partially
                          individualize land rights
Observation:

       One panellist wanted to know the meaning of individualization of tenure, does it
        mean segregated land tenure? Referring to the explanatory note EI explained that
        during BT Act tenure was recorded jointly or singly. WBEA followed the same
        procedure. During revision under WBLR Act all joint tenures have been split. Hence,
        tenure rights are already individualized.
       Answering the query of another panellist Mr. Shome explained that in case of joint
        patta also record is being maintained separately.
       One panellist raised the issue of collective rights and community rights. EI shared
        that as a result of implementation of FRA 2006, 312 community rights have been
        recorded in the State. Recording community rights in forest fringe areas have made
        progress recently. But the problem lies in cooperation from Forest Department
        Officials.
       One panellist pointed out whether individualization is done for collective or group
        tenure, EI explained that law does not permit individualization of collective or group

284 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        tenure.
       Mr. Shome further added that individualisation happens by law (WBLR Act) as there
        is the provision for ‘One Man one Khatian (Record of Rights)’. But, some gaps remain
        in the implementation of the law.
       Ms. Ganguly wanted to know that in case of joint patta whether the title is provided
        in separate name or not. Other panellists explained that Patta is given in joint name
        (names of
       both husband and wife is mentioned). Ideally, name should be recorded separately
        and in that case two separate records are supposed to be provided. But practically
        singly record is provided. Mr. Shandillya added that as per Act there should be
        separate khatian for each raiyat. If it is not done practically then in the single record
        share of each tenure holder (may be 50% each) should be mentioned. This issue is
        largely being ignored (may be because of lack of manpower or lack of legal
        awareness).

Recommendation:
     The Government may consider the measures for ensuring speedy (recording of)
     individualisation of tenure.

         Dimension                      Grade              Change in Grade
2.2. Individual land in A: More than 90% of individual No change in grade
rural areas is recorded land in rural areas is formally
and mapped              recorded and mapped.

Observation:

      Referring to the previous discussion EI restated that legal framework provides for
       individualization of land records.
     Mr. Shome referred to a survey study conducted by the Directorate of Land Records
       and Survey, GoWB where one sample was taken randomly from each district. The
       objective was to identify the number of plots mentioned in map and number of plots
       mentioned in RoR. The study reveals that the recording and mapping of land is done
       almost with 99% perfection. But it has to be noted that records are not updated.
     EI suggested to make the reference to this study (Dimension 2 of LGI 2 of Panel 6)
       along with the analysis for this dimension.
          Dimension                           Grade                   Change in Grade
2.3. Individual land in A: More than 90% of individual No change in grade
urban areas is recorded land in urban areas is formally
and mapped                  recorded and mapped

Observation:

       Referring to the analysis report EI shared that all individual lands in urban areas
        except those falling within Calcutta Municipal Corporation (Ward 1 – 100) are
        mapped and recorded. Section 19 of the Kolkata Land Revenue Act, 2003 provides
        that maps and records of these hundred wards would be prepared under the
        provisions of the WBLR Act. The notification has not been done yet.
       All other panellists accepted the gradation proposed by EI.

Recommendation:
     There is a need to conduct a survey of the first hundred wards [1-100] of Kolkata
     Municipal Corporation and maps and records are to be prepared under the
     provision of WBLR Act.

285 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
           Dimension                        Grade                                Change in Grade
2.4. The number of B: The number of illegal land                                 No change in grade
illegal land sales is low transactions is low and some are
                          unambiguously identified on a
                          routine basis

Observation:

       Referring to the analysis report EI shared that illegal land sale is taking place in
        terms of transfer of patta land, transfer of lease holding land (e.g. Salt Lake city),
        transferring land without registration and alienation of tribal land.
       One panellist shared his experience that bargadars are sometimes seen to be selling
        land.
       Mr. Shome pointed out that transfer of raiyat land without registration is high in
        rural areas. It is because they want to avoid the cost of stamp duty which is very high.
        Other panellists added that oral transfer of land and even exchange of land is taking
        place rampantly. It is a very important issue associated with this which needs to be
        addressed by the government.
       One panellist shared a case in Midnapore where a party by investment of huge money
        asked all pattaholders (around 100 acres of land) to surrender their land to the
        government. Now, the party occupied the land and requesting the government to
        settle the land to them. Since the land is now free from incumbrances nand it belongs
        to government, government can consider the request. Clandestine arrangements are
        taking place in rural areas in different forms.
       Other panellists shared that tribal land alienation is still a problem in some pockets
        of the state. Though people are now reluctant to purchase tribal land fearing that no
        registration is possible, clandestine arrangements in different forms are taking place.
        One apnelist cited the example that in mines areas like Birbhum few parties are
        obtaining license for open mining by making partnership with tribes. After getting
        license they are making huge money through mining keeping the tribes in dark.
       One panellist pointed out that because of restriction of transferring tribal land, tribes
        are also facing problem. There are certain cases when tribal are willing to sell land
        because of valid reason but cannot because of the restriction. Mr. Banerjee suggested
        that some sort of institutional arrangement may be made to resolve those issues.
        Land Corporation may be set up for allowing the selling of tribal land to other when
        there is no buyer. But IE pointed out that same arrangement was made for bargadars
        as per 21C in WBLR Act. But it has remained silent.

Recommendation:

       All transaction should be ensured through registration. Reduction in stamp duty or
        other incentives may be put in place to encourage registration of all transaction.
       Institutional arrangement should be made for setting up Land Corporation for
        buying the distressed sale to arrest the trend of illegal settlements. Mechanism
        should also be developed for proper monitoring.

           Dimension                          Grade                              Change in Grade
2.5. The number of D: Existing legal restrictions on                             No change in grade
illegal lease transactions land leases are routinely neglected
is low

Observation:

286 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       EI stated that lease transaction in the state was totally prohibited as per WBEA Act.
        Further amendments have been made creating permission under certain
        circumstances. Despite restrictions, it is being practiced clandestinely.
       One panellist mentioned about a case where a person took power of attorney and
        clandestinely transacted land on lease.
       All other panellists agree that though law does not permit lease transaction it is being
        done clandestinely.

Recommendation:

        An in-depth study may be conducted by an independent organization to assess the
        extent and nature of lease transaction. The study should reflect on the practical
        scenario and make recommendation to the government accordingly.

           Dimension                     Grade                                    Change in Grade
2.6. Women's property D: Less than 15% of land recorded                           No change in grade
rights are recorded   to physical persons is recorded in
                      the name of women either
                      individually or jointly
Observation:

       Referring to the analysis report EI shared that Women’s rights are recognized in
        practice by formal system. Women’s property rights are recorded in the R-O-R during
        each settlement.
       One panellist shared the recent development where issuing patta in the name of
        women either singly or jointly has been given utmost priority. One panellist
        suggested that LR Department should be manned by women to bring about changes
        in attitude.
       Mr. Banerjee suggested that there is a need to take up the work of ensuring the
        recording of women’s’ property rights in the state in a mission mode (something like
        Operation Barga).

Recommendation:
    Government should take up a clear policy on land rights for women.
    Exemption in stamp duty in case of registration of land in the name of women may
     be introduced.

          Dimension                              Grade                        Change in Grade
2.7. Women's property         C: Equality of women's property                 No change in grade
rights to land are equal      rights to those by men is
to those by men both in       established by law, but there are
law and in practice           considerable      limitations      to
                              exercising such rights in practice
Observation:

       EI mentioned that Hindu Succession Act 1955 and other Act provide for equal rights
        for women. But there is lacuna in practice.
       One panellist added that the Amendment in Hindu Succession Act 2005 is also a very
        important step towards equality of rights.
       Other panellists opined that there is a need to include the provision of prioritising
        women (as for prioritisation of women in the LR manual (through amendment).


287 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Recommendation:

        To make it compulsory for including women’s name in the Record of Rights (RoR);
        To reopen the past cases where land title (patta) has been given in single title for
         including women’s name in those titles making it a joint title;
        To amend the law for making joint ownership compulsory;
        To provide financial relief to women by providing revenue concession through 25%
         of exemption of rent paid by them (Data source: UN women study in Madhya
         Pradesh, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh and Kerela, Landesa)
        To aware Women’s groups on the legalities of property rights




    Panel 2: Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations

                                          17 February 2014
                                              Landesa
                                    Venue: Landesa Kolkata Office


Mr. Pinaki Halder, LGAF- West Bengal Project Leader and State Director, Landesa West Bengal
welcomed all present and started the day’s proceeding with a power point presentation
delineating the purpose of the panel discussion, about LGAF, the core thematic areas of LGAF
before venturing into the detailed discursive discussion on Panel 2: Rights to Forest and
Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations.

The expectations of this meeting were-

        Panelists would discuss over the analysis of each parameters and arrive at a consensus to
         finalize the gradations
        Gaps would be identified against each parameter and recommendations will come out to
         bridge those gaps
        Provide policy suggestions/ recommendations on the related issues on land
         governance

Following were the participants of the meeting-

    1)   Dr. A.K Raha, IFS (Retd), Ex-PCCF/WB
    2)   Mr.Atonu Chatterjee, MD, WBTDCC
    3)   Dr.Kulandaivel, IFS, DCF (HQ), GoWB
    4)   Prof. Apurba Kr. Mukhopadhyay, N.I.A.S, Kol
    5)   Mr.ArindamDutta, ADM & DL&LRO, PaschimMedinipur
    6)   Mr.Ashoke Kr. Nayar, Programme Officer, Action Aid India
    7)   Mr.SashiBhushanPraharaj, Manager cum Field Officer, LAMP, Bankura
    8)   Mr.RathinMahapatra, Accountant, LAMP, Belagaria
    9)   Mr. Pinaki Halder, State Director, Landesa, State Coordinator and Project Team Leader-
         LGAF- West Bengal

288 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Landesa Kolkata team members were also present to aid the uninterrupted flow of the panel
discussion. The names of those present were-

              Mr. Supriya Chattopadhyay, Communications Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
              Mr. Sudipta Biswas, District Program Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
              Dr. Shyamal Kumar Jana, Districts Manager, Landesa-West Bengal
              Ms. Udita Chatterjee, Research and Documentation Officer, Landesa- West Bengal
              Dr. Jayanta Munsi, District Program Manager, Landesa-West Bengal
              Mr. Debasis Mondal, Office Assistant, Landesa- West Bengal

The panel has two indicators as follows:

Indicator 1: Rights to forest and common lands
Indicator 2: Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations

Under Indicator 3 there areeight dimensions and within Indicator 4 there are six dimensions.
Each dimension has four gradations-ranked by the panel from A to D. The dimensions were
explicitly discussed in great detail to get the panelists’ inputs to incorporate changes in the
gradations and analysis.

The dimensions under indicator 1 are:

          i.      Forests and common lands are clearly identified in law and responsibility for use
                  isclearly assigned.
         ii.      Rural group rights are formally recognized and can be enforced.
        iii.      Users’ rights to key natural resources on land (incl. fisheries) are legally recognized
                  and protected in practice.
        iv.       Multiple rights over common land and natural resources on these lands can legally
                  coexist.
         v.       Multiple rights over the same plot of land and its resources (e.g. trees) can legally
                  coexist.
        vi.       Multiple rights over land and mining/ other sub-soil resources located on the same
                  plot can legally coexist
     vii.         Accessible opportunities exist for mapping and recording of group rights
    viii.         Boundary demarcation of communal land

The dimensions under indicator 2 are:

          i.      Restrictions regarding rural land use are justified and enforced.
         ii.      Restrictions on rural land transferability effectively serve public policy objectives
        iii.      Rural land use plans are elaborated/changed via public process and resulting
                  burdens are shared
        iv.       Rural lands, the use of which is changed, are swiftly transferred to the destined use.
         v.       Rezoning of rural land use follows a public process that safeguards existing rights
        vi.       For protected rural land use (forest, pastures, wetlands, national parks etc.) plans
                  correspond to actual use.

All the dimensions under each of the two indicators were discussed in detail and the final
gradation and recommendations corresponding to the gradations are finalised as follows:

Indicator 1:Rights to forest and common lands
        Dimensions                          Grade               Change in grade
2.1.1.  Forests     and B: Forests and common lands are No change in grade
common     lands     are clearly identified, responsibility for
289 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
clearly identified in law land use is clearly identified but
and responsibility for implementation is ambiguous.
use is clearly assigned.
Observation:

       At the very outset, Mr. Halder explained the meaning of common land as the land
        which is used for common purpose by the community like grazing ground, graveyard,
        playground etc. But as per law, there is no classification of common lands in this
        State. He further requested the ADM/DL&LRO to reflect on this issue.
       Mr.Dutta shared that common lands which are used by the community for common
        purpose are identified in the records. But common lands within forest are not
        identified.
       Dr.Raha shared that in forest areas in the districts of southern West Bengal (Bankura,
        West Midnapore and Purulia) are highly fragmented. Most of the common lands
        identified in forest areas are vested waste lands which are yet to be distributed in few
        parts vested lands have been distributed to landless families in 1980s. Records are
        also updated. Currently, we are trying to set up land bank for providing land to the
        industries especially wastelands which are not in use. For that purpose we are trying
        to identify vested waste lands. As per records, there are huge chunk of vested waste
        lands which are not in use. But when we went to the field, we found that there is
        hardly in vested waste lands which have not been distributed as patta or not being
        used by the community. Then we felt the need of updating land records.
       Mr.Dutta shared that land bank which the LR Department is maintaining does not
        contain full data of vested land. At the same time records are not fully updated. The
        amount of land which has been distributed may not be reflected in the land bank.
       Dr.Raha pointed out that in many places lands are under encroachment. But
        Mr.Dutta shared that encroachment is more in semi-urban and fringe areas rather
        than rural areas. Dr. Kulandaivel cited some example of Bankura district where
        vested lands have been identified effectively and accurately but it has been found that
        lands are under encroachment by local people for cultivation and other purpose. As
        far as forest department is concerned, we have clear data of vested lands (esp. in
        Bankura, Purulia and Midnapore). Mr. Halder wanted to know whether it is done in
        other districts also especially in North Bengal. Dr. Kulandaivel answered that the
        situation in North Bengal is different because there is another conflicting issue of Tea
        Garden areas.Dr. Raha added that Forest Department took initiative to update land
        records using GPS technology 5 years back by the fund from Government of India. As
        of now 90% of the forest lands are clearly demarcated. He also added that forest areas
        in South Bengal are surveyed and it is in conformity with the Revisional Survey of LR
        Department. But the forest areas in North Bengal are left out from Cadastral Survey
        and Revisional Survey. There are huge chunk of blocks which are not part of CS or RS
        and these are being maintained as forest blocks. But the demarcation of boundaries
        are very clear (almost 98%) and there is no ambiguity.
       Dr.Kulandaivel shared that Forest Department conducts ‘creation’ every year. It
        identifies forest areas, degraded forest etc. and updates the map (de-created). On the
        basis of that we propose for re-creation (artificial regeneration of forest). The
        department knows where is unplanned forest land, where is proper forest land, where
        is waste lands etc.So, Forest Department is very clear about its boundaries. There is
        no ambiguity in it.
       Dr.Raha pointed out that there is ambiguity in implementation. There is no
        ambiguity between forest land and common land. The grey areas are – common land
        within forest areas and maintaining records of lands for pattas given to families in
        forest areas (because pattas were given hurriedly without clear updating of records).
       Mr. Chatterjee pointed out that encroachment is the problem of implementation.

290 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        Secondly he emphasised that common lands within forest areas are sometimes not
        demarcated properly. There may or may not be common lands within forest areas
        which are being used by people. Forest Department has not taken initiative to
        identify and record those areas as common land. So, steps should be taken to classify
        those forest lands.
       When Dr.Raharaised the issue of common property resourcesMr. Chatterjee
        explained that when a particular community are using the usuerfactright of that area
        is considered as common property. For example, people who are engaged in
        collection of ‘tendu’ leaves traditionally in a particular period of time in a year
        (January to June) are claiming their usufruct right. He further explained that, for
        example, if a piece of forest land is used by the community as common property like
        ICDS centre,there is special provision for using that land [under Sec3(2)] for that
        particular purpose only not exceeding 1 hectare. It is clearly defined under FRA 2006.
       Dr.Raha shared another problem of granting community rights. The land which is
        being used by the community is legally meant for ST and other traditional forest
        dwellers as per FRA. But in few cases community comprises other non-forest
        dwellers who are almost 50%. If the right is granted to the community, elite class will
        enjoy the facility and actual forest dwellers will be deprived. So it is becoming
        difficult to grant the right to actual forest dwellers.
       When one panelist wanted to know about the role of Joint Forest Management
        Committee Dr.Raha explained that the people who are living within forest areas or
        around forest areas should constitute Joint Forest Management Committee for
        protection of the forest and also getting usufruct benefit from the forest. As per the
        Act, all people within the community are entitled to be member of JFMC. In West
        Bengal in general, JFMCs are not dominated by tribal population. Where there is
        more than 50% representation from tribes JFMCs are enjoying community rights as
        per Act. Where tribal representation is less than 50%, they have the rights under
        government resolution on joint forest management. This is outside the purview of the
        FRA. JFMC right is not a statutory right; is by executive order/resolution. But the
        JFMCs constituted under FRA are enjoying statutory rights. If all are brought under
        the purview of FRA, they can enjoy statutory rights.
       Mr. Chatterjee cited the example of LAMP and suggested an alternative way. LAMP is
        acting as cooperative of collectors. All members of LAMP are not actually collectors.
        There are number of members who belong to other community. LAMP is demanding
        community rights on the basis of the list of collectors only. Likewise if tribal members
        are taken out separately and community rights are given to them, we can avoid the
        complexity.
       Panelists concluded that the scenario in West Bengal is different from other States
        (Chattisgarh, Jharkhand etc.). Because of less tribal population and domination by
        other population in the State, there is problem of granting community rights in forest
        areas.
       Mr. Chatterjee and other panelist pointed out that common land within forest areas
        are not identified but outside the forest areas are clearly identified. So, they suggested
        rephrasing the statement for ranking it accurately.
       Mr. Halder suggested that if we get data from a district on Common land clearly
        identified outside the forest areas and assumed common lands identifiable within
        forest areas, we can show it as an example to substantiate the fact. He requested
        Mr.Dutta to provide the same for West Midnapore district. Mr.Dutta agreed to
        provide that.
       Dr.Raha raised the issue of lack of coordination between Forest Department and LR
        Department. Because of that, there is huge information gap between two
        departments regarding areas identified as protected forest, areas identified as
        common lands, areas distributed as forest patta etc.

291 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Recommendation:

       Forest Department is required to play proactive role in physical verification of
        common lands and updating records (record of common land, record of forest patta,
        record of actual waste lands etc.)
       Gap in information between LR Department and Forest Department needs to be
        bridged.
       Executive order should be issued followed by practical guideline so that L&LR
        Department and Forest Department work in tandem.


         Dimensions                        Grade                Change in grade
2.1.2 Rural group rights C: The tenure of most groups in No change in grade
are formally recognized rural areas is formally recognized
and can be enforced      but ways for them to gain legal
                         representation are not regulated.
Observation:

       Referring to the analysis report, Dr.Raha explained that group rights are formally
        recognized by the JFMC but not by the FRA. Benefits like NTFP being enjoyed by
        JFMC are recognized by Executive Order, it is not a statutory right as it is not
        supported legally. Then we can say that tenure of most groups in rural areas is
        formally recognized.
       Mr. Chatterjee pointed out that the rights of the people over common property
        resource is not legally recognized either. The benefits they are enjoying that are
        because of traditional practice (from mouth to mouth) which is not written
        elsewhere. Now, the effort is on to bring it under formal legal recognition.
       Panelists agreed that if we divide regulation into two parts then we can say that in
        case of JFMC legal representation is not regulated and in case of common property
        resources it is regulated.Mr. Chatterjee cited the example of arrangement of allowing
        sal leaves collection to the traditional collectors which are not backed by legal
        framework.
       Panelists suggested that we need to define ‘Rural Groups rights’ under Joint Forest
        Management and Protection Committee (JFMC) and ‘Community Rights’ under
        Forest Rights Act (FRA) in the explanatory note for more clarification.

Recommendation:

       Provision should be made in FRA to incorporate the system of JFMC giving some
        waiver or making some alteration.
       Scope of ‘community rights’ to be widened up to include other forest dwellers along
        with ST.

         Dimensions                          Grade                Change in grade
2.1.3 Users’ rights to key D: Users' rights to key natural No change in grade
natural resources on resources are not legally recognized
land (incl. fisheries) are and often not protected in practice
legally recognized and
protected in practice

Observation:


292 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       Dr. Raha shared that in Sundarban, local fishermen used to enjoy customary fishing
        rights in the Sundarban Rivers within Reserved Forest boundary. However, no such
        right has been recognised under FRA 2006. Until and unless it is legally recognized,
        it depends upon the whims of the forest officials whether they will be able to enjoy
        the customary rights or not and to what extent.
       Dr. Kulandaivel added that government cannot punish any official because of denial
        of providing benefits to people until and unless it is not legally recognized. Naturally,
        government officials are indifferent on this issue. It completely depends on their
        goodwill.
       All other panelists agreed to the fact shared by them and justified the ranking.

Recommendation:

        Synergy is required for provisioning JFMC under FRA. Bringing about certain
        changes in JFMC may also be required.

         Dimensions                         Grade                     Change in grade
2.1.4 Multiple rights over C: Co-existence is possible by law Grade is changed from C to
common       land     and but rarely respected in practice    B.
natural resources on
these lands can legally
coexist

Observation:

       Dr. Raha explained multiple rights to other panelists showing one example. JFMC
        constituted under government resolution is enjoying the rights over NTFP like sal
        leaves, tendu leaves etc. At the same time WBTDCC has been enjoying rights on the
        same. Whether these two rights are co-existing or creating any conflict of interest.
       Mr. Chatterjee and Mr. Praharaj shared that it has been co-existing since long back.
        No conflict has been found till date at ground level.
       Dr.Raha further explained the issue citing some example. Using same piece of land as
        playground and also as grazing ground by a community or collecting NTFP from the
        same forest by different groups is some field are co-existing in practice. He further
        added that there is possibility of conflict when a group who is allowed collecting sal
        leaves only and want to collect sal seed. Multiple rights are not clearly segregated by
        executive order. So, it may or may not be respectory in practice.
       Mr.Dutta opined the statement would more appropriate if the word ‘rarely’ is
        removed.
       The house agreed that statement in B is more appropriate than in C. Rights are
        legally co-existing and respected in practice but there should be proper mechanisms
        to resolve disputes if it arises so.


          Dimensions                        Grade                     Change in grade
2.1.5 Multiple rights over C: Co-existence is possible by law Grade is changed from C to
the same plot of land but rarely respected in practice        B.
and its resources (e.g.
trees) can easily co-exist
Observation:

       Considering the discussion held on the previous dimension, panelists suggested
        changing the grade from C to B.

293 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       Dr.Raha gave an example where a particular piece of land is owned by a tribe and
        forest is being managed by Forest Department. But the person wanted to cut the trees
        on the ground that the land belongs to him. In this case, co-existance is there in law
        but it is not respected in practice.

          Dimensions                        Grade                    Change in grade
2.1.6 Multiple rights over D: Co-existence is not possible by No change in grade
land and mining/ other law; mining rights override land
sub-soil        resources rights
located on the same plot
can legally coexist

Observation:

       Dr.Raha shared that if any forest land is selected for mining then it is handed over to
        Mining Agency. Forest Department no longer manages that land. But as per law, if
        the land was belonging to any tribal, clearance is required from Gram Sabha before
        transferring the land to Mining Agency.
       All panelists agreed to grade it as D as the statement is very much justified.

          Dimension                              Grade                 Change in grade
2.1.7           Accessible    B: The law provides opportunities No change in grade
opportunities exist for       for those holding group land under
mapping and recording         customary, group, or collective
of group rights               tenures to record and map these
                              rights if they so desire. Procedures
                              to do so are affordable and include
                              basic safeguards against abuse.


Observation:

       One of the panellists suggested that it would be wise to write the word ‘imperative’
        instead of ‘desire’ in the statement B because maintaining record is mandatory.
        Panelists agreed that practically it is affordable.
       Dr.Raha shared that when the area of forest is big then there is no problem in
        granting community rights over NTFP in specific areas to a particular community by
        demarcation. But when the area of forest is very small and interest groups are large in
        number, then it becomes a problem to demarcate a particular area for a particular
        community. Practically, rough estimate is made for demarcation.
       All panelists agreed that recording the right should be made mandatory. Process is
        also affordable.
       Dr.Kulandaivel shared some field level problem in demarcation. But he insisted that
        demarcation should be made mandatory to tackle future problem also keeping in
        mind growing population and decreasing manforest ratio.

Recommendation:
     Recording and mapping of the rights of the groups who are holding land under
     customary, group, or collective tenures should be made mandatory.

        Dimensions                    Grade                    Change in grade
2.1.8       Boundary D: Less than 10% of the area under No change in grade
demarcation       of communal and/or indigenous land

294 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
communal land                 has boundaries demarcated and
                              surveyed and associated claims
                              recorded
Observation:

All panelists agreed that percentage is indicative (not exact figure) and it is definitely less
than 10%. Hence, they all agreed to grade it as D.


Indicator 2: Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
         Dimensions                           Grade                    Change in grade
2.2.1         Restrictions A:       Regulations       regarding Gradation changed from A
regarding rural land use restrictions on rural land use to B
are     justified      and effectively serve public purpose and
enforced                   are enforced

Observation:

       Dr.Raha said that there are a number of regulations regarding converting agricultural
        land into non-agricultural land, ecological and environmental perspective in land use,
        consideration of water bodies for land use, use of wetland etc. But the enforcement of
        these regulations is very weak.
       Mr.Dutta suggested that changes are required in law. Law provides for penalising the
        raiyats only. Often the raiyats do not change while other persons can change who are
        either taking the land forcibly or by encroachment. Law does not make any provision
        to penalise encroachers. One panelist opined that it is difficult to trace other persons
        except raiyats. Another panelist said that the problem is in implementation.
       Mr.Dutta shared another example. A vested land which is encroached and due to use
        for other purpose ignoring regulations classification changes. Government cannot
        take any action. Dr.Raha shared that in Malda and Murshidabad districts the land
        which is classified as orchard land may be used for other construction purposes
        ignoring regulations.
       One of the panellists for example shared that the implementation of the Inland
        Fisheries Act, Non-forestry Act etc. are very weak because of lack of implementation
        machinery and proper infrastructure.
       Mr. Halder said that this has to be strengthened with some data or case study.
       All panelists suggested grading it as B instead of A.


          Dimensions                        Grade                 Change in grade
2.2.2 Restrictions on A: There are a series of regulations No change in grade
rural land transferability that for the most part serve public
effectively serve public purpose and that are enforced
policy objectives

Observation:

       Dr.Raha shared that transferability of land is restricted by laws in cases of land of
        Scheduled Tribes, homestead plots/patta etc. There are other several laws which
        restricts transferability of land. As far as enforcement is concerned, it is weak.
       One of the panellists shared that enforcement level is not satisfactory.But we cannot
        say that it is not enforced.
       All panelists agreed that regulations are there and it is enforced by and large though

295 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        it may not be satisfactory.

        Dimensions                              Grade                             Change in grade
2.2.3 Rural land use          A: Public input is required and                     No change in grade
plans               are       sought in preparing and amending
elaborated/changed via        rural land use plans (incl. rezoning)
public    process  and        and relevant decisions are arrived
resulting burdens are         at in a transparent and public
shared                        process
Observation:

       Mr. Halder mentioned that provision has been made in Sec. 4C of the Land Reforms
        Act. (Local enquiry, public hearing etc.). He mentioned that Panchayat Act needs to
        be referred to for the analysis of this dimension.
       All panelists agreed that public input is required and sought through different
        mechanism. Though there may be some debate on level of transparency but we
        cannot say that decisions are arrived at in a non-transparent process. Hence, A is the
        most suitable option for gradation.

          Dimensions                            Grade               Change in grade
2.2.4 Rural lands, the        C: Between 30% and 50% of the Change in grade from C to
use of which is changed,      land that has had a change in land A.
are swiftly transferred to    use assignment in the past 3 years
the destined use              has changed to the destined use
                              (e.g. forest, pastures, wetlands,
                              national parks etc.).
Observation:

       ADM, Paschim Midnapore mentioned that in maximum cases, permission is made
        post facto. Whenever prior permission is there, it is changed by one month. Even in
        case of forest land transfer is done within 3 years.
     When one panelist wanted to know how the change takes place, Mr.Dutta shared that
        either the change has to be compensated by forest land or by providing any other
        land for the forestry. Dr.Kulandaivel further clarified that if the forest land is given
        for the non-forestry purpose, compensation has to be given. Once permission is given
        for change, it takes no time to transfer.
     One of the panellists shared that it is important to make afforestation compulsory.
        Another panellist said that if the forest land is given for non-forest purpose clearance
        has to be given.
     Mr. Halder mentioned that the ‘analysis’ of this dimension has to be changed and the
        Forest Conservation Act has tobe referred.
     All panelists agreed to grade it as A because on an average more than 70% of the land
        that has had a change in land use assignment in the past 3 years has changed to the
        destined use.
          Dimensions                             Grade                       Change in grade
2.2.5 Rezoning of rural       B: Processes for rezoning are public Grade changed from B to
land use follows a public and clear but mechanisms to                A.
process that safeguards       safeguard existing rights are not
existing rights               fully effective
Observation:

       Dr.Raha referred to Indian Forest Act, 1927 and Wildlife protections Act, 1972 and
        mentioned that if government declares a private land as sanctuary it must follow a

296 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        public process. He described the process of notification. Recorded forest land is
        vested with the government and then it is transferred to Forest Department. Forest
        Department issues a notification and it is declared as protected forest. Once it is
        declared as protected forest, Forest Department has to settle the rights of the people.
        Forest Department has to either accepts the rights or withholds it or relinquish it. But
        in past, the process was not followed in hurriedness. That is why conflict exists
        between Forest Department and people of the regions. He continued that the
        scenario is different now. Processes for rezoning are now public and clear. There is an
        effective mechanism to safeguard existing rights and compensation in case of loss in
        areas where land use is to be restricted.
       All other panelists agreed to the point mentioned by Dr. Raha and suggested for
        changing grade from B to A.

          Dimensions                             Grade                  Change in grade
2.2.6 For protected rural     A: The share of land set aside for No change in Grade
land      use     (forest,    specific use that is used for a non-
pastures,      wetlands,      specified purpose in contravention
national    parks    etc.)    of existing regulations is less than
plans correspond to           10%.
actual use
Observation:

       Dr.Raha said that forest land, pastures and wetlands within forest area, national
        parks etc. are managed by Forest Department. Any change in land use plan has to be
        approved by Ministry of Environment & Forest. Most of deviation is seen in wetland
        management especially situated in government or private land in urban areas.
       One panelist pointed out that clandestine arrangement between government officials
        and contractors leads to aberration in wetland management in urban and semi-urban
        areas.
       All other panelists agreed that in rural protected land (forest, national parks etc.)
        almost no deviation is found. There may be some deviation in wetland management
        which is mostly found in urban and semi urban areas. If we consider the total cases of
        aberrationit will definitely be less than 10%. Hence, all agreed to rank it as A.

Recommendation:

        There is a need for re-looking into JFMC (Joint Forest Management & Protection
        Committee) orders and there has to be a synergy between Forest Rights Act (FRA)
        and JFMCs.



                   Panel 3: Urban Land Use, Planning, and Development

                                            10 March 2014
                                               Landesa
                                     Venue: Landesa Kolkata Office

The meeting was started with a warm welcome to the panelists by Mr. Pinaki Halder, LGAF-
West Bengal Project Leader and State Director, Landesa, West Bengal.After making a brief
presentation delineating the purpose of the panel discussion, about LGAF, the core thematic
areas of LGAF, Land Governance Indicators and Dimensions etc. he ventured into the detailed
discursive discussion on Panel 3: Urban Land Use, Planning, and Development.

297 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Following were the participants of the meeting-

    1)         Mr.Anup K. Matilal, Ex-Joint Secretary, Urban Development Dept., Govt. of WB
    2)         Mr.SaibalThakurata, Chief Town Planner, Urban Development Dept., Govt. of WB
    3)         Ms.Annapurna Shaw, Professor, IIM - Kolkata
    4)         Ms.Nirmala Banerjee, Retd Professor, Centre for Studies in Social Science, Kolkata
    5)         Ms.ReshmiGanguly, Programme Officer, Action Aid
    6)         Mr. Pinaki Halder, State Director, Landesa, State Coordinator and Project Team Leader-
               LGAF- West Bengal

Landesa Kolkata team members were also present to aid the uninterrupted flow of the panel
discussion. The names of those present were-

              Mr. Supriya Chattopadhyay, Communications Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
              Ms. Udita Chatterjee, Research and Documentation Officer, Landesa- West Bengal
              Mr. Debasis Mondal, Office Assistant, Landesa- West Bengal

The panel has five indicators as follows:

    1. Restrictions on rights: land rights are not conditional on adherence to unrealistic
       standards.
    2. Transparency of land use restrictions: changes in land use and management
       regulations are made in a transparent fashion and provide significant benefits for society
       in general rather than just for specific groups.
    3. Efficiency in the urban land use planning process: land use plans are current,
       implemented, do not drive people into informality, and cope with urban growth.
    4. Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land uses: development
       permits are granted promptly and based on reasonable requirements.
    5. Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas

There are two dimensions under Indicator 1, three dimensions under Indicator 2, four
dimensions under Indicator 3, two dimensions under Indicator 4 and three dimensions under
Indicator 5. Each dimension has four gradations-ranked by the panel from A to D. The
dimensions were explicitly discussed in great detail to get the panelists’ inputs to incorporate
changes in the gradations and analysis and to incorporate their suggestions or policy level
recommendation.

The dimensions under indicator 1 are:

          i.      Restrictions on urban land ownership/transfer effectively serve public policy
                  objectives.
         ii.      Restrictions on urban land use (disaster risk) effectively serve public policy
                  objectives.

The dimensions under indicator 2 are:

          i.      Process of urban expansion/infrastructure development process is transparent and
                  respects existing rights.
         ii.      Changes in urban land use plans are based on a clear public process and input by all
                  stakeholders.
        iii.      Changes in assigned urban land use are swiftly followed by actual land use change.

The dimensions under indicator 3 are:


298 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       i.   Policy to ensure delivery of low-cost housing and services exists and is progressively
            implemented.
      ii.   Land use planning effectively guides urban spatial expansion in the largest city.
     iii.   Land use planning effectively guides urban development in the four next largest
            cities.
     iv.    Planning processes are able to cope with urban growth.

The dimensions under indicator 4 are:
     i. Provisions for residential building permits are appropriate, affordable and complied
        with.
    ii. A building permit for a residential dwelling can be obtained quickly and at a low cost.

The dimensions under indicator 5 are:
      i. Formalization of urban residential housing is feasible and affordable.
     ii. In cities with informal tenure, a viable strategy exists for tenure security,
         infrastructure, and housing.
    iii. A condominium regime allows effective management and recording of urban
         property.

All the dimensions under each indicator were discussed in detail and the final gradation and
recommendations corresponding to the gradations are finalised as follows:

Indicator 1:Restrictions on rights
            Dimensions                           Grade                       Change in Grade
3.1.1.Restrictions on urban B: There is a series of                     No change is proposed
land     ownership/transfer regulations that are for the most
effectively serve public part serve public purpose but
policy objectives              enforcement is deficient.
Observation:
     Prof. Nirmala Banerjee shared that urban planning has never been in tune with the
        growing urban population. Planning for the poor has never taken due place in metro
        city planning. She also commented that there is no coordination between metro city
        planning and planning in other urban areas.
     She also pointed out that we talk about metro city planning and census town
        planning but are less concerned on how they are organically and functionally
        connected and there is lack of viable relationship being established.
     She again commented that the urban legislations/ regulations have never really
        accounted for the working poor community in cities and towns who are actually
        contributing to the process of urban development.
     Prof. Annapurna Shaw opined that all the legislations (e.g. Urban Land Ceiling Act)
        have been drafted with very good intention but again the implementation of
        important provisions is tardy.
     Other panelists in line with Prof. Shaw agreed that the regulations that exist have
        good intention but enforcement is weak. Hence they agreed to grade it as B.
     One panelist shared that government has made progress in updating the land records
        which is available in the website for the public. In addition to that, government has
        experimentally started to update the registration process (Howrah and Rajarhat)
        where transfer of land will be recorded and it will be accessible to the public.

            Dimensions                              Grade                         Change in Grade




299 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
3.1.2 Restrictions on urban B: There are a series of Grade D was proposed
land use (disaster risk) regulations that are for the most instead of B.
effectively serve public part serve public purpose but
policy objectives           that are not enforced.
Observation:
   One panelist referred that The West Bengal Town and Country (Planning &
     Development) Act, 1979 provides for Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) in land use and
     development control plan.
   Expert Investigator shared that the government has been talking about the provision
     for increasing the height of building by increasing FAR like, for example, what has
     been done in Hyderabad. But still it has not been enforced. Receiving a query from
     another panelist, he shared that the limit of ceiling height varies from ULB to ULB at
     present. Prof. Shaw added that height description of buildings have been defined in
     Easter Metropolitan bypass areas in Kolkata.
   Mr. Halder referred to the background report where Expert Investigator has
     mentioned about different barriers – legal, political, financial and social to
     implement these regulations. Example was cited of conflicting provisions between
     Acts. Prof. Shaw added political reluctance to redevelop land in fear of the burden of
     disturbing settlements and rehabilitating people.
   One of the panelists commented that there is no provision of transfer of development
     rights in Kolkata Municipal Corporation Act as it is so in the states of Maharashtra,
     Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh to redevelop the older part of the city.
   One of the panelists suggested that there should be proper planning before
     undertaking any development (systematic land use planning) project.
   One panellist pointed that there is huge quantum of fallow land or encroached land
     within the city. If these areas are identified and recovered properly and utilized for
     development projects, there will be no need to use fringe areas.
   Panelists agree that there is a need to revisit the regulations because these are not
     serving any public purpose. Hence they decided to grade it as D instead of B.

Recommendation (if any):
  1. There is a need to review the present situation from time to time to incorporate
     changes in policies or making new regulations.
  2. There should be an exercise to recover city lands from encroachment.
  3. WBT&C (P&D) Act needs thorough revisions/ updating to overcome conflicts and to
     address present planning issues. Change of land use and conversion of land are
     treated separately in two departments under two acts, leading to harassment and
     confusion.

Indicator 2: Transparency of land use restrictions
            Dimensions                          Grade                       Change in Grade
3.2.1Process     of    urban C: Information on planned Grade D is proposed
expansion/infrastructure      urban        expansion         and instead of C.
development process is infrastructure development is
transparent and respects publicly available with sufficient
existing rights               anticipation but the way in
                              which land rights by those
                              affected are dealt with is largely
                              ad hoc.
Observation:
     One panelist commented that information on planned urban expansion and
        infrastructure development is publicly not available. But, EI stated that it is available.
     When Prof. Shaw wanted to know where the information is available, EI informed
300 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        that though it is not available in the website any person can formally approach to the
        department for information and it is made available. Another way of getting
        information is RTI.
       Prof. Shaw shared her experience of approaching Housing & Urban Development
        Corporation (HUDCO) office for some data regarding expansion plan. She concluded
        that she was not provided any information by the officials showing the lame excuse of
        confidentiality.
       EI shared that all 126 Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in West Bengal have already
        prepared Draft Development Plan (DDP) and these have been approved by the
        Bodies. There was scope of sharing information with the public and to incorporate
        public opinions in the plan.
       Chief Town Planner reiterated that once the Draft Development Plan (DDP) is ready
        it will be uploaded in the website and will be available to the public. Inputs and
        suggestions will also be invited from the citizens.
       Prof. Shaw stressed that the information on planned urban expansion and
        infrastructure development is not publicly available till date (which is under process).
        Hence the group decided to grade it as D instead of C.

           Dimensions                           Grade                      Change in Grade
3.2.2 Changes in urban        C: Public input is sought in Gradation was changed
land use plans are based on   preparing and amending land from C to B.
a clear public process and    use plans but the public
input by all stakeholders     comments are largely ignored in
                              the finalization of the land use
                              plans.
           Dimensions                           Grade                      Change in Grade
3.2.3 Changes in assigned B: Between 50% and 70% of the                   No change in grade
urban land use are swiftly land that has had a change in
followed by actual land use land use assignment in the past
change                        3 years has changed to the
                              destined use.
Observation:
     When asked by one panelist about the nature of land, Mr.Thakurta, Chief Town
       Planner made it clear that two kind of lands are there – existing land and prososed
       land. Here for the purpose of discussion, proposed land is taken into consideration.
     EI shared that when HUDCO prepares any plan for economically weaker sections,
       changes in proposed land are followed immediately. And development project is
       implemented in the very assigned land. In certain cases, due to political whims,
       change in land use plan is not being followed.
     After a long discussion panelists came to conclusion that when any land is marked for
       commercial /industrial use or residential use or use of public purpose, the change is
       followed by the authority. But compromises are made to certain extent.
     When Prof. Banerjee wanted to know if there is any provision for revision,
       Mr.Thakurta shared that there is provision for revision of land use plan after every 10
       years. He stressed that in 100% cases changed plan is followed in 3 years and in more
       than 70% cases it is changed to the destined use (based on experience and evidence).
     Prof. Shaw countered that there are lot cases, which are published in newspapers,
       where the rules (plans) are violated backed by political parties. Then we cannot say it
       is followed in 100% cases. Prof. Banerjee supplemented that people have to resort to
       legal process in the cases of violation of rule. She added that there is also chance of
       mismatch between legislative and administrative orders.
     Mr.Thakurta stated that administration cannot take action in cases of violation of
       rule because of the non-availability of data. He also agreed that there is lack of

301 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        appropriate mechanism and sometime political will to follow with the proposed
        actions identified and incorporated in the DDP.
       Prof. Shaw stated that there are a number of small Municipalities where there is no
        progress in changing land use plan. Mr.Thakurta agreed that Municipalities do not
        have any mechanism to change the actual land use after it has been assigned. He also
        added that Municipalities only sanction the plan for construction of houses or
        commercial building but the there is no provision for development of Municipal
        areas. Then EI added that for that purpose DDP has been prepared for all
        Municipalities. Prof. Banerjee stated there is huge gap between policy making and its
        implementation. She continued that there is no machinery or administrative control
        over what happens after taking any policy decision (lack of follow up action /
        monitoring).
       The panel concluded that there is no readily available data to substantiate how much
        land that has had a change in land use assignment in the past 3 years has changed to
        the destined use. Based on the experience it can be said that more than 50% cases it
        happen. Hence, the panel agreed to the rank (B) proposed by EI.

Recommendation (if any):
     Prof. Shaw suggested that the GIS technology could be leveraged to ascertain the
       change happening over time in actual land use.
     One Panelist suggested that there has to be a separate cell for land use control.
Indicator 3: Efficiency in the urban land use planning process
           Dimensions                             Grade                  Change in Grade
3.3.1 Policy to ensure B: A policy for low cost housing The panel suggested to
delivery of low-cost housing and         services    exists  but change the grade from B to
and services exists and is implementation is not always D.
progressively implemented effective. As a result, the
                                number       of     those   with
                                inadequate shelter declines but
                                still remains high.
Observation:
     Prof. Shaw argued that there is no state level mandatory policy of low cost, affordable
       housing for economically weaker section in urban areas. But, Mr.Thakurta stated that
       there is a policy both for government housing projects and housing projects being
       implemented in PPP mode or fully owned private projects. Prof. Shaw cited the
       example of South City Project in Kolkata where there is no provision for economically
       weaker section. Mr.Thakurta referred to the gazette notification made by the
       government in 2012 paving the way for reservation of 25% of dwelling units in any
       housing project planned with more than 5000 sq. meter area.
     One panelist commented that in spite of PPP affordable housing is not being adhered
       or implemented. Even there is no mechanism to monitor whether it is being
       implemented or not.
     One panelist referred that unlike Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, West
       Bengal does not have state level mandatory policy for low cost housing scheme.
     Prof. Banerjee pointed out that there are two departments who are managing the
       development activities in urban areas, i.e. Urban Development Department and
       Municipal Affairs. There is lack of coordination between two departments. Even the
       there are certain circular or notification from any particular department which is in
       conflict with the rules of other department.
     Mr.Thakurta shared that 74th Amendment Act has not been implemented in any state
       fully. West Bengal Government followed by Maharastra has formed Metropolitan
       Planning Committee where attempt has been made to bridge the gap of coordination
       between two departments.

302 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       EI stated that as far as legislation is concerned, West Bengal is much progressive that
        other states. District Planning Committee has been established all districts as per the
        provision laid down in 73rd and 74th Amendment Act. But he agreed that
        implementation is tardy.
       Referring to the background report Mr. Halder mentioned that as per USHA Study
        Report 5,55,000 urban settler have received shelter and around 2,00,000 are in
        worst condition who need adequate shelter. In last 7 years BSUP and IHSDP has
        taken care of fair amount of shelters for the poor.
       There was a debate on the issue of number of shelterless people increasing or
        decreasing considering the fact that ‘slum’ has been defined from different angle and
        in general ‘notified’ slums are only taken into consideration.
       The panel concluded that though as per Government Notification ((Notification
        No.1448/T&CP/C-2/3A-2/2011 dated 20th July, 2011) LIG for EWS are being
        constructed, it is not at par with the huge requirement of masses and above all it is
        not affordable to them. So, it does not meet the demand of EWS. Hence, the panel
        suggested to change the grade from B to D.

            Dimensions                           Grade                    Change in Grade
3.3.2 Land use planning           C: In the largest city, while a All present accepted this
effectively guides urban          hierarchy of regional/detailed Grade for the dimension.
spatial expansion in the          land use plans is specified by
largest city                      law, in practice urban spatial
                                  expansion occurs in an ad hoc
                                  manner with infrastructure
                                  provided some time after
                                  urbanization.
Observation:
All panelists unanimously agreed to grade it as C.

           Dimensions                             Grade                     Change in Grade
3.3.3 Land use planning           C: In the four major cities in the All present accepted this
effectively guides urban          country, while a hierarchy of Grade for the dimension.
development in the four           regional/detailed land use plans
next largest cities               is specified by law, in practice
                                  urban development occurs in an
                                  ad      hoc     manner        with
                                  infrastructure provided some
                                  time after urbanization.
Observation:
All panelists unanimously agreed to grade it as C.

           Dimensions                           Grade                    Change in Grade
3.3.4 Planning processes B: In the largest city, the urban All panelists are OK with
are able to cope with urban planning process/authority is this            gradation      but
growth                         able to cope to some extent with suggested that it should be
                               the increasing demand for supported by data.
                               serviced units/land as evidenced
                               by the fact that most new
                               dwellings are formal.
Observation:
     Prof. Shaw shared that number of slum dwellers are increasing due to lack of proper
       housing or low-cost rent facilities. The question was raised whether planning process
       is taking care of the market demand.

303 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       Mr.Thakurta shared that the rent legislation (Thika Tenancy Act) is pro-tenant, as
        such there are substantial numbers of unutilised vacant housing but the owners tend
        to avoid letting it out to tenants. As per a central government study the problem of
        housing shortage can be managed up to 70% if the unutilized houses are used for
        rent.

Indicator 4: Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land uses
           Dimensions                          Grade                    Change in Grade
3.4.1       Provisions for A: Requirements to obtain a Grade was changed from
residential building permits building permit are technically A to B.
are appropriate, affordable justified,      affordable,    and
and complied with              complied with.
Observations:
     EI stated that building permits are technically justified, affordable and complied
       with. Prof. Banerjee shared some clandestine arrangements. When an applicant is
       ready to build houses by the contractor chosen by Municipal Corporation Officials or
       political leader, they don’t need formal permission from the offic e. Or people can
       evade formal permission by paying penalty.
     EI reiterated that rules for building construction which have been made by the
       government are praiseworthy. Mr.Thakurta supported that when any person is
       applying for permission he has to comply with all provisions. They stressed on
       ‘requirement’ to obtain a building permit are technically correct. Prof. Banerjee
       countered that when any building is being constructed without permission, they are
       escaping all rules by paying penalty only.
     Considering the above fact the panel decided to change the rank from A to B. The
       panel agreed to the point – “requirements are partly complied with”.
     When Prof. Shaw wanted to know about the fee structure (whether it is affordable or
       not) EI informed that it is very nominal.

            Dimensions                            Grade                       Change in Grade
3.4.2 A building permit for A: All applications for building         All the Panelists agreed to
a residential dwelling can       permits receive a decision          grade it as A.
be obtained quickly and at a within 3 months.
low cost
Observation:
     All the ULBs have citizen’s Charter which clearly mentions about the modalities to
        obtain building permit and the maximum period within which (within 90 days) the
        decision is to be taken.
     The expert investigator shared that a new act – West Bengal Right to Public Service
        Act, 2013 has come up which is giving better and satisfactory results. Government
        Officials are bound to provide service to the citizen within stipulated time period.
     Prof. Banerjee shared some bitter experience which are often heard from the public
        that file has been lost or some other excuse by the government officials and delaying
        the process. Mr.Thakurta shared that due to enactment of this recent legislation,
        concerned government officials are penalized in those cases by deducting their
        salaries or delaying increment etc.

Indicator 5: Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
           Dimensions                          Grade                   Change in Grade
3.5.1    Formalization   of B:     The     requirements     for No change in gradation.
urban residential housing is formalizing housing in urban
feasible and affordable      areas are clear, straight-forward,
                             and affordable but are not

304 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                  implemented consistently in a
                                  transparent manner.
Observation:
   Expert Investigator stressed that requirements are very clear. Other panelists shared
     that in practice formalization process depends on Building Inspector to a great
     extent. Clandestine practices are there where without following all provisions in the
     rule houses are formalized.
   Prof. Banerjee advocated for making stringent rule so that corrupt practices can be
     removed. Existing loopholes in the Acts creates opportunity for corruption.
     Mr.Thakurta shared that stringent rule cannot solve all issues rather it can
     complicate more. So, Inspectors are given some discretionary authority to regularize
     the housings after checking the compliance of provisions. Prof. Shaw advocated for
     the provision of penalty in case of malpractices.
   One panelist said that Grade C is more suitable than Grade B. But finally Grade B was
     selected for this dimension considering the fact that ‘requirements’ are clear, straight
     forward and affordable.

            Dimensions                              Grade                Change in Grade
3.5.2 In cities with informal     A: Existing regulations do not Panelists suggested to
tenure, a viable strategy         provide incentives for new grade it as D instead of A.
exists for tenure security,       informal occupations and a
infrastructure, and housing       strategy exists to regularize land
                                  rights and provide services to
                                  existing informal occupants.
Observation:
   EI referred to Thika Tenancy Act, Urban Land Ceiling Act, Acts related to use of
     government or railway land etc. which provides for informal occupation. But, there is
     no government policy yet to regularize land rights and provide services to existing
     informal occupants.
   Other Panelists also opined that there is clear strategy of the government to address
     the problem. EI shared some recent development like taking initiative for
     formulation of policy as a prelude to implement Rajiv AwasYojana, a study (USHA)
     has been conductedto map the informal tenure (by conducting survey particularly in
     slums) within the KMDA area, a committee has been set up under the chairmanship
     of Chief Minister and first meeting of the committee has been convened by the State
     Finance Minister. So we can say that process has already been started.
   Other panelists opined that since these initiatives are in the beginning we cannot say
     that regulations exist. Hence, finally panelists agreed to grade it as D instead of A.

          Dimensions                               Grade           Change in Grade
3.5.3   A    condominium          B: Common property under No change suggested.
regime allows effective           condominiums is recognized
management and recording          and the law has clear provisions
of urban property                 for management and publicity of
                                  relevant records but these are
                                  not always followed in practice.
Observation:

       Referring to the background report, Expert Investigator shared that the law has clear
        provisions for management and publicity of relevant records under the West Bengal
        Apartment Ownership Act, 1972. Common property has been clearly recognized by
        the act. Yet the management still remains very poor. Other panelists discussed on the
        issues of management of common space in apartments, registration of common

305 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        property (under Cooperative Registration Act) etc. and came to a conclusion that the
        management is not at par.
       Panelists agreed that Registration Department is prompt enough to register land and
        individual flats. But, problem lies with other departments to come forward resulting
        in delayed recording. Hence, all present agreed to grade it as B.




                             Panel 4: Public Land Management

                                            17April 2014
                                              Landesa
                                    Venue: Landesa Kolkata Office


1.0 The meeting for panel 9 was started again post lunch with a warm welcome to the panelists
by Mr. Pinaki Halder, LGAF- West Bengal Project Leader.After having a brief introduction to the
theme, he led the discussion towards opinion of the panelists regarding background note
followed by detailed discursive discussion on review of the dimensions and their ranking.

2.0 Following were the participants of the meeting-

    1) Mr.T. K. Shome, IAS (Retd.), Ex-Director, Directorate of Land Record &Survey,Govt. of
       West Bengal
    2) Mr.A. K. Chakraborti, IAS (Retd.), Ex-Secretary, Board of Revenue, Govt. of West Bengal
    3) Mr.S. Banerjee, IAS (Retd.), Ex-Member – WBLRTT, Govt. of West Bengal
    4) Mr.P. K. Pramanik, DDG-National Informatics Centre, West Bengal
    5) Mr. Pinaki Halder, State Director, Landesa, State Coordinator and Project Team Leader-
       LGAF- West Bengal
    6) Dr. Jayanta Munsi, District Project Manager, Landesa – West Bengal

Landesa Kolkata team members were also present to aid the uninterrupted flow of the panel
discussion and take the minute of the meeting. The names of those present were-

       Mr. Supriya Chattopadhyay, Communications Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
       Mr.SudiptaBiswas, Districts Project Manager, Landesa – West Bengal
       Ms. Udita Chatterjee, Research & Documentation Officer, Landesa – West Bengal
       Mr. Debasis Mondal, Office Assistant, Landesa- West Bengal

3.0 The Moderatormade a brief presentation of the background information regarding this
panel and invited feedback from the panelists. He covered the following points in his
presentation – (a) definition of public land (b) nature and typology of public land (c) role of
L&LR Department in management of public land (d) role of other government departments in
management of public land (e) settlement issues of different type of land etc.

4.0 After detailed discussion on background note, discussion was carried out for reviewing the
dimension andjustification of ranking. The panel has three indicators: (1) Identification of
public land and clear management (2) Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition process
(3) Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedures.

4.1 There are six dimensions under Indicator 1, three dimensions under Indicator 2 and five
dimensions under Indicator 3. Each dimension has four gradations-ranked by the panel from A
to D. The dimensions were explicitly discussed in great detail to get the panelists’ inputs to
306 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
incorporate changes in the gradations and analysis and to incorporate their suggestions or
policy level recommendation. The major observation from the panel discussion, suggestion for
necessary changes or modification in the explanation and policy level recommendations are
given below.


Indicator 1: Identification of public land and clear management
          Dimensions                          Grade              Change in Grade
4.1.1. Criteria for public A: Public land ownership is justified No change is proposed
land     ownership     are by provision of public goods and
clearly    defined    and effectively and transparently managed
assigned to the right at        the     appropriate    level  of
level of government.       government.
Observation:
       During discussion (background note) on definition of public land the panel suggested
        to include ‘land acquired for public purposes’ along with khasmahal land and land
        vested in the state by operation of the Ceiling Acts.
       The panel concluded that there is no ambiguity in ownership and management of
        public land. It is clearly defined by law. The roles and responsibilities of concerned
        departments or public institutions or local bodies in management of lands are clearly
        defined. Responsibilities have been entrusted to appropriate level following the
        principle of subsidiarity. Hence, the panel agreed to the grade (A) proposed by Expert
        Investigator.

          Dimensions                      Grade                    Change in Grade
4.1.2 There is a complete B: Between 60% and 90% of The panel suggested to
recording of public land. public land is clearly identified rank it as ‘C’ in place of
                          on the ground and on maps.        ‘B’.
Observation:

       Mr.Chakraborti stated that all public lands are mapped and surveyed in the State.
        Public lands are also recorded in the name of concerned department or public
        institution or local bodies. But there is gap that records are not updated.
       Mr.Shome pointed out that notice is also served for making change in records. But it
        is not done timely and consistently. It results into creating gap in updated
        information.
       The panel concluded that there is no readily available data which can show actual gap
        in clearly identifiable public land. Based on the experience of working with the
        system, it can be said that around 50% public lands are clearly identifiable. Hence,
        the panel suggested that grade ‘C’ will be more appropriate than ‘B’.

         Dimensions                           Grade                   Change in Grade
4.1.3 Information on C: All the information in the public land No          change     is
public land is publicly inventory is only available for a limited proposed.
accessible.             set of public property and there is little or
                        no justification why records are not
                        accessible.
Observation:

       After explanation of the point by the moderator, Mr.Shome stated that all
        informations on public land are available because of the computerization. Other
        panelists opined that records may not be updated.

307 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       The panel came to conclusion that though concerned departments or institutions
        owning public lands are required to maintain their separate Land Registers but it is
        not done regularly. Information on such public lands is not available to the public on
        request and there is no justification offered for such non- availability. Hence the
        panel agreed to grade (C) proposed by EI.

          Dimensions                                Grade               Change in Grade
4.1.4 The management          C: There is ambiguity in the assignment Grade is changed
responsibility        for     of    management       responsibility  or from ‘C’ to ‘B’.
different types of public     capability for different types of public
land is unambiguously         land and/or major gaps in the extent to
assigned.                     which equity and efficiency are often not
                              attained in practice.
Observation:

       After explanation by the moderator, the panel opined that there is no ambiguity in
        assignment of management responsibilities to the concerned departments or public
        institutions or local bodies. It clearly defined by law.
       One panelist pointed out that responsibility is not assigned on the basis of the
        efficiency of the institutions. Another panelist added that in spite of being the
        custodian of land, L&LR Department does not exercise control over it. Because of
        absence of any mechanism to oversee the function of concerned department or public
        institutions or local bodies there remains a gap in practice.
       Taking into account the points raised by the panelists, it was finally decided to grade
        the dimension as ‘B’ instead of ‘C’.

          Dimensions                             Grade                Change in Grade
4.1.5 Responsible public      B: There are some constraints in the Grade is changed
institutions        have      financial and/or human resource from ‘B’ to ‘C’.
sufficient resources for      capacity but the system makes most
their land management         effective use of available resources in
responsibilities.             managing public lands adequately.
Observations:

All panelists unanimously agreed that available financial /human resources are not sufficient
for the responsible institutions to manage the public land handed over to them. It is also true
that the system makes optimum utilization of available resources in managing public land.
Hence, the panel suggested to change the grade from ‘B’ to ‘C’.

            Dimensions                             Grade                     Change in Grade
4.1.6       All      essential    A: Key information for public Grade is changed from ‘A’
information on public land        land allocations (the locality and to ‘C’.
allocations       to   private    area of the land allocation, the
interests       is    publicly    parties    involved    and      the
accessible.                       financial terms of the allocation)
                                  is   recorded     and     publicly
                                  accessible.
Observation:

       Referring to the relevant sections of the rules the moderator stated that the
        settlements are entered in a register. People can access this information upon request
        only.
       One panelists raised an issue that Development Authorities like

308 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
          SantiniketanSriniketan Development Authority, Assansol Durgapur Development
          Authority etc. are supposed to upload the information in the website. But it is not
          done.
         One panelist pointed out that in case of land allocation to private industries, it is
          made on the basis of terms and conditions set with the parties. It is not made publicly
          accessible.
         After a long deliberation, the panel came to a conclusion that key information on
          public land allocation like area of land, location, parties involved, financial
          transaction details etc. are not made readily available by the public. Hence, grade ‘C’
          will be more appropriate than ‘A’.

Indicator 2: Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition processes
          Dimensions                            Grade                  Change in Grade
4.2.1 There is minimal D: More than 50% of land acquired in the Grade is changed
transfer of acquired land past 3 years is used for private purposes. from ‘D’ to ‘A’.
to private interests.6
Observation:

         After explanation of the dimension by the moderator, one panelist stated that it is
          difficult to differentiate the purpose of land acquisition as ‘public’ or ‘private’. Then
          the moderator explained that if the acquired land is handed over to any private
          company or any private party then it will be considered as private purpose.
         The panel, based on their rich experience, concluded that less than 10% of land
          acquired in the past 3 years is used for private purposes. Hence, the dimensioned
          should be ranked as ‘A’ instead of ‘D’.

           Dimensions                         Grade           Change in Grade
4.2.2 Acquired land is A: More than 70% of the land that has Grade is changed
transferred to destined been acquired in the past 3 years has from ‘A’ to ‘B’.
use in a timely manner. been transferred to its destined use.
Observations:

There is no readily available data to show the actual percentage cases of acquired land
transferred to destined use within 3 years. Based on the rich experience of working with
government it can be said that 50% to 70% cases are transferred to destined use. Hence, the
panel suggested that grade ‘B’ will be more appropriate than ‘A’.

          Dimensions                                             Grade                          Change in Grade
4.2.3 The threat of land A: None at all.                                                        Grade is changed
acquisition does not lead                                                                       from ‘A’ to ‘B’.
to pre-emptive action by
private parties.
Observations:

The panel agreed that generally the case of taking pre-emptive action by any private party
through competent court is not found. Thus the panel suggested that it would be perfect to
rank the dimension as ‘B’.

Indicator 3: Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedures

6
 In some countries in the process of urban expansion privately land held maybe acquired before land use planning is implemented
and then sold/returned to previous owners in a different form. This is not to be considered for ranking this dimension. Transfer of
acquired land to private interests is excluded.
309 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
          Dimensions                                Grade                Change in Grade
4.3.1 Compensation is         A: Fair compensation, in kind or in cash, Grade is changed
provided      for     the     that allows maintenance of previous from A to B.
acquisition of all rights     social and economic status, is paid to all
regardless    of    their     those with rights in acquired land
recording status.             (ownership, use, access rights etc.)
                              regardless of the recording status.
Observations:

       The moderator referred to existing legal framework under three relevant Acts i.e.
        Land Acquisition Act 1894, WBEA Act 1953 and WBLR Act 1955 which provide for
        paying compensation to land owners and sharecroppers under different clause. All
        other panelists agreed to the point raised by him.
       One panelist pointed out that there is no provision in any Act but by virtue of
        Executive Order (2006) compensation is also paid to agricultural labourers who
        worked on the acquired agricultural lands. The panel suggested to add this point in
        analysis also.
       The panel drew inference that there is no doubt that compensation is provided for the
        acquisition of all rights regardless of their recording status. However, the level of
        compensation is not always just and transparent (especially, it does not consider
        social and economic status of to those whose rights are not recorded). Hence the
        panel suggested to change the grade from A to B.

          Dimensions                            Grade               Change in Grade
4.3.2 Land use change D: Where people lose rights as a result of No change in grade
resulting in selective loss land use change outside the acquisition
of    rights    there    is process, compensation is not paid.
compensated for.
Observations:

All the panelists agreed to the point that there is no provision to compensate for any loss of
rights due to change in land use. Whatever provision we have that is compensation for loss of
rights as a result of acquisition. Hence, the panel unanimously accepted the grade (D)
proposed by the EI.
          Dimensions                              Grade                 Change in Grade
4.3.3 Acquired owners D: Less than 50% of acquired land Grade is changed
are         compensated owners receive compensation within one from ‘D’ to ‘B’.
promptly.                   year.
Observations:

       The moderator mentioned that there may be some time lag between acquisition and
        payment of compensation because of various reasons like confusion regarding
        ownership, minor dispute over land ownership / share, production of incomplete
        documents by land owners etc.
       One panelist pointed out that the moment government acquires land on paper, it is
        considered as vested land. The raiyat (land owner) can use the land until it is
        occupied by the government.
       Considering the average number of delay cases in practice, the panel arrived at a
        consensus that between 70% and 90% of acquired land owners receive compensation
        within one year. Hence, it would be most suitable to rank it as ‘B’ in place of ‘D’.

          Dimensions                    Grade            Change in Grade
4.3.4      There   are A: Independent avenues to lodge a No change in grade

310 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
independent        and complaint against acquisition exist and
accessible avenues for are easily accessible.
appeal          against
acquisition.
Observations:

       The moderator mentioned that the first instance appellate forums in regard to
        compensation under the three Acts i.e. LA Act, WBEA Act, WBLR Act are defined. All
        these appellate forums are independent and easily accessible.
       The panel concluded that whatever be the level of competent authority, it is easily
        accessible by the public to lodge complaint against acquisition. Hence, the panel
        agreed that ranking ‘A’ is justified.

          Dimensions                                 Grade           Change in Grade
4.3.5 Timely decisions         A: A first instance decision has been Grade is changed
are made regarding             reached for more than 80% of the from ‘A’ to ‘C’.
complaints       about         complaints about acquisition lodged
acquisition.                   during the last 3 years.
Observations:

       The moderator mentioned that in most of the cases the decision is taken by the first
        instance Court regarding complaints about acquisition.
       One panelistadded that a writ petition can be filed in the High Court against
        acquisition itself. For other cases like admissibility of compensation and amount
        thereof could be appealed to the next appellate forum or High Court.
       The panel suggested to add this point in dimension analysis.
       The panel concluded that a high number of cases reach to next appellate court or the
        High Court due to complexities of cases and it takes time to be resolved. On average
        30-50% cases, first instance decision is taken by 3 years. Hence, the panel arrived at a
        consensus that grade ‘C’ will be most appropriate than grade ‘A’.




          Panel 5: Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Private Investors

                                             24 April 2014
                                               Landesa
                                     Venue: Landesa Kolkata Office

1.0 The meeting was started with a warm welcome to the panelists by Mr. Pinaki Halder, LGAF-
West Bengal Project Leader and State Director, Landesa, West Bengal and introduction among
each other.After making a brief presentation delineating the purpose of the panel discussion,
about LGAF, the core thematic areas of LGAF, Land Governance Indicators and Dimensions etc.
311 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
he ventured into the detailed discursive discussion on Panel 5: Transfer of Large Tracts of Land
to Private Investors.

2.0 Following were the participants of the meeting-

    1) Dr.P. K. Das, Associate Professor, Department of Economics, Centre for Studies in Social
       Science, Kolkata
    2) Mr.Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, Ex-OSD, West Bengal Industrial Development
       Corporation
    3) Mr.Sukumar Banerjee, IAS (Retd.), Ex-Special Secretary, L&LR Department, Govt. of
       West Bengal
    4) Mr.Sunil Nair, Chief Marketing Officer, Bengal Aerotropolis Projects Limited
    5) Dr.Vivekananda Mukherjee, Associate Professor, Department of Economics, Jadavpur
       University
    6) Mr. Pinaki Halder, State Director, Landesa, State Coordinator and Project Team Leader-
       LGAF- West Bengal

2.1 Landesa Kolkata team members were also present to aid the uninterrupted flow of the panel
discussion. The names of those present were-

       Mr. Supriya Chattopadhyay, Communications Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
       Mr.SudiptaBiswas, Districts Project Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
       Mr. Debasis Mondal, Office Assistant, Landesa- West Bengal

3.0 The Moderator made a brief presentation of the background information regarding this
panel and invited feedback from the panelists. He covered the following points in his
presentation – (a) background data of type of land in the State according to use (b) availability
of land for private investment purpose (c) issues of management of land including public land
(d) procedure of transfer of public land to private investors (e) role of WBIDC, WBIIDC,
WBSIDC etc. (f) rehabilitation and resettlement issues etc.

4.0 After detailed discussion on background note, discussion was carried out for reviewing the
dimension and justification of ranking. The panel has four indicators: (1) Transfer of public land
to private use follows a clear, transparent, and competitive process and payments are collected
and audited (with the exception of transfers to improve equity such as land distribution and
land for social housing) (2) Private Investment Strategy (3) Policy implementation is effective,
consistent and transparent and involves localstakeholders and (4) Contracts involving public
land are public with agreements monitored and enforced.


4.1 There are five dimensions under Indicator 1, seven dimensions under Indicator 2, four
dimensions under Indicator 3 andthree dimensions under Indicator 4. Each dimension has four
gradations-ranked by the panel from A to D. The dimensions were explicitly discussed in great
detail to get the panelists’ inputs to incorporate changes in the gradations and analysis and to
incorporate their suggestions or policy level recommendation.

5.0 The major observation from the panel discussion, suggestion for necessary changes or
modification in the explanation and policy level recommendations are given below.


Indicator 1: Transfer of public land to private use follows a clear, transparent,
and competitive process and payments are collected and audited
         Dimensions                       Grade            Change in Grade
5.1.1.   Public     land C: The share of public land No change is proposed

312 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
transactions are conducted disposed of in the past 3 years
in an open transparent through sale or lease through
manner                          public auction or open tender
                                process is between 50% and 70%.
Observation:
     Expert Investigator started discussion with brief explanation to the panel on this
       dimension. He explained the meaning of few terms like ‘public holding’, ‘acquisition’
       etc. when he was requested so by one panelist. He also delineated the process of
       transfer of public land to private investors as per government guideline laid out in the
       WBLR Manual 1991.
     The moderator requested Mr.S.P.Mukherjee to share his experience regarding the
       process followed by WBIDC, HIDCO or L&LR Department. Mr.Mukharjee briefly
       described the process which was also supplemented by Mr. Banerjee. Upon request
       from one panelistMr. Mukherjee explained the terms and conditions prepared and
       followed for long term settlement.
     One panelist queried whether the auction is made or not, Mr. Mukherjee responded
       that as per Government Order (26.12.2012) for industrial development project
       highest price is not the main criteria and auction is not the only mode of allotment
       either. Detailed development plan is prepared. Price is fixed by the government
       following certain criteria like acquisition price, cost of capital, development charges
       and premium as applicable. He also added that unlike past process, the auction has
       been started by WBIDC and HIDCO after this Government Order.
     One panelist raised the issue of transparency of bidding process. Mr.Mukharjee
       shared a case of HIDCO at Rajarhat where bidding process was cancelled because
       only a single party participated in the process. HIDCO went for re-advertisement.
     When one panelist wanted to know about the pricing method, other panelists
       responded that it is basically fixed taking into consideration thelocal market
       value.When asked about the past process of transfer, Mr. Banerjee shared that it was
       done simply on the basis of application from the interested parties (subject to
       availability of public land). There was no scope of assessment whether second party is
       more eligible or not. Price was fixed on the basis of local market value keeping in
       mind that government is not loser.
     Mr. Banerjee shared a case of Panagarh Industrial Park where WBIDC went for
       advertisement for allocating land to private investors. The advertisement also
       highlighted that facilities as per prescribed norms will be provided to the parties by
       the government. In spite of that out of 2700 acre of land, only 1458 acre was
       transferred on lease. The anchor investor was a fertilizer company. Finally, after the
       failure of bidding process, government decided to allocate rest of the land to any
       interested parties on a fixed rate.
     The panel concluded that after 2012 there has been major change in transfer process
       (public auction or open tender process). On an average, more than 60% of public
       lands disposed through sale or lease have been done through public auction or open
       tender process. Hence, the panel agreed to grade the dimension as ‘C’.

       Dimensions                       Grade                Change in Grade
5.1.2 Payments for public A: More than 90% of the total No change in grade
leases are collected      agreed payments are collected from
                          private parties on the lease of
                          public lands.
Observation:

       EI explained the terms of payment for long term leases i.e. lease agreement for 30
        years and lease agreement for 99 years. The issues covered rate, price fixation,
313 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        concession, mode of payment etc. He also presented a data of last three years on
        quantum of land sanctioned on long-term lease and amount received by government
        as rent, premium etc.
       Mr. Nair suggested to re-check the data because it shows that less quantum of land
        has been sanctioned in 2010-11 than 2009-10. Other panelists opined that the figure
        may reflect current reality because the quantum of land available has been nearing to
        saturation point.
       Considering the facts and figures presented by the Expert Investigator, the panel
        agreed that more than 90% of the total agreed payments are collected from private
        parties on the lease of public lands. Hence, the panel accepted the grade (A) proposed
        by the EI.

       Dimensions                                Grade                  Change in Grade
5.1.3   Public   land    is       A: All types of public land are No change in grade
transacted at market prices       generally divested at market prices
unless guided by equity           in     a    transparent      process
objectives                        irrespective of the investor’s status
                                  (e.g. domestic or foreign).
Observation:

       The Expert Investigator explained the general practice of price fixation. In
        determining the premium and other lease terms factors like location of the land to be
        settled, the purpose of the settlement, suitability of the land for the lease purpose,
        prevailing price of land in the locality etc. are taken into account. In this process,
        price never becomes less than market price. Moreover, sometimes it may become
        higher than market price.
       One panelist shared the case of Andal where price rose up to three to four times
        higher than market price because of higher demand of land in that location. Another
        panelist pointed out that there is no circle rate in West Bengal. Even rate varies from
        Mouza to Mouza.
       One panelist pointed out that during fixation of price much weightage is given to the
        recent sale prices of land of similar type as obtained from the Registration Office. In
        this context, another panelistreferred to the Government Order (26.12.2012) which
        clearly specifies that land allotted for private use should be based on market prices.
        However, there are provisions for relaxations to accommodate weaker sections of the
        society or to meet other social objectives.
       The panel came to a conclusion that in the State context, public land is transacted at
        market price. All transactions irrespective of the status of the investor’s status are
        carried out in a transparent manner. Hence, the panel agreed to the grade (A)
        proposed by the EI.

          Dimensions                                Grade             Change in Grade
5.1.4 The public captures         B: Mechanisms to allow the public Gradation was changed
benefits   arising   from         to capture significant share of the from B to C.
changes in permitted land         gains from changing land use are
use                               not always used, although generally
                                  applied transparently.

Observation:

       The EI briefed the kind of benefit which can be accrued from the land use by different
        stakeholders. He stated that it is very difficult to quantify the benefit to be accrued
        from the land use. In general, only short term tangible benefits are taken into

314 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        account. Long term benefits are ignored.
       One panelist cited the example of allocating land to TATA Hospital at New Town
        area, which accrued huge fiscal benefit because of absence of any comprehensive
        mechanism to capture all short-term and long-term benefit.
       The panel suggested that an independent benefit assessment mechanism should be
        adopted to quantify the short-term and long-term benefits that will accrue to the
        public.
       The panel arrived at a consensus that gradation should be changed from B to C in the
        ground that there is no mechanism in practice to quantify the benefits as a whole,
        only tangible benefits are captured in the reports.

          Dimensions                                Grade                Change in Grade
5.1.5 Policy to improve           B: Policy is in place to improve No change in grade
equity in asset access and        access to and productive use of
use by the poor exists, is        assets by poor and marginalized
implemented      effectively      groups, is applied in practice, but is
and monitored                     not effective
Observation:

After brief explanation of the dimension by the moderator followed by analysis made by EI,
the panel accepted the fact presented by EI. The panel unanimously agreed to the grade (B)
proposed by the EI.

Indicator 2: Private investment strategy
            Dimensions                         Grade            Change in Grade
5.2.1 Land to be made B: A policy to identify land that can No change in grade
available to investors is be made available to investors
identified transparently and exists, based on ad hoc assessment
publicly, in agreement with of land potential but with
right holders                community       consultation   and
                             agreement, and is applied in more
                             than 90% of identified cases.
Observation:

       EI stated that L&LR Manual 1991 and Government Order dated 26.12.2012 clearly lay
        out the process to be followed for identification of land that can be made available to
        investors. Hence, it can be said that policy does exist. But, it is based on ad hoc
        assessment of land potential. Barring the case of Singur, consultation with
        community is made.
       Mr. Nair cited the example of acquisition of land for Durgapur Aerotroplois and for
        industrial parks at Panagarh, Raghunathpur, Kharagpur and Naihati where
        community consultation was made for selection of sites and fixing compensation
        package.
       Mr. Mukherjee stated that as far as WBIDC is concerned, land is identified
        transparently and publicly, in agreement with right holders.
       One panelist shared that after preparation of initial development plan (proposed area
        to be acquired) consultation is made with community. Changes are incorporated in
        the plan accordingly.
       After the detailed discussion, the panel decided to rank the dimension as ‘B’.

          Dimensions                       Grade              Change in Grade
5.2.2    Investments are A: Process is in place that properly No change in grade
selected    based     on considers both national and local

315 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
economic,     socio-cultural benefits and is adhered to. Benefit
and environmental impacts sharing mechanism are in place
in an open process
Observation:

All the panelists unanimously agreed that the process is more or less followed in practice and
ranking ‘A’ is appropriate for the dimension.

           Dimensions                                Grade            Change in Grade
5.2.3    Public institutions      B: Institutions to make decisions No change in grade
transferring     land      to     are clearly identified and have the
investors     are     clearly     necessary capacity (incl. resources
identified and regularly          for field verification) and strong
audited                           incentives in ensuring socially
                                  beneficial outcomes but processes
                                  may be complex and difficult for
                                  investors.
Observation:

       EI stated that there is no doubt that institutions are clearly identified. In the State
        context, L&LR Department and public institutions like WBIDC, WBIIDC, WBSIDC
        etc. can transfer land to investors.
       One panelist raised an issue whether they have the capacity to handle land transfer to
        private investors. Mr. Mukherjee explained that WBIDC has five men committee
        comprising technical experts from various fields to scrutinize and assess the actual
        land requirement, water source, viability (technical and social) aspects of any
        proposal for setting of an industry. He also added that during preparation of detailed
        project report, social impact assessment is done.
       One panelist pointed out that there is doubt that institutions are audited regularly.
        Other panelists responded that there is provision for internal as well as external
        audit. Institutions have to comply with the audit quires raised by Auditor General.
       The panel concluded that the process is bit complex and time taking. Though there is
        provision for ‘single window’ service, but practically it is not investor friendly. Hence,
        the panel accepted the grade (B) proposed by EI.

           Dimensions                                Grade              Change in Grade
5.2.4     Public      bodies      A: A policy is in place for effective Grade is changed from
transferring     land     to      inter-ministerial and coordination A to B.
investors share information       to ensure that decisions on land use
and coordinate to minimize        and    land     rights    are    well
and     resolve     overlaps      coordinated across sectors, and is
(including sub-soil).             applied effectively.
Observation:

       EI explained the process of transferring land and interrelationship between different
        government departments or public institutions. Referring to the LR Manual 1991 and
        consecutive Government Order (2012) he highlighted that policy does exist.
       One panelist pointed out the scope of conflict between Central Government and State
        Government citing the example that surface right transfer is dealt with by the state
        while sub-soil rights (say coal mine) are considered by central government. He also
        added that there is no avenue for coordination between central and state
        governments when large scale acquisition of land is involved.
       The panel came to a conclusion that though there is some sort of inter-departmental

316 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        coordination at the State level but there is no avenue for coordination between
        central and state government. There is no policy to minimize and resolve overlaps.
        Hence, the panel suggested to change the grade from ‘A’ to ‘B’.
       The panel also suggested that some formal mechanism like identifying a nodal agency
        from both state and central government for compliance and reconciliation might be
        considered.

          Dimensions                        Grade              Change in Grade
5.2.5   Compliance    with C: Monitoring of compliance is No change in grade
contractual obligations is limited or only part of the results
regularly monitored and accessible to the public
remedial action taken if
needed.
Observations:

       Referring to the background note EI stated that there is provision laid out in the
        policy for compliance of contractual obligation and taking action for non-compliance.
        But in practice, monitoring mechanism is very week. In case of non-compliance, the
        matter goes to court and it takes long time for settlement.
       The panel unanimously agreed to the point raised by the EI and accepted the grade
        (C) proposed by him.

           Dimensions                        Grade              Change in Grade
5.2.6 Safeguards effectively C: Safeguards (EIA, SIA, etc.) are No change in grade
reduce the risk of negative partly in line with global best
effects from large scale practice
land-related investments.
Observation:

       EI mentioned about the institutional framework which provides control over
        environmental impact. He briefed the role of Pollution Control Board and Bio-
        Diversity Board. He also explained the norms laid out in the guideline for taking care
        of environmental aspect.
       One panelist raised the issue of social impact assessment. EI along with other
        panelists responded that it is done by the public institutions like WBIDC, WBSIDC
        etc. during feasibility assessment.
       All panelists agreed to the point that though there are provisions for safeguard to
        effectively reduce the risk of negative effect, but still there is gap in practice. Hence
        the panel unanimously agreed that ranking (C) is appropriate for the State.

           Dimensions                        Grade             Change in Grade
5.2.7    The   scope    for B: Applied resettlement policy is No change in grade
resettlement   is   clearly partly in line with global best
circumscribed          and practice, and in most cases applied
procedures exist to deal
with it in line with best
practice.
Observation:

       The EI stated that there is R&R Policy document of WBIDC which prescribes norms
        for resettlement. It deals with compensation package and also protects the interest of
        sharecroppers and landless labourers. But in practice, there remains gap leaving the
        scope for grievances. Appropriate remedial measures are not taken fully.

317 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       The panel accepted the fact without any debate and agreed to rank the dimension as
        ‘B’.

Indicator 3: Policy implementation is effective, consistent and transparent and
involves local stakeholders
           Dimensions                           Grade              Change in Grade
5.3.1 Investors provide A: Investors' business plans No change in grade
sufficient information to (application materials) require
allow rigorous evaluation of sufficient evidence of technical
proposed investments.        viability, community consultation,
                             and availability of resources to
                             effectively identify project risk and
                             viability and effectively monitor
                             progress.
Observation:

       Regarding the information provided by the investor the EI stated that the investor
        has to submit detailed project report (DPR) which is reviewed by a Five-man
        Committee. Community consultation has to take place as per prescribed norm during
        preparation of DPR.
       Mr. Nair shared a case of joint venture project at Andal with Bengal Aerotropolis
        where the anchor investor had to comply with all the formalities in respect of
        justifying technical viability and community consultation. The investor had to
        undertake a full research work to understand the community behavior and develop
        formula of compensation for right losers as well as the community in general
        including the corporate social responsibility (CSR) policy.
       Other panelists opined that it is more or less true in case of other projects. Though in
        the past this aspect was not taken much care, but post Singur episode it is taken care
        of seriously. Considering the fact the panel suggested that ranking (A) is justified.

          Dimensions                              Grade                Change in Grade
5.3.2     Approval      of        A: All investment application Grade is changed from A to
investment plans follows a        related documents are reviewed B.
clear     process     with        according to a uniform process
reasonable timelines.             and receive a response within 3
                                  months of date of submission
Observation:

       The EI stated that the process of approval of plans laid out in the policy has already
        been discussed. He also mentioned that as per guideline it should be completed in
        one month but practically it may take 2 – 3 months.
       Regarding the time taken by the WBIDC, Mr. Mukherjee and others opined that it
        takes around six months.
       Considering the time taken to process the approval of investment plan, the panel
        suggested that grade ‘B’ will be more appropriate than ‘A’.

            Dimensions                           Grade                Change in Grade
5.3.3 Right holders and            C: Those holding rights to Grade is changed from C to
investors negotiate freely and     land with potential for B.
directly with full access to       investment have incentives
relevant information.              to properly negotiate but
                                   their rights are unclear or
                                   opportunities   to   obtain

318 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                   relevant    information        or
                                   assistance do not exist.
Observation:

       Referring to the analysis report the EI stated that there is scope for the investor and
        the right holders to negotiate on site selection of a project, price of land,
        rehabilitation of land losers etc. He also mentioned about an Executive Order which
        goes forward to arrange for the negotiation on site selection also by formation of two
        committees viz. ‘site selection committee’ and ‘screening committee’ which has not
        been envisaged in Land Acquisition Act 1894.
       Mr. Banerjee and Mr. Mukherjee shared that right holders generally submit petition
        for further clarification if required.
       The panel opined that it cannot be said that opportunities to obtain relevant
        information or assistance do not exist. There may be certain limitation to get
        adequate information and assistance. So, the panel decided to change the grade from
        ‘C’ to ‘B’.

            Dimensions                          Grade             Change in Grade
5.3.4 Contractual provisions B: Modalities for benefit sharing No change in grade
regarding benefit sharing are are routinely included in relevant
publicly disclosed.           contractual arrangements, but
                              there is limited public disclosure.
Observation:

       After explanation of the point by the Expert Investigator, one panelist opined that
        fiscal incentives are given to the private investors to attract investment but
        government does not disclose the agreement. Disclosure is very limited in practice in
        the State.
       One panelist cited the example of Singur where lot of fiscal benefit was given to TATA
        for establishing NANO Car Factory. The agreement was not disclosed. Even after
        filing RTI the agreement was not disclosed and the matter went to court. Since,
        private parties were involved with the government and they are not bound to disclose
        information due to confidentiality policy of the company, the matter remained
        undisclosed.
       The panel concluded that grade B is justified in this regards. Also the panel suggested
        that government should take up policy to make the lease agreement public to bring
        transparency in the process.

Indicator 4: Contracts involving public land are public with agreements
monitored and enforced.
            Dimensions                        Grade               Change in Grade
5.4.1 Information on spatial A:       Comprehensive        and No change in grade
extent and duration of consolidated          information     on
approved concessions is spatial extent, duration, and
publicly available.          parties        involved         in
                             concessions/leases is available
                             publicly.
Observations:
     The EI mentioned about the “West Bengal State Support for Industries Scheme,
        2013” which provides various incentives to the private parties for setting up
        industries.
     Mr. Nair stated information on ‘approved concession’ is available in case of WBIDC
        and WBIIDC. Mr. Mukherjee stated that it is also available in case of HIDCO. All

319 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        information regarding this is available in the website of the concerned public
        institutions.
       The panel unanimously accepted the fact and agreed that rank (A) proposed by EI is
        justified.

             Dimensions                             Grade            Change in Grade
5.4.2     Compliance      with     C: There is little third-party Grade is changed from C
safeguards on concessions is       monitoring       of    investors' to B.
monitored and enforced             compliance with safeguards and
effectively and consistently.      mechanisms to quickly and
                                   effectively ensure adherence are
                                   difficult to access for affected
                                   communities.
Observations:

       EI mentioned about the provision of internal audit by the organization itself as well
        as external audit by Comptroller & Auditor General (CAG).
       Other panelists also agreed to the provisions but stated that problem lies in
        compliance of audit observation.
       The panel concluded that third party monitoring is in place but there is gap in quickly
        and effectively reach adherence. Hence the panel suggested that ranking ‘B’ will be
        more appropriate instead of ‘C’.

           Dimensions                              Grade             Change in Grade
5.4.3 Avenues to deal with         D: There is little third-party Grade is changed from
non-compliance exist and           monitoring      of     investors' D to B.
obtain timely and fair             compliance    with   contractual
decisions.                         provisions and mechanisms to
                                   quickly and effectively reach
                                   arbitration are virtually non-
                                   existent.
Observations:

       As per above discussion the panel accepted the fact that there are provisions for third
        party monitoring and also compliance of audit observation. But the there are certain
        gaps in quickly and effectively reach adherence.
       One panelist pointed out whether in case of non-compliance any arbitration takes
        place or not. Other panelists opined that there is mechanism for arbitration also. But
        generally it does not go up to that level. In case it goes upto that level, it is not
        reached quickly and effectively. The arbitration process also takes time. Hence, the
        panel suggested to rank the dimension as ‘B’ instead of ‘D’.


6.0 Recommendations:

       The panel suggested that an independent benefit assessment mechanism should be
        adopted to quantify the short-term and long-term benefits that will accrue to the public
        because of permitted changes in land use.
       There is no avenue for coordination between central and state governments when large
        scale acquisition of land is involved leaving scope for disputes being arisen which may
        take a long process for reconciliation. For example, the surface right transfer is dealt with
        by the state while sub-soil rights (say coal mine) are considered by central government.

320 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        Some formal mechanism like identifying a nodal agency from both state and central
        government for compliance and reconciliation might be considered.




   Panel 6: Public Provision of Land Information – Registry and Cadastre

                                             17 April 2014
                                                Landesa
                                     Venue: Landesa Kolkata Office


1.0 Mr. Pinaki Halder, LGAF- West Bengal Project Leader and State Director, Landesa, West
Bengal welcomed the panellists and the meeting started with a round of introduction. He then
explained the purpose of the Workshop, and provided an overview of the LGAF. His
presentation focused on the following: (i) global land issues; (ii) overview of land governance;
(iii) purpose of the LGAF (iv) structure, process and methodology of LGAF; and (iv)
Expectations from the panellists in this workshop. He also explained the outline of the
workshop and role of the panellists. After making this brief presentation, he led the discussion
towards opinion of the panellists regarding background note followed by detailed discussion on
review of the dimensions and their ranking.

2.0 Following were the participants of the meeting-

    1) Mr.T. K. Shome, IAS (Retd.), Ex-Director, Directorate of Land Record &Survey,Govt. of
       West Bengal
    2) Mr.A. K. Chakraborti, IAS (Retd.), Ex-Secretary, Board of Revenue, Govt. of West Bengal
    3) Mr.S. Banerjee, IAS (Retd.), Ex-Member – WBLRTT, Govt. of West Bengal
    4) Mr.P. K. Pramanik, DDG-National Informatics Centre, West Bengal
    5) Mr. Pinaki Halder, State Director, Landesa, State Coordinator and Project Team Leader-
       LGAF- West Bengal
    6) Dr. Jayanta Munsi, District Project Manager, Landesa – West Bengal

Landesa Kolkata team members were also present to aid the uninterrupted flow of the panel
discussion and take the minute of the meeting. The names of those present were-

       Mr. Supriya Chattopadhyay, Communications Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
       Mr.SudiptaBiswas, Districts Project Manager, Landesa – West Bengal
       Ms. Udita Chatterjee, Research & Documentation Officer, Landesa – West Bengal
       Mr. Debasis Mondal, Office Assistant, Landesa- West Bengal

3.0 The Expert Investigator, Mr. Shome briefly elaborated the background information
regarding this panel and invited feedback from the panelists. He shared the gradual evolution of
different survey and settlement operations, relevance of these surveys, accuracy of the
information generated, kind of services available to the public and recent development in this
regards. Regarding the availability and accessibility of land related information, Expert
Investigator shared the steps taken by the government for computerization. Mr.Pramanikshared
some detailed information and demonstrated the service available through internet
321 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
(www.banglarbhumi .com) before the panel. They reviewed the type and nature of information
available through website, its usability, cost effectiveness and accessibility to the public. The
panel commented that this will curb the corrupt practice related to land management at
different levels by offering atransparent system. Mr.Pramanik along with other panelists praised
the action taken by this government and mentioned it to be a good model before the other
States.

3.1 All panelists opined that the information given in the background note is exhaustive, to the
point, pertinent and justified and addressed the issues of provision of public information in the
context of West Bengal quite effectively.

4.0 After detailed discussion on background note, discussion was carried out for reviewing the
dimensions andjustification of ranking. The panel has five indicators: (1) Mechanisms for
recognition of rights (2) Completeness of the land registry (3) Reliability: registry information is
updated and sufficient to make meaningful inferences on ownership (4) Cost-effectiveness &
sustainability: land administration services are provided in cost-effective ways that are
sustainable in the long term (5) Fees determined transparently to cover cost of service provision.

4.1 There are four dimensions under Indicator 1, seven dimensions under Indicator 2, two
dimensions under Indicator 3, two dimensions under Indicator 4 and three dimensions under
Indicator 5. Each dimension has four gradations-ranked by the panel from A to D. The
dimensions were explicitly discussed in great detail to get the panelists’ inputs to incorporate
changes in the gradations and analysis and to incorporate their suggestions or policy level
recommendation. The major observation from the panel discussion, suggestion for necessary
changes or modification in the explanation and policy level recommendations are given below.

Indicator 1:Mechanisms for recognition of rights
          Dimensions                             Grade                   Change in Grade
6.1.1 Land possession by B: There is a clear, practical process No change is proposed
the     poor    can     be for the formal recognition of
formalized in line with possession but this process is not
local norms in an implemented effectively, consistently
efficient and transparent or transparently.
process.
Observation:
     The Expert investigator referred to the Sec.49 of WBLR Act, West Bengal Acquisition
        of Homestead land for Agricultural Labourers, Artisans and           Fisherman Act 1975,
        Government schemes like Chas-O-Basabaser-Janyo-Bhumidan-Prakalpa and Nijo-
        Griho-Nijo-BhumiPrakalpa which provide for formal recognition of possession by the
        land-poor. The process of selection of beneficiaries for the same is transparent. He
        also added that there may be certain gaps in implementation like sporadic partisan
        approach for beneficiary identification etc.In addition to this, he highlighted another
        gap of not issuing Record of Rights from earlier days (at present the practice of
        distribution of RoR along with land title is ensured). A total number of 31,41,232
        families have been given patta till October 2013 whereas RoR have been given to
        24,57,347 families creating a gap of around 7 lakh.
     Mr.Chakraborti opined that there were some irregularities in selection of
        beneficiaries. But, selection process was by and large fair (at least 95% correct).
     Considering the fact that in spite of clearly defined policies for formal recognition of
        possession there are certain gaps in terms of transparency and consistency. Hence,
        the panel suggested to keep the ranking as B.

       Dimensions                               Grade                         Change in Grade

322 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
6.1.2     Non-documentary D: Non-documentary forms of No change is proposed
evidence is effectively used evidence are almost never used
to help establish rights.    to obtain recognition of claims
                             to property.
Observation:

       Expert Investigator elaborated the scope of establishing rights and stressed that it is
        always done on the basis of some documents. Even in case of the rights of the
        sharecroppers it is recorded on the basis of the field enquiry, hearing from land
        owners and local Panchayats.
       One panellist pointed out that there is an established system of recording of
        possession in the State. In the State context, recognition without document is not
        encouraged. Hence, the panel agreed to grade the dimension as D.

          Dimensions                               Grade                    Change in Grade
6.1.3          Long-term B: Legislation exists to formally Change is proposed
unchallenged possession recognize          long-term,      unchallenged from B to C.
is formally recognized.      possession but applies only to one
                             specific type of land (e.g. either public
                             land or private land).
Observation:
      Expert Investigator explained the legal framework under which the unchallenged
       possessions are recognized. He also explained the conditions which enables the
       possessions to be formally recognized.
      One panellist raised the issue of adverse possession and wanted to know about its
       feasibility to be recognized. Mr.Chakraborti responded that adverse possession is not
       possible in case of public land. It is possible in case of private land only which is also
       very minimal in practice.
      The panel agreed to the point that unchallenged possessions are recognized legally
       which is subject to the decision of the court. The panel then concluded that legislation
       is there to formally recognize the unchallenged possession but legal hurdles to
       implement it, scope becomes very limited. Hence, the panel suggested that ranking C
       will be more appropriate than B.

         Dimensions                               Grade             Change in Grade
6.1.4         First-time      A: On-demand recording of rights No change in grade
recording of rights on        includes proper safeguards to prevent
demand includes proper        abuse and costs do not exceed 0.5% of
safeguards and access is      the property value.
not restricted by high
fees.

Observation:
   EI briefed the legal provisions and the procedure of first time recording of rights. He
     also presented the data on fees for mutation which is very minimal (do not exceed
     0.5% of the property value).
   All other panelists accepted the detailed analysis on this issue provided by the EI and
     unanimously agreed to the grade proposed by the EI.


Indicator 2: Completeness of the land registry
        Dimensions                         Grade                                Change in Grade
6.2.1 Total cost of D: The total cost for recording a property                  No change in Grade
323 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
recording a property transfer is equal to or greater than 5% of
transfer is low.     the property value.
Observation:

After explanation by the Moderator followed by additional data shared by Expert
investigator, all other panelists agreed that the rate is high in the State. Considering the
present rate (which is 5% of property value in rural areas and 6% of property value in urban
areas) for recording of property transfer the panel decided that the ranking (D) is
appropriate.

            Dimensions                         Grade            Change in Grade
6.2.2 Information held in A: More than 90% of records for No change in grade
records is linked to maps privately held land recorded in
that reflect current reality. the     registry  are  readily
                              identifiable in maps (spatial
                              records).
Observation:

       After briefing by the moderator, Mr. Banerjee agreed that on the basis of long
        association with land governance it can be said that in 98% cases record of land is
        linked to map.
       Mr.Pramanik shared his experience that the system of digitized map enables easy
        identification of ownerless land. It helps the department to update the records
        accordingly.
       When one panellist queried whether the plot is identifiable in the map or not,
        Mr.Pramanik responded that it is 100% identifiable. But, change in use of plot
        (demarcation within the plot because of increase in number of shareholders) which is
        not recorded, cannot be linked with map. All other panellists agreed that it is
        definitely linked and identifiable but may not be updated because of unchanging
        nature of records.
       When one panellist wanted to know the implication of “current reality” the
        moderator explained the same along with its bearing with ownership and record.
        Mr.Pramanik added that record may not reflect current reality because mutations are
        not always done promptly.
       Considering the fact that in more than 90% cases records are identifiable and it is
        linked to map, the panel suggested to rank it as A.

          Dimensions                            Grade           Change in Grade
6.2.3 All relevant private C: Relevant private encumbrances are No change in grade
encumbrances           are recorded but this is not done in a
recorded.                  consistent and reliable manner.
Observation:

       EI explained the type of private encumbrances as easement rights, possession of land
        with consent, adverse possession,forcible possession and rights of the share croppers
        (under WBEA Act). However, he added, private encumbrances are recorded in the
        RoR inconsistently and it does not reflect ground reality.
       One panellist stated that rights of the sharecroppers are not considered as private
        encumbrance under the provision of WBLR Act. He also added that ‘mortgage in
        bank’ is still not recorded as private encumbrances on the body of r-o-r.
       Suggestion came up from the panel that government should consider recording
        private encumbrances like bank and private institutions.
       EI shared recent development that the initiative taken by the State Government for

324 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        online management of all records is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. Mr.
        Pramanik also accepted the fact of progress.
       Taking into account the situation in the State that recording of private encumbrances
        in the RoR still does not reflect the ground reality, the panel suggested to rank it as
        ‘C’.

          Dimensions                           Grade                 Change in Grade
6.2.4 All relevant public C: Relevant public restrictions or charges No change in grade
restrictions or charges are recorded but this is not done in a
are recorded.             consistent and reliable manner.
Observations:

       EI explained the term public restriction and mentioned the scope of public restriction
        as restriction on transfer of land beyond ceiling limit without approval of revenue
        officer, long-term settlement of land, short-term settlement, settlement through patta
        of government land etc.
       Mr. Chakraborti opined that ‘creation of tenancy’ should also be included in
        restrictions. But EI and other panelists suggested that it is not necessary to mention
        here because it is not recorded.
       The panel accepted that there are certain gaps in recording public restrictions or
        charges like land revenue, lease etc. So, it can be concluded that recording is not done
        consistently. Hence the panel accepted the ranking (C) proposed by the EI.

         Dimensions                            Grade                Change in Grade
6.2.5 There is a timely A: Copies or extracts of documents No change in grade
response to requests for recording rights in property can generally
accessing       registry be obtained within 1 day of request.
records.
Observations:

EI mentioned that because of the introduction of Over the Counter (OTC) service public can
access all RoR and map related information within 15 minutes. He also added that since all
maps and RoRs are digitized except 1-100 wards of Kolkata Municipal Corporation, people
can easily access it through internet. Mr. Pramanik and other panellists agreed to the fact
and accepted the grade (A) proposed by EI.

         Dimensions                             Grade                   Change in Grade
6.2.6 The registry is A: The records in the registry can be No change in grade
searchable.                 searched by both right holder name and
                            parcel.
Observations:
Considering the fact that land records and cadastral maps are available on website, it is easily
searchable. As the panel also agreed that people can get the service from the OTC easily, it is
appropriate to grade the dimension as ‘A’.

          Dimensions                         Grade          Change in Grade
6.2.7 Land information A: Copies or extracts of documents No change in grade
records     are  easily recording rights in property can be
accessed.               obtained by anyone who pays the
                        necessary formal fee, if any.
Observations:

Considering the fact of digitization of all records and maps and making it accessible from the
325 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
website or available with nominal fees as mentioned by the EI, the panel unanimously agreed
to rank the dimension as ‘A’.

Indicator 3:Reliability: Registry information is updated and sufficient to make
meaningful inferences on ownership
         Dimensions                          Grade              Change in Grade
6.3.1 Information in C: Links are in place for some types of No change in grade
public    registries    is land information and checks are
synchronized to ensure insufficient to eliminate a significant
integrity of rights and number        of potentially fraudulent
reduce transaction cost.   transactions.
Observations:

       EI mentioned that in case of land acquisition land information are synchronized
        promptly by the help of Bhu-Adhigrahan and Bhu-Chitra software. He also
        mentioned that State Government has taken steps to synchronize digital records of
        land transaction, RoRs& cadastral parcel and legacy records through intranet at State
        Data Centre. Regarding this, he also identified gaps like bank loans and court orders
        are not recorded in RoRs and during land transaction RoRs are not verified properly.
       Based on their long experience, other panelists agreed with the EI. Considering the
        above fact, they opined that the process of synchronization at present cannot ensure
        elimination of all fraudulent practices. Hence, the panel agreed to grade the
        dimension as ‘C’.

         Dimensions                                 Grade         Change in Grade
6.3.2            Registry     B: Between 70% and 90% of the No change in grade
information is up-to-         ownership          information   in
date and reflects ground      registry/cadastre is up-to-date and
reality.                      reflects ground reality.
Observations:

       After the explanation by the EI, the panel came to a conclusion that the state has a
        mechanism to update registry information but it cannot be said that it reflects ground
        reality well. The panel identified one gap that the State has not made a good progress
        in updating mutation of records.
       There is no readily available data to assess the percentage of updated ownership
        information in registry or cadastre. The panel suggested ranking it as ‘B’ primarily on
        the basis of vast and cumulative field experience.

Indicator 4: Cost-effectiveness and sustainability
          Dimensions                        Grade                 Change in Grade
6.4.1 The registry is D: The total fees collected by the registry No change in grade
financially sustainable are less than 50% of the total registry
through fee collection to operating costs.
finance its operations.
Observations:

EI shared some data on the amount of fees payable to get information (RoR, map etc.) along
with amount spent for the salary of the staff and cost for infrastructure. It is quite evident
that the total fees collected by the registry are less than 50% of the total registry operating
costs. Hence, all the panelists unanimously agreed to grade it as D.

          Dimensions                                  Grade                     Change in Grade

326 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
6.4.2 Investment in land      C: Human and physical capital No change in grade
admin. is sufficient to       investment is sufficient to maintain
cope with demand for          medium service standards but does not
high quality services.        allow to proactively adapt to new
                              developments.
Observations:

After explanation by the EI, the panel concluded that the numbers of staff deployed at the
field level are not sufficient to provide quality service. At the same time more investment is
required by the government to enhance the quality of service. Given the huge workload at
delivery point due to non-fulfilment of vacant positions has been denying effective service in
a timely manner. But it cannot be said that there is no investment in capital in the system. It
is not as per requirement. Hence, the panel decided to grade the dimension as C.

Indicator 5: Fees are determined transparently to cover the cost of service
provision
          Dimensions                           Grade                  Change in Grade
6.5.1 Fees have a clear B: A clear rationale and schedule of fees No change in grade
rationale, their schedule for different services is not publicly
is   public,    and   all accessible, but receipts are issued for all
payments are accounted transactions.
for.
Observations:

       Referring to the government policy for providing service to the people at a token rate,
        the EI said that there is no rationale for fixation of fees. All other panelists accepted
        the point.
       EI also added that fees schedule is available at respective land record offices and
        registration offices. Other panelists agreed that fee structure is not made public.
        There is lack of transparency and uniformity in maintaining fee structure.
       When one panellist wanted to know whether receipt is issued for transaction or not,
        EI responded that it is done sincerely. All other panelists also supported the fact that
        there is transparency in issuing receipts after payment of fees.
       Mr. Pramanik provided additional information that a mechanism has been developed
        through internet that after completion of registration process, mutation case will
        automatically be initiated. Though it requires further proceeding. He provided the
        source of information as ‘wbregistration.gov.in’.
       The panel agreed to the grade (B) proposed by EI.

         Dimensions                           Grade                   Change in Grade
6.5.2 Informal payments B: Mechanisms to detect and deal with No change in grade
are discouraged.        illegal staff behaviour exist in all registry
                        offices but cases are not systematically or
                        promptly dealt with.
Observations:

       EI presented a data which clearly shows that inspite of number of illegal transactions
        complaints were lodged against 75 employees in three years. Only 10 employees were
        punished.
       Other panelists agreed that in spite of having Service Conduct Rules its enforcement
        is very poor. There is lack of proper monitoring mechanism. Government system is
        not prompt in taking action against guilty employees.
       The panel accepted the grade (B) proposed by EI.

327 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
          Dimensions                          Grade               Change in Grade
6.5.3 Service standards C: Service standards have been No change in grade
are    published     and established, but have not been published
regularly monitored.     and there is little attempt to monitor
                         performance against the standards.
Observations:

EI shared that West Bengal Rights to Public Service Act 2013 has been enacted. But State
Government has established service standard and published the same for a few services, not
for all services. All other panelists agreed to fact presented by EI. They opined that ranking
(C) is justified.



                             Panel 7: Land Valuation and Taxation

                                         Date-28th April 2014
                                     Venue: Landesa Kolkata Office

1.0 The meeting was started with a warm welcome to the panelists by Mr. Pinaki Halder, LGAF-
West Bengal Project Leader and State Director, Landesa West Bengal. After making a brief
presentation delineating the purpose of the panel discussion, about LGAF, the core thematic
areas of LGAF, Land Governance Indicators and Dimensions etc. he ventured into the detailed
discursive discussion onPanel 7: Land Valuation and Taxation.

2.0 Following were the participants of the meeting-

    1) Mr. P. K. Pramanik, DDG- NIC- West Bengal
    2) Mr.Sabyasachi Roy, Ex. Inspector General- Revenue, GoWB
    3) Dr. Vivekananda Mukherjee, Associate Professor, Department of Economics, Jadavpur
       University
    4) Mr. Anup K. Matilal, Retd. Officer, L&LR and Urban Development Departments, GoWB
    5) Mr. Pinaki Halder, State Director, Landesa, State Coordinator and Project Team Leader-
       LGAF- West Bengal

2.1 Landesa Kolkata team members were also present to aid the uninterrupted flow of the panel
discussion. The names of those present were-

       Mr. Supriya Chattopadhyay, Communications Manager, Landesa- Kolkata
       Mr. Sudipta Biswas, District Program Manager, Landesa-Kolkata
       Mr. Jayanta Munsi, District Program Manager, Landesa-Kolkata
       Ms. Udita Chatterjee, Research and Documentation Officer, Landesa- Kolkata
       Mr. Debasis Mondal, Office Assistant, Landesa- Kolkata

3.0 The Moderator made a brief presentation of the background information regarding this
panel and invited feedback from the panelists. He covered the following points in his
presentation – (a) legal framework for land valuation system (b) basic criteria for land valuation
and role of CORD software (c) role of West Bengal Valuation Board (d) exemption issues for
special categories (e) land revenue related issues. During his briefing panelists raised certain
issues regarding the scope of improvement of the function of CORD software like its efficiency,
updation of market value, linking up valuation with CORD software etc.



328 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
4.0 After detailed discussion on background note, discussion was carried out for reviewing the
dimension and justification of ranking. The panel has two indicators: (1) Transparency of
valuations: valuations are based on clear principles, applied uniformity, updated regularly and
publicly accessible; (2) Collection efficiency: land and property taxes are collected and the yield
from doing so exceeds collection cost. There are two dimensions under Indicator 1 and four
dimensions under Indicator 2 as follows.

4.1 The dimensions under indicator 1 are-

        (i)     There is a clear process of property valuation
        (ii)    Valuation rolls are publicly accessible

4.2 The dimensions under indicator 2 are-

        (i)     Exemptions from property taxes payment are justified and transparent
        (ii)    All property holders to pay property tax are listed on the tax roll
        (iii)   Assessed property taxes are collected
        (iv)    Receipts from property tax exceed the cost of collection

5.0 Each dimension has four gradations-ranked by the panel from A to D. The dimensions were
explicitly discussed in great detail to get the panelists’ inputs to incorporate changes in the
gradations and analysis and to incorporate their suggestions or policy level
recommendation.The major observation from the panel discussion, suggestion for necessary
changes or modification in the explanation and policy level recommendations are given below.


Indicator 1: Transparency of valuations: valuations are based on clear
principles, applied uniformly, updated regularly, and publicly accessible.
         Dimensions                          Grade             Change in Grade
7.1.1. There is a clear A: The assessment of land/property No change is proposed
process    of  property values for tax or compensation
valuation.              purposes reflects market prices with
                        minimal differences between recorded
                        values and market prices across
                        different uses and types of users and
                        valuation rolls are regularly updated.
Observation:

       For every Municipal Corporation areas, there is a Valuation Board, who reviews
        property tax system in every five years. Accordingly they prescribed new tax rate for
        the property holders in those areas.
       Existing tax rate reviews in every five years gap as the Municipalities don’t have
        enough infrastructural facilities to review the same on yearly basis.
       In case of any particular area within any Municipality different tax rate/tax structure
        is not possible on actual basis. So they mutually agreed with the property holders
        before fixation of their tax rate.
       In case of property registration, it is difficult to give actual definition of ‘market
        value’. It is found practically that in case of fast growing peri-urban areas (in some
        cases in particular village areas also) always two different rates prevails. One is
        Government Rate and the other is Local Rate. A gap (under-valuation) always found
        in those two rates (local rate often higher than the Govt. rate). In those particular
        cases, the Government always lose revenue.
       Sometimes, over-valuation in particular cases are also observed. Generally it depends
        upon the actual classification of any particular land in the land records e.g. a
329 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        particular land is “Shali” in reality but termed as multi-crop in the existing land
        records of L&LR dept. Moreover that particular land is quite potential in case of
        commercial purpose. In that case over-valuation might happen.
       Gap between Govt. value and local value in in selected areas is also observed. But in
        most of the cases, both rates are more or less same.
       One question was raised by a panelist- whether variations are at par with the Market
        value, if not what is the average variation? The answer to this question was given by
        other panellists – variations are happening; it is comparable between the government
        price and market price. There is possibility of under-valuation and over-valuation. In
        land use maps due to classification of land the value of land is less even if the land has
        got potential for fetching high price.

           Dimensions                      Grade            Change in Grade
7.1.2 Valuation rolls are A: There is a policy that No change is proposed
publicly accessible.      valuation rolls be publicly
                          accessible and this policy is
                          effective for all properties that
                          are considered for taxation.
Observation:

       The moderator mentioned that the roll is prepared by the West Bengal Valuation
        Board is published for the ULB inviting objections within a specified period.
       Mr.Pramanik added that plot-wise Govt. valuation of property in West Bengal is
        available in the dept. website i.e. www.wbregistration.gov.inAll information are
        available in that site and it is accessible to everyone.

       Indicator 2: Collection efficiency: land and property taxes are collected
       and the yield from doing so exceeds collection cost
         Dimensions                          Grade               Change in Grade
7.2.1 Exemptions from A: There are limited exemptions to the Grade is changed
property taxes payment payment of land/property taxes, and the from A to B.
are     justified  and exemptions that exist are clearly based
transparent.             on equity or efficiency grounds and
                         applied in a transparent and consistent
                         manner.
Observation:

As per Govt. order all religious institutions, charitable institutions etc. are exempted from
paying any property tax to the Govt. There is provision for exemption for economically
weaker and socially vulnerable section. They only need to produce valid document for
exemption. But it is also mentioned that “Discretionary” power is conferred on the
Chairpersons (Municipalities, Corporation etc.) for exemption of property tax payment in
particular cases. But there is no clear-cut guideline about the categories or rate for
discretion. Sometimes the concerned authorities get influenced by the political motives. So
option “B” is found to be suitable.

          Dimensions                       Grade                 Change in Grade
7.2.2     All    property A: More than 80% of property holders No change in grade
holders liable to pay liable for land/property tax are listed on
property tax are listed on the tax roll.
the tax roll.
Observation:

330 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       More than 80% property holders in town areas are liable to pay property tax are
        listed on the tax roll. In case of peri-urban areas, the Govt. is giving more emphasis
        towards preparation of new tax rates to generate funds. 13 th Finance Commission
        recommended giving more emphasis to generate internal revenue. Accordingly the
        Govt. is giving priority to prepare new tax structure for new peri-urban areas. The
        concerned urban authorities prepare their new tax rate in consultation with the other
        Municipalities or urban bodies. Generally they consult with the neighbouring
        municipalities or urban bodies.
       One panelist cited an example regarding consulting neighbouring ULBs. The
        Newtown Kolkata Development Authority (NKDA) formed by an administrative
        order from the West Bengal Assembly three months back. Immediately it had started
        to prepare its new tax rate by taking ideas from the existing tax rate of neighbour Salt
        lake Municipality. In this process, it will start to collect tax shortly.
       The panel suggested to consultPanchayat& Rural Development Department for
        getting data regarding the collection of tax for land and building properties by the
        Panchayats in rural areas.

          Dimensions                         Grade          Change in Grade
7.2.3 Assessed property B: Between 70% and 80% of assessed No change in grade
taxes are collected.    land/ property taxes are collected.
Observations:

Currently all Municipal bodies serve notice to every property holders to pay tax as well as
every municipality deputes one staff responsible for particular area for tax collection. As a
result, collection of property tax is regular.

            Dimensions                        Grade                Change in Grade
7.2.4      Receipts    from A: The amount of property taxes No change in grade
property tax exceed the cost collected exceeds the cost of
of collection.               staff in charge of collection by a
                             factor of more than 5.
Observation:

       Regular Tax collection depends upon two factors i.e. Efficiency of serving notice and
        Timely visit to the property holders for tax collection. If both of those factors go well,
        then collection definitely could be regular.
       There is no full proof mechanism to collect tax from the defaulters. Government lacks
        proper infrastructure to pay attention in this direction.
       Data available from State Finance Commission and JnNURM suggest that collection
        of tax varies from Municipality to Municipality, Gram Panchayat to Gram Panchayat.
        In every case, tax collection is higher than cost of collection. On an average, collection
        is more than five times higher than cost of collection.



6.0 Recommendations:

           There is a need for coordination among the different layers of the government in use
            of Market Value Data Base (MVDB) in CORD not only for the purpose of collection of
            stamp-duty revenue/registration fee as currently done, but also for calculation of
            base of property/land tax and land revenue. This will allow for less discretion in
            determination of tax base, which is essential for a transparent and efficient tax
            regime.

331 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
           The discretion used in determination of property tax base and rate as in the present
            system should be reduced. The credible mechanisms should be designed towards
            collection of property taxes from defaulters.



                 Panel 8: Dispute Resolution & Conflict Management

                                             12 April 2014
                                               Landesa
                                     Venue: Landesa Kolkata Office

1.0 The meeting was started with a warm welcome to the panelists by Mr. Pinaki Halder, LGAF-
West Bengal Project Leader and State Director, Landesa, West Bengal and introduction among
each other. He then explained the purpose of the Workshop, and provided an overview of the
LGAF. His presentation focused on the following: (i) global land issues; (ii) overview of land
governance; (iii) purpose of the LGAF (iv) structure, process and methodology of LGAF; and (iv)
Expectations from the panellists in this workshop. He also explained the outline of the
workshop and role of the panellists. After making this brief presentation, he led the discussion
towards opinion of the panellists regarding background note followed by detailed discursive
discussion on Panel 8: Dispute Resolution & Conflict Management.

2.0 Following were the participants of the meeting-

    1) Mr. C. R. Das, Ex-Hon’ble Administrative Member, West Bengal Land Reform &
       Tenancy Tribunal,Govt. of West Bengal
    2) Mr.Sukumar Banerjee, Ex-Administrative Member, West Bengal Land Reform &
       Tenancy Tribunal, Govt. of West Bengal
    3) Mr.KallolChaudhuri, Senior Advocate, Kolkata High Court and WBLRTT
    4) Mr.Hasanul Islam, Independent Consultant, Kolkata
    5) Mr. Pinaki Halder, State Director, Landesa, State Coordinator and Project Team Leader-
       LGAF- West Bengal

Landesa Kolkata team members were also present to aid the uninterrupted flow of the panel
discussion. The names of those present were-

       Mr. Supriya Chattopadhyay, Communications Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
       Mr.SudiptaBiswas, Districts Project Manager, Landesa – West Bengal
       Mr. Debasis Mondal, Office Assistant, Landesa- West Bengal

3.0 The Expert Investigator briefly elaborated the background information regarding this panel
and invited feedback from the panelists. One panelist asked to define ‘conflict’. Expert
Investigator explained the meaning, scope and nature of conflict resolution to the panelists.
Panelists were also briefed about the level and pattern of conflict and also different forum for
conflict resolution. He explained the role of West Bengal Land Reform and Tenancy Tribunal, its
function and relation with other institutions.

3.1 In this context one panelist raised the question on relevance of Sec.6(3) of West Bengal
Estate Acquisition Act 1953. Expert Investigator and other panelists held a detailed discussion
on the issue. Provision of conflict resolution in different Acts especially WBEA Act and WBLR
Act were discussed in details.

3.2 All panelists opined that the information given in the background note is accurate, pertinent
and justified and addressed the issues of conflict resolution in the context of West Bengal quite
effectively.
332 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
4.0 After detailed discussion on background note, discussion was carried out on justification of
dimension wise ranking and its explanation. The panel has two indicators: (1) Assignment of
responsibility and (2) the share of land affected by pending conflict is low and decreasing. There
are four dimensions under Indicator 1 and three dimensions under Indicator 2. Each dimension
has four gradations-ranked by the panel from A to D. The dimensions were explicitly discussed
in great detail to get the panelists’ inputs to incorporate changes in the gradations and analysis
and to incorporate their suggestions or policy level recommendation. The major observation
from the panel discussion, suggestion for necessary changes or modification in the explanation
and policy level recommendations are given below.

Indicator 1: Assignment of Responsibility
      Dimensions                             Grade                   Change in Grade
8.1.1. There is clear A: There are no parallel avenues for No change is proposed
assignment               of conflict resolution or, if parallel
responsibility for conflict avenues exist, responsibilities are
resolution.                 clearly assigned and widely known
                            and explicit rules for shifting from one
                            to the other are in place to minimize
                            the scope for forum shopping.
Observation:

       The Expert investigator explained the nature of dispute and when it may arise. He
        continued that there are specific provisions in the respective Acts like WBEA and
        WBLR Act to address those issues. The State has clear guidelines for resolving
        conflicts or objections.
       Referring to the specific provisions in the relevant Act and process of dispute
        resolution through government machinery other panelists fully agreed that there is
        clear assignment of responsibility of conflict resolution in the land laws of West
        Bengal. Hence all agreed to rank the dimension as A.
       Panelists suggested that mechanism should be developed in such a way that
        maximum number of cases can be settled at the lower level. It can reduce the
        pressure at higher level resulting speedy dispute resolution. For the purpose,
        government may take appropriate measure to build the capacity of the field level
        officials and / or recruit sufficient number of staff at the field level.

Dimensions                Grade                             Change in Grade
8.1.2 Conflict resolution A: Institutions for providing a No change is proposed
mechanisms are accessible first   instance   of    conflict
to the public.            resolution are accessible at the
                          local level in the majority of
                          communities.
Observation:

       Referring to the analysis report the Expert Investigator said that there is scope of
        participation of people (i.e. the Raiyats, and other stakeholders) in the process of
        conflict resolution whether it is at the lower level or at the higher level. He cited the
        example of change or alteration in records of rights which is made public during draft
        publication and also during final publication.
       One panelist said that the State has the mechanism which people can easily access. If
        any seek intervention of the government mechanism for conflict resolution, he or she
        can approach the government at local level. The case may be resolved at that very
        level. If it is not possible to resolve the case at that level, it can go to the higher level.
       Considering the fact that government institution at local level is easily accessible to
333 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        the public for conflict resolution, all panelists agreed to rank the dimension as A.
       A suggestion came up from the panel that government may take appropriate measure
        for wide publicity of the availability of service. Organizing awareness camp at grass
        root level or carrying out campaign through media may yield results.

      Dimensions                                Grade                     Change in Grade
8.1.3 Mutually accepted       D: There is no effective informal or local No change in grade.
agreements       reached      dispute resolution system in place that
through         informal      can resolve a significant number of land
dispute       resolution      related disputes effectively.
systems are encouraged.
Observation:

       After explanation of the statement, one panelist said that there is no provision of
        informal dispute resolution in this State because it is not recognized by the formal
        judicial or administrational dispute resolution system in the State.
       One panelist pointed out that in the past there was practice of village level conflict
        resolution related to land. But gradually this system has disappeared because of
        many reasons like lack of faith on village head, intrusion of political biasness, vested
        interest of different stakeholders, lack of updated knowledge of headmen regarding
        land laws etc.
       One panelist said that there is no provision of Nyay (justice) Panchayat in the State.
        And also the political atmosphere is not suitable for informal conflict resolution in
        the State.
       All other panelists agreed to the point that in the context of West Bengal, informal
        dispute resolution mechanism will not be an effective alternative solution. Hence, all
        panelists opined that ranking the dimension as D is justified.

          Dimensions                                Grade              Change in Grade
8.1.4    There    is   an     C: A process exists to appeal rulings on No change in grade
accessible,    affordable     land cases at high cost and the process
and timely process for        takes a long time/ the costs are low but
appealing        disputed     the process takes a long time.
rulings.
Observation:

       Referring to the background note the Expert investigator made a comparative
        analysis of number of cases resolved and average time taken between Civil Court and
        Revenue Court. He concluded that Land Reform & Tenancy Tribunal (LRTT) is very
        fast in resolving disputes compared to Civil Court and it takes around 10 month to
        resolve any cases whereas civil court takes around 2 years.
       Other panelists shared their experience too and agreed to the fact mentioned by the
        Expert investigator.
       One panelist pointed out that because of increase of population and huge pressure on
        man and land ratio, numbers of pending cases are increasing in both cases.
       Other panelists reflected on the data of the Supreme Court shared by the Expert
        Investigator and agreed that the fact is true regarding average time taken by the
        courts. But all agreed that institutions for conflict resolution are easily accessible to
        the public.
       All panelists came to a consensus that expenditure incurred by the people for
        resolving dispute varies because of nature of case and time taken in the court.
        Average cost of resolving dispute is higher in civil court than that of LRTT.
       One panelist suggested vesting power to additional department / institution to settle

334 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        the cases of change of ownership, change of name in the records etc. to resolve the
        cases timely and reduce the cost thereof.
       Another suggestion came up from the panel that government may take initiative to
        make the LRTT fully functional with four benches.
       All panelists agreed to rank the dimension as C unanimously.

Indicator 2: The share of land affected by pending conflicts is low and
decreasing.
         Dimensions                           Grade              Change in Grade
8.2.1 Land disputes B: Land disputes in the formal court No change in Grade
constitute    a      small system are between 10% and 30% of the
proportion of cases in total court cases.
the formal legal system.
Observation:

After explanation by the Moderator followed by additional information shared by Expert
investigator, all other panelists agreed to the percentage figure of court cases related to land
dispute. They mentioned that their experience also reflects the same figure. Hence all
panelists agreed to rank the dimension as B.

          Dimensions                          Grade                 Change in Grade
8.2.2 Conflicts in the formal A: A decision in a land-related The panel decided to rank
system are resolved in a conflict is reached in the first the dimension as B instead
timely manner.                instance court within 6 months of A.
                              for more than 90% of cases.
Observation:

       The Expert Investigator stated that resolution of dispute through district land
        administration system takes lesser time. But formal legal takes more time because of
        lengthy judicial process coupled with adjournment of cases due to absence of Judge
        or lawyer or parties etc.
       All panelists suggested that the average time taken should be 10 to 12 months (based
        on their long experience with the process) instead of 6 months as mentioned by the
        Expert investigator.
       Panelists suggested that certain specific number of designated officials should be
        placed at the district or lower level who will exclusively deal with land dispute cases.
        This initiative can save the time of conflict resolution.
       Suggestion also came up from the panel that an appropriate monitoring mechanism
        should be developed to track the pending cases in the LRTT and facilitated speedy
        action.

           Dimensions                          Grade              Change in Grade
8.2.3 There are few long- B: The share of long-standing land No change in grade
standing (> 5 years) land conflicts is between 5% and 10% of the
conflicts.                total pending land dispute court cases.
Observation:

       Referring to the analysis report, the Expert Investigator explained the reasons for
        long pendency of cases. Other panelists supported the fact of frequent adjournment
        of hearing due to non-availability of lawyers or judge or parties or due to failure of
        submission of documents etc.
       One panelist pointed out that the decision of the government of West Bengal to
        establish LRTT in the year 1998 has brought about a radical change in the scenario.

335 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        Sometimes, huge numbers of cases are transferred to LRTT in a bulk to reduce the
        load of civil court and make the process faster. But still, there may be certain long
        pending cases because of nature of complication of the cases, involvement of huge
        number of interested parties etc.
       All panelists agreed to the figure proposed by the Expert investigator that there are
        between 5% and 10% of the total pending land dispute court cases which are long
        long-standing. Hence the panelists agreed to rank the dimension as B.



5.0 Recommendations from the panel:

       Mechanism should be developed in such a way that maximum number of cases can be
        settled at the lower level. For the purpose, government may take appropriate action to
        deploy sufficient number of officials at the field level who have judicial acumen. These
        officials should exclusively deal with dispute resolution. Government should also take
        action to enhance the capacity of the existing field level officials. This step will help the
        government to resolve the disputes in a timely manner reducing the cost of settling cases
        and also reduce the burden of settling piled up cases at LRTT or Civil Courts.
       Government may take appropriate measure for wide publicity of the availability of
        service of dispute resolution at community level. Awareness camp at grass root level may
        be organized by the government. Carrying out campaign through media may also yield
        good results.
       Power may be vested to additional department / institution to settle the cases of petty
        disputes like change of ownership, change of name in the records (mutation) etc. to
        resolve the cases timely at the lower level and reduce the cost thereof.
       Another suggestion came up from the panel that government may take initiative to make
        the LRTT fully functional with six or at least four benches.
       Suggestion also came up from the panel that an appropriate monitoring mechanism
        should be developed to track the pending cases in the LRTT and bring it to the notice of
        the government and take appropriate action.


                      Panel 9: Institutional Arrangement and Policies

                                             8 March 2014
                                               Landesa
                                     Venue: Landesa Kolkata Office

1.0 The meeting was started with a warm welcome to the panelists by Mr. Pinaki Halder, LGAF-
West Bengal Project Leader and State Director, Landesa West Bengal in the presence of Mr.
Gregory Rake, outgoing Country Director of Landesa. Taking the advantage of the presence of
Mr. Gregory Rake, Mr. Pinaki Halder requested him to make a small presentation on the work of
Landesa on land issue and its experience of working with government in India. Mr. Rake made a
small presentation before the panelists on “Securing Land Rights for the Poor in India –
Challenges & Way forwards” which was followed bysharing of experiences from the panelists.
After closing that chapter, Mr. Halder ventured into the detailed discursive discussion on Panel
9: Institutional Arrangement and Policies.

2.0 Following were the participants of the meeting-

    1) Mr. K.L. Mukhopadhyay, Member (Retd), WB Land and Land Reform Tribunal
    2) Mr. T.K. Shome, Former DLRS, Govt. of WB
    3) Mr. Anup K. Matilal, Former Officer in L&LR Dept., Govt. of WB
336 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
    4)   Mr. A.K. Chakraborti, Ex-Special Secretary, Board of Revenue, Govt. of WB
    5)   Mr. C.R. Das, Member (Retd), WB Land and Land Reform Tribunal
    6)   Mr. Gregory Rake, India Country Director (outgoing), Landesa
    7)   Mr. Pinaki Halder, State Director, Landesa, State Coordinator and Project Team Leader-
         LGAF- West Bengal

Landesa Kolkata team members were also present to aid the uninterrupted flow of the panel
discussion. The names of those present were-

        Mr. Supriya Chattopadhyay, Communications Manager, Landesa- West Bengal
        Dr. Shyamal Kumar Jana, Districts Manager, Landesa-West Bengal
        Ms. Udita Chatterjee, Research and Documentation Officer, Landesa- West Bengal
        Mr. Debasis Mondal, Office Assistant, Landesa- West Bengal

3.0 Addendum: Second and Third round of panel discussions were held on 12th April 2014 and
17th April 2014 respectively at Landesa Kolkata office. Before going into details about the
dimension analysis and its ranking on both days, the participants were briefed about the
background of the theme, its objective and indicators and dimensions covering the panel. Inputs
were sought from the panelists regarding analysis of the dimensions and justification of ranking.
Suggestions came up from both panels have also been incorporated and certain change in
ranking have also been made accordingly.

3.1 The participants in the second panel discussion were as follows:

    1) Mr. C. R. Das, Ex-Administrative Member, West Bengal Land Reform & Tenancy
       Tribunal, Govt. of West Bengal
    2) Mr. Sukumar Banerjee, Ex-Administrative Member, West Bengal Land Reform &
       Tenancy Tribunal, Govt. of West Bengal
    3) Mr. Kallol Chaudhuri, Senior Advocate, Kolkata High Court and WBLRTT
    4) Mr. Hasanul Islam, Independent Consultant, Kolkata
    5) Mr. Pinaki Halder, State Director, Landesa, State Coordinator and Project Team Leader-
       LGAF- West Bengal

3.2 The participants in the third panel discussion were as follows:

    1) Mr. T. K. Shome, IAS (Retd.), Ex-Secretary and Director, Directorate of Land Record &
       Survey, Govt. of West Bengal
    2) Mr.A. K. Chakraborti, IAS (Retd.), Ex-Secretary, Board of Revenue, Govt. of West Bengal
    3) Mr. S. Banerjee, IAS (Retd.), Ex-Special Secretary, L&LR Department and ex-Member –
       WBLRTT, Govt. of West Bengal
    4) Mr. P. K. Pramanik, DDG-National Informatics Centre, West Bengal
    5) Mr. Pinaki Halder, State Director, Landesa, State Coordinator and Project Team Leader-
       LGAF- West Bengal

4.0 The panel has two indicators as follows:

    1. Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates concerning the regulation and
       management of the land sector are clearly defined, duplication of responsibilities is
       avoided and information is shared as needed.
    2. Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process: policies are formulated
       through a decision-making process that draws on inputs from all concerned. The legal
       framework is non-discriminatory and institutions to enforce property rights are equally
       accessible to all.


337 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
4.1 Under Indicator 1 there are six dimensions and within Indicator 2 there are seven
dimensions. Each dimension has four gradations-ranked by the panel from A to D. The
dimensions were explicitly discussed in great detail to get the panelists’ inputs to incorporate
changes in the gradations and analysis.

4.2 The dimensions under indicator 1 are:

          i.      Land policy formulation, implementation and arbitration are separated to avoid
                  conflict of interest.
         ii.      Responsibilities of the ministries and agencies dealing with land do not overlap
                  (horizontal overlap).
        iii.      Administrative (vertical) overlap is avoided.
        iv.       Land right and use information is shared by public bodies; key parts are regularly
                  reported on and publicly accessible.
         v.       Overlaps of rights (based on tenure typology) are minimal and do not cause friction
                  or dispute.
        vi.       Ambiguity in institutional mandates (based on institutional map) does not cause
                  problems.

4.3The dimensions under indicator 2 are:

          i.      Land policies and regulations are developed in a participatory manner involving all
                  relevant stakeholders.
         ii.      Land policies address equity and poverty reduction goals; progress towards these is
                  publicly monitored.
        iii.      Land policies address ecological and environmental goals; progress towards these is
                  publicly monitored.
        iv.       The implementation of land policy is costed, matched with benefits and adequately
                  resourced.
         v.       There is regular and public reporting indicating progress in policy implementation.
        vi.       Land policies help to improve land use by low-income groups and those who
                  experienced injustice.
    vii.          Land policies proactively and effectively reduce future disaster risk.

5.0 All the dimensions under each of the two indicators were discussed in detail and the final
gradation and recommendations corresponding to the gradations are finalised as follows:

Indicator 1:Clarity of mandates and practice
         Dimensions                            Grade                Change in Grade
9.1.1. Land policy A: In situations that can entail No change in grade
formulation,              conflicts of interest or are sensitive to
implementation and abuse (e.g. transfers of land rights)
arbitration           are there is a clear separation in the roles
separated to avoid of policy formulation, implementation
conflict of interest.     and arbitration.
Observation:

              Expert Investigator stated that there is no ambiguity in law or policy. Land
               administration system is very clear cut under the control of Land & Land Reform
               Department. Land policy is formulated in the department itself at the highest level
               involving Minister in Charge, Principal Secretary to the Department, and other
               higher level officials and inputs are taken from field level officials. Mr.
               K.L.Mukhopadhyay stated that all policy decisions are taken politically (by political

338 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        government/ruling party) which may or may not be in consultation with other
        parties. All policy decisions come through Legislative Assembly by passing
        legislation. He also added that since MLAs are people’s representatives and their
        opinion are taken into consideration, it can be said that all stakeholders are consulted
        in the policy making process.
       Referring to the background note Expert Investigator mentioned about Land
        Acquisition Act, the W.B. L.R. Act, the WBEA Act, the Homestead Act, the Kolkata
        Land Revenue Act and the Forests Acts including the Forests Rights Act are taken in
        to consideration for implementation. For arbitration Forest Act, WBEA Act,
        Homestead Act and WBLR Act are taken into consideration. The dispensations
        provided in the WBEA Act, WBLR Act and the Homestead Act for arbitration are
        quite independent and separated from implementing agencies. Only in case of Forest
        Act, Land Acquisition Act and WBLR Act there are certain overlapping between
        implementation and arbitration.
       Mr. K.L. Mukhopadhyay did not agree with the term ‘conflict of interest’ . He stressed
        that in spite of having separate mechanism conflict of interest does exist. It is the
        duty of the legislator or policy makers to take steps to defuse the tension. Mr. Shome
        differed from his opinion and stated that conflict of interest exists between landlord
        and tenants, between individuals and between state and individuals. EI intervened
        that two types of conflict are there - inter departmental conflict (e.g. Conflict between
        Forest Department and Land Reform Department) and conflict between state and
        individuals. Arbitration is related in the context of transfer of land rights.
       All panelists finally agreed that as far as the state of West Bengal is concerned, LR
        Department has absolute single command over land. There is clear cut separation of
        policy formulation, implementation and arbitration. There is no scope of conflict of
        interest because of overlapping.

    Dimensions                              Grade               Change in Grade
9.1.2 Responsibilities     A: The mandated responsibilities No change in grade
of the ministries and      exercised by the authorities dealing
agencies dealing with      with land governance are non-
land do not overlap        overlapping with those of other land
(horizontal overlap).      sector agencies.
Observation:

       Referring to the background note EI stated that at the government level the domain
        of activities i.e. functions, duties and responsibilities etc., of different departments
        are clearly defined following the ‘Rules of Business’ leaving no or little scope for any
        overlap which may result in functional conflict. He also mentioned that overlapping
        exists to some extent between the function of LR Department and Forest Department
        due to Forest Rights Act. For example, ‘patta’ (land title) is given to the forest
        dwellers by the LR Department but control over forest land lies with Forest
        Department. Hence, there is possibility of conflict. Since the Chief Minister herself is
        in charge of the LR Department and she has been playing proactive role in resolving
        dispute with forest department, the situation has changed. So, functionally there is no
        inter-departmental conflict.
       Mr. Mukhopadhyay stated that being empowered by the verdict of Supreme Court of
        India and as per FRA, forest people have been demanding their record of rights
        (RoR) over the land where they have been cultivating for so many years. And the
        issues are being resolved. So, theoretically there is no functional overlapping but
        practically there may be a few.
       Mr. T.K. Shome shared about some recent development. He mentioned that
        government issued a clear guideline in 2012 on Management of Land where roles of

339 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        different departments / institutes have been clearly defined. Question was raised by
        one panelist whether there is any scope of crossing jurisdiction. Mr. Mukhopadhyay
        answered that Overlapping may only occur in case of the subject stipulated in the
        concurrent list of the Constitution of India.
       One panelist asked whenever any land is handed over to other department like Urban
        Development, Irrigation etc. are they given the right to manage that land fully or not.
        Mr. Mukhopadhyay answered that the role of that department in managing that piece
        of land is clearly ‘defined’.
       All panelists finally agreed to grade it as A because in case of transfer of rights of land
        to other department / institute also the role of that department / institute is clearly
        defined leaving no scope of functional overlapping.
       Data Source: Rules of Business 2012

        Dimensions                        Grade                     Change in Grade
9.1.3 Administrative A:      Assignment    of   land-related No change in grade
(vertical) overlap is responsibilities between the different
avoided.              levels     of   administration    and
                      government is clear and non-
                      overlapping.
Observation:

       Mr. Mukhopadhyay stated that there is absolutely no scope of vertical overlapping.
        There is only single command. Government order for administration is issued by the
        DLRS only, which is executed through collectorates at district level. (Collectorates
        only execute the order of the state government. They act as mere agent, there is no
        separate authority.)
       All other panelists agreed that role of the government functionaries are defined at
        each level. Hence, there is no scope of vertical overlapping.

        Dimensions                              Grade                 Change in Grade
9.1.4 Land right and       B: Information related to rights in No change in grade
use information is         land is available to interested
shared    by    public     institutions     and     although    this
bodies; key parts are      information is available at reasonable
regularly reported on      cost, it is not readily accessible as the
and           publicly     information is not maintained in a
accessible.                uniform way.

Observation:

       One panelist shared that by paying requisite fees certified copies are available from
        the government. The other way of getting information is filing RTI by paying Rs.10/-
        only. Regarding this point Mr. Shome shared that digitized information (maps,
        records etc.) has been made available now in the website.
       Referring to the background note where it has been mentioned that “The different
        government departments or public bodies like municipalities, panchayats etc. do
        maintain inventories of land owned and managed by them” one panelist shared his
        experience of not seeing any such information in certain districts (e.g. Cooch Bihar).
        Another panelist shared that it is not true for all districts. It varies from district to
        district and even institute to institute. There are a number of examples where
        Municipalities or Panchayats are also maintaining records of the land managed by
        them.
       One panelist pointed out that information maintained by parastatal bodies may

340 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        sometimes vary with the information maintained by LR department. Mr.
        Mukhopadhyay shared his experience by citing the example of Kolkata Dhapa land as
        the land was acquired for using as dumping ground only. The Supreme Court held as
        many cases that unused acquired land can be used by the government for other
        public purposes only. In spite of that Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) is selling
        the unused land to private companies as an exhorbitantly high price obtained
        through auction.
       Mr. Mukhopadhyay again pointed out that copy of record given by LR Dept. may
        sometimes vary from the record given by Municipalities. Mutation granted by the LR
        Department is the authentic one because entries in the RoRs carry statutory
        precaution of correctness which Municipal record does not.
       EI pointed out that apart from Municipalities and Panchayats some other
        departments like PWD, Irrigation etc. are also maintaining information of land
        managed by them. But it should be kept in mind that ‘records’ of land maintained by
        LR Department only are public documents.
       Since digitized information (maps, records etc.) are uploaded in the website and it is
        accessible by the public, all panelists agree to the fact that information is available.
        But considering the situation that there are certain gaps in maintaining uniformity in
        information managed by different institutions, panelists decided to grade it as B.

        Dimensions                              Grade                    Change in Grade
9.1.5 Overlaps of          A: The issues identified in the tenure The panel finally ranked it
rights   (based   on       Legal framework and procedures for as ‘B’ in place of ‘A’.
tenure typology) are       land-related matters (incl. renewable
minimal and do not         and subsoil resources) are fully
cause    friction or       consistent and a unified mechanism
dispute.                   for complaint and grievance redress is
                           available in case of overlap.
Observation:

       Mr. Mukhopadhyay said that since land is used throughout the year for multiple
        cropping there is lean period when land can be used for grazing for cattle of the
        community.
       All panelists agreed that the case of friction is not the result of overlapping rights in
        the State.
       Mr. Halder queried about any case of friction in terms of use of land for mining sub-
        soil resources. Mr. Mukhopadhyay and Mr. Shome answered that sub-soil right has
        never been granted to the raiyats who enjoy the right to use the surface land only.
       IE opined that community rights, easement rights and customary rights are legally
        defined; there is no ambiguity. And there is no scope of friction or dispute due to
        overlapping of rights.
       Mr. Mukhopadhyay added that whatever conflicts are there in practice in our State
        are absolutely political in nature (intentionally created by political parties to win the
        favour of a section of people) but there is no conflict in legal framework.
       Panel came to the conclusion that there is no conflict between community rights,
        easement rights and customary rights. There may be some overlapping of rights in
        practice like using cultivable land for grazing purposes during lean season or using
        leased open cast mining area for pastoral purpose. Conflicts arising out of such
        friction are insignificant in number. Most of the cases are settled at local level
        (though there is no uniform procedure for grievance handling or conflict resolution).
        Hence, the panel decided to rank the dimension as B instead of A.

        Dimensions                               Grade                            Change in Grade

341 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
9.1.6 Ambiguity in         B: With minor exceptions, the Grade is changed from B to
institutional              processes     applied      by    public D.
mandates (based on         institutions dealing with land are fully
institutional map)         integrated and consistent.
does      not cause
problems.
Observation:

       One panelist wanted to know the meaning of ‘institutional map’. Mr. Halder and Mr.
        Shome explained that the land which has been transferred to other departments and
        department or agencies who are dealing with lands (managing by themselves).
       Mr. Mukhopadhyay explained that when any land is given to other department it
        becomes the asset of that department; management of that land becomes the
        responsibility of that department which is defined. He added that if any land which
        was given by the LR Department for a particular purpose to other department and if
        such land was not used for that purpose, the land should be relinquished to LR
        Department. There is no scope of ambiguity.
       During third round of panel discussion (17-04-2014) the panel concluded that though
        different public institutions owning land resource maintain register related to land
        owned and managed by them those are pathetically outdated. There is lack of
        coordination between LR Department and other concerned public institutions like
        Panchayat, Municipalities etc. Hence, the panel finally suggested ranking it as ‘D’ in
        place of ‘B’.

Indicator 2:Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process
        Dimension                          Grade                  Change in Grade
9.2.1 Land policies A: A comprehensive land policy exists Grade is changed from A to
and regulations are or can be inferred by the existing B.
developed      in    a legislation, and those affected by
participatory manner decisions were consulted beforehand
involving all relevant and their feedback on the resulting
stakeholders.          policy is incorporated.
Observation:

       The Expert Investigator referred to the awareness camp held during 1970s and 1980s
        among bargadars, landowners, PRI members etc. (stakeholders) and inputs received
        from field level officials for policy formulation (e.g. Operation Barga, amendment of
        Sec. 21B of WBLR Act regarding presumption to be Bargadars etc.). He also cited
        example of recent consultation held between government and representatives from
        industries regarding amendment of Sec. 4A, 4B, 14Z etc.
       Mr. Mukhopadhyay pointed out that the conflict of interest between landlord and
        tenants, owners of the land and bargadars has always been there. But in
        representative democracy the interest of different stakeholders are put forward
        during policy formulation. Though policies are formulated in a participatory manner
        (by representatives from stakeholders) through legislation, it is politically influenced
        by ruling party because they enjoy majority in the assembly. He also added that no
        policy could serve the interest of both parties equally. Referring to the legislation
        (Premises Tenancy Act) in 1956 he claimed that provisions (rent control) were pro-
        tenants. In other state of the country also legislations were pro-tenants. The Supreme
        Court also supported such laws. The result was disastreous. The land lords did not
        maintain the buildings and created huge dead stock. Investment in housing sector
        dried up. Government of India took alarm and set up as many as three expert
        committees to go into this problem and suggests solutions. It again involved a

342 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        consultation process engaging all stakeholders (house owners, tenants, business
        associations, civil societies etc.) to have a balanced view. Since land is a state subject,
        Government of India prepared a model Act and sent to the states for making their
        own laws following the model. After consultation with all stakeholders the Premises
        Tenancy Act of 1997 was enacted.
       Mr. Shome tried to conclude that there may be conflict of interest among different
        stakeholders, but the process of consultation does exist. In most of the cases
        participation of stakeholders are through their elected representatives (through
        MLAs in the Legislative Assembly). Mr. Mukhopadhyay added that it not only
        involves representatives, views of stakeholders are also taken into consideration
        directly. He cited the example of Bengal Tenancy Act. Before passing the legislation a
        draft bill was prepared in 1880 and it was circulated seeking the views of all
        concerned. All other panelists agreed.
       One panelist referred to the role of website where opinion is invited from all section
        of society during drafting any policy. He referred to the Land Acquisition Bill of 2013
        which was uploaded in the website and suggestions were invited from all
        stakeholders.
       All panelists came to the conclusion that although land policies do not exist as such
        on each and every matter such process can be inferred from legislations. In addition
        to that all agreed that there is doubt on whether the suggestion of all stakeholders are
        incorporated in the legislation (because there will always be some sort of conflict of
        interests). One panelist suggested reframing the statements for correct gradation.
        Finally, panelist could not arrive at a consensus. (Majority accepted C while 1-2
        panelists stuck to A.).
       During second round of panel discussion (12-04-2014) panelists agreed that though
        there is no such policy document in the State but there is solid legal framework which
        lays the ground for land policy. But there are certain gaps. For example, existing
        legal framework provides the guideline for use of excess land but illusive about
        payment of compensation regarding land acquisition.
       Panelists concluded that though the process of legislation is more or less
        participatory in nature but the level of participation is not satisfactory. There remains
        doubt whether their feedbacks are incorporated or not. In the past, there was very
        little scope of participation of affected people. Though the practice of putting the
        policy in the website is in place but no one can guarantee the involvement of the
        affected stakeholders through this way. Hence, the panel decided to grade the
        dimension as B instead of A.

Recommendation:

       EI and Mr. Mukhopadhyay stated that WBLR Act and Thika Tenancy Act between
        them cover the tenancy related issues of the entire state in a comprehensive menner.

         Dimensions                            Grade                   Change in Grade
9.2.2    Land    policies     C: Land policies incorporate some No change in Grade
address    equity    and      equity and poverty objectives but
poverty reduction goals;      these are not regularly and
progress towards these is     meaningfully monitored.
publicly monitored.
Observation:

       One panelist wanted to know the implication of the term equity. Mr. Halder
        explained him that the policy should be made in such a way that serves the interest of
        the most marginalized and vulnerable section of the society. He also gave thrust on

343 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       gender equity.
      EI mentioned that recording of bargadars through ‘Operation Barga’ was a step taken
       by the state government to serve the interest of the sharecroppers who are considered
       as most marginalized section in agrarian society. While discussing on the background
       note Mr. Mukhopadhyay objected to giving credit to ‘Operation Barga’ only as a
       measure to record the name of the sharecroppers. He stated that as per data, there
       were o.6 million recorded bargadars already existing before the special drive called
       ‘Operation Barga’ was launched. Hence, EI agreed to change the language as
       “recording of bargadar including Operation Barga”.
     While EI mentioned that land policies incorporated some equity and poverty
       objectives, other panelists opined that no policy decision was taken in favour of
       women in the past. Some policy measures have been taken in recent past.
     All panelists came to a conclusion that though there are some policies to address the
       issues of equity and poverty there is still a gap especially in addressing gender equity.
       There is also lacuna from the government’s end to monitor the implementation of
       policies. For example, in spite of the government notification (1994) to incorporate
       the name of women in land distribution there was hardly any monitoring mechanism
       to ensure it.
         Dimensions                            Grade                        Change in Grade
9.2.3    Land     policies C: Land policies incorporate some No change in grade
address ecological and ecology           and       environmental
environmental        goals; sustainability objectives but these
progress towards these is are not regularly and meaningfully
publicly monitored.         monitored.
Observation:

       EI shared that in Bengal Tenancy Act there was a provision that Zaminders should
        construct, repair and maintain embankment on the side of river to prevent flood and
        soil erosion. He enquired other panelists whether it can be considered as ecological
        measure. Other panelists opined that the purpose of that was to protect land of
        tenants from natural calamities. The spirit was to cast an obligation on the
        Zaminders. Hence it did not serve the ecological or environmental goal. Mr. Halder
        explained that ecological and environmental goal refers to the changes happening in
        land use whether that is adversely affecting the relationship between human welfare
        and environment and policies have shown intention to take care to prevent this.
       Mr. Mukhopadhyay referred to Sec.4C in WBLR Act which provides for not changing
        the character of land used for any purpose and also conservation of wetland, planting
        of sapling after cutting trees, compensatory water body etc.
       One panelist referred to the government circular of 2005-06 from Environment
        Department that prohibits some actions and make provision of penal measure in case
        of violation regarding wetland management in Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC)
        area.
       During second round of panel discussion (12-04-2014), all panelists came to a
        conclusion that during formulation of policies ecological and environmental issues
        were not taken much care of. Though existing legal framework leaves enough scope
        for improvement considering the present scenario, but there are certain provisions of
        law to meet ecological and environmental needs by default. WBLR Act provides for
        addressing certain land issues like management of water bodies, taking care of land
        used for quarry, sand mining etc. Panelists also unanimously agreed that there is no
        meaningful monitoring system of the government. Hence, the panel decided to rank
        it as C.

          Dimensions                               Grade                          Change in Grade

344 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
9.2.4                 The     D: The implementation of land No change in grade
implementation of land        policy is not costed and there is
policy is costed, matched     inadequate budget, resources and
with      benefits    and     capacity to implement the land
adequately resourced.         policy.

Observation:

   Mr. Mukhopadhyay pointed that LR department is one of the biggest budget recipients
    from the government. Mr. Shome opined that though it is true but still budgetary
    provision is not adequate and it is not costed fully. Mr. Shome added that Cost benefit
    analysis has never taken place; ad hoc allotment of budget is made as per requirements
    (e.g. budget allotted for computerization).
   All panelists agreed that item wise cost benefit analysis has never been done.
    Government has not taken it seriously to prepare detailed budget for specific plans. One
    panelist shared that most of the fund from central government has been used for
    infrastructural development of the department only. Recently government has utilized
    budget for computerization.
   When Mr. Mukhopadhyay enquired from other panelists whether due to inadequate
    budget LR Department cannot procure resources to implement policy Mr. Shome
    addressed that it is true. There are huge numbers of posts in the department lying vacant
    due to inadequate budget.
   The house could not arrive at a consensus. One or two panelists preferred to grade it as
    ‘C’ (because they don’t agree that budget is not prepared at all) while rest of the panelists
    preferred to grade it as D (because budget, resources and capacity are inadequate and
    cost benefit analysis is not done).
   During second round of panel discussion Mr. Banerjee and others agreed to the points
    raised in the first round of discussion. They suggested (based on their long experience of
    working with the Government at very senior level) to grade it as ‘D’ considering the fact
    that there is inadequate budget, resources and capacity to implement the land policy and
    implementation of land policy is not costed effectively and efficiently.

        Dimensions                             Grade                   Change in Grade
9.2.5 There is regular    A: Formal land institutions report on Grade is changed from A to
and public reporting      land policy implementation in a C.
indicating progress       regular,        meaningful,       and
in              policy    comprehensive way with reports being
implementation.           publicly accessible.
Observation:

       Mr. Mukhopadhyay pointed out that Minister-in –Charge of the department in her
        budget speech every year refers to all aspects of implementation of the policy in a
        year. How policies are being implemented stated in the budget session.
       One panelist mentioned that monthly statement published from DLRS describes in
        detail how much land has vested, how much vested land has been distributed etc.
        DLRO holds meeting every month and consolidates data of the district and progress
        is reviewed. This progress report is sent to the DLRS.
       Another panelist asked to make it clear whether the report is being made available
        publicly or not. Mr. Shome clarified that it is uploaded in the website and people can
        easily access those.
       Third round of panel discussion (17-04-2014) came up with suggestion that
        department follows a formal reporting system. There is a clearly defined bottom-up
        progress reporting system which is maintained regularly (on a monthly basis). But,

345 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
        this report is not made public on a regular basis. It is also difficult to get the
        information from the department by the public. Even though the budget speech
        contains the details of progress and performance of the department these are not
        publicly accessible, neither the monthly progress report generated by the office of
        DLRS. So, the panel suggested that ranking C is more appropriate than A.

        Dimensions                             Grade                 Change in Grade
9.2.6 Land policies          A: Policy is in place to improve No change in grade
help to improve land         access to and productive use of
use by low-income            assets by poor and marginalized
groups and those who         groups, and is applied in practice
experienced injustice.       and is effective.
Observation:

       Mr. Mukhopadhyay explained the spirit of land reform. If the land is concentrated in
        the hand of few they will enjoy the whole benefit depriving majority of population
        who are directly or indirectly dependant on land. The ceiling limit has enabled the
        government to take away surplus land for distribution among the landless or land
        poor people. Hence, it caters to the need of low-income groups. Additionally, if
        government provides inputs like seeds, fertilizers in subsidized rate to the farmers, it
        will enhance production and more people of low-income group will be benefitted. The
        very purpose of land reform in the state was to create a condition of near equal
        opportunity for all.
       Other panelists shared that land reform policy in West Bengal has enabled access to
        (e.g. irrigation, inputs, institutional credits etc.) and productive use of assetsby the
        poor through redistributive justice. There are a number of schemes / policies like
        Kissan Credit Card, facilities to BPL families, MGNREGA etc. which are directed
        towards the benefit of low-income group and contributing to productive use of assets.
        One panelist added that more 50% of the budget resources in MGNREGA are being
        used for the conservation of irrigation facilities in this state. There are different
        schemes from agriculture department in the state for providing inputs at subsidized
        rate to the marginal farmers (holding land less than one acre).
       One panelist pointed out that the state has only one gap in policy in serving the
        interest of women.Other panelists also agreed to rank it as A but accepted that policy
        should address the gender equiety adequately.

Recommendation:

Gender issues should be incorporated in the policy. And mechanism should be developed to
monitor the implementation of the policy.

          Dimensions                        Grade                    Change in Grade
9.2.7    Land     policies C: Policy is in place to prevent Suggested to change it
proactively           and settlement in high risks areas but from C to D.
effectively reduce future which is not enforced.
disaster risk.
Observation:

       One panelist referred to the risk associated with indicrimante changes in the use of
        land.He cited an example that KMC has clear policy on wetland management. It does
        not permit infrastructure development in wetland, it rather provides for protection
        and restoration of wetlands. But there is shortcoming in implementation of this
        policy.

346 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
       The EI referred to explanatory note and raised the issue of settlements in areas with
        perceptible risks such as along open drains, under high tension wires, along river
        banks and in the flood prone plains, near sites where hazardous materials are
        disposed off and so on, especially in the cities. He wanted to know from other
        panelists whether there is any comprehensive policy to prevent this. Mr. Halder
        shared a recent development. There is an initiative to develop a land use plan for the
        entire state. Seven districts have already land use maps. They have also identified the
        land which can be used for the purpose of urbanization. Chief Minister declared that
        we are developing a comprehensive Land Use Policy but still it is not in place. Once it
        is in place, it will allow us to make proper plan on which land to be used and which to
        be left creating scope for preventing settlement in hazardous areas.
       Mr. Mukhopadhyay referred to the Town and Country Planning rules made in 2008-
        10 detailing land use plan for KMDA area. The minimum required area of land for the
        development of township has been fixed under the rule. The rule also prohibits
        construction of residential building in high risk zones.
       Mr. Halder shared another recent development. He referred that Prof. Shantanu Jha
        of Kalyani University took initiative to involve National Remote Sensing Agency
        (NRSA) to take satellite images of Kalyani Municipality. He has prepared a detailed
        urban land use plan for the first time in West Bengal. He is trying to disseminate
        information through different forums to show the most vulnerable areas (satellite
        images) which were marshy lands or wasteland a few hundred years before. He is
        appealing to the government to protect those areas by rehabilitating those families
        who have been living there.
       All panelists agreed that there is policy but there is no political will to implement it
        effectively. Clandestine arrangement with political leaders and irregular practices in
        government departments are the stumbling blocks in enforcing those policies.
       During second round of panel discussion (12-04-2014), Mr. Islam shared a recent
        development that land use plan has been prepared by the government in 2007 for
        urban areas. But he along with others agreed that the State does not have any
        comprehensive Land Use Policy.
       Mr. Banerjee pointed out that though there is provision for restriction of land use
        pattern in three hilly Sub-divisions of Darjeeling district as per WBLR Act (Sec.4A),
        but it is silent about other high risk zone. For example, in spite of being located in
        high risk zone (coal mine area), Asansol, Raniganj etc. cities are developing day by
        day. He also added that whatever has so far been done has been by executive order.
        There is no legislative or policy framework to regulate the land use in order to
        prevent future disaster risk. Hence, the panel agreed to rank it as ‘D’ instead of ‘C’.




347 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
Annexure 3: Expert Investigators and Panel Composition

                                    List of Expert Investigators

    Proposed               Name and          General                       Specific justification for
   Panel/LGAF               position     Qualifications,                   choice & other remarks
  thematic area                        expertise & years of
                                            experience
Recognition     and Anil          K. M.Sc in Physics from                Last position held –
respect for existing Chakraborti,    Calcutta University,                Secretary,    Board     of
rights               IAS (Retd)      expertise in rural land             Revenue, one of the most
                                     tenure, drafting land               knowledgeable persons in
                                     legislations        and             the state in different
                                     implementing       land             aspects of land tenure and
                                     reforms policies                    land reforms

Land Use Planning, Anup        Kr. M.A.     in   Modern                  10 years’ experience in
Management and Motilal, WBCS History, overall 33                         land administration and
Taxation           (Exe) Retd.     years of experience in                management, served as
                                   rural    development,                 Project Manager in Kokata
                                   land reforms, urban                   Urban Services for Poor
                                   land use                              project (DFID supported)
                                                                         with focus on urban land
                                                                         use, planning and taxation
Forestry/               Dr.        Atanu Ph.        D        in          Last position – Principal
Commons land            Kumar      Raha, Environmental                   Chief    Conservator     of
                        IFS (Retd)       Science, M. Sc. in              Forests, West Bengal,
                                         Physics,          Post          introduced Joint Forest
                                         graduate in Forestry,           Management          through
                                         35 years of forest              people’s participation
                                         management
                                         experience
Transfer of Public      Dr. Pranab Kr. Ph. D in Economics                Currently         Associate
Land to Private         Das              from         Jadavpur           Professor of Economics,
Use                                      University, 20 years’           Centre for Studies in Social
                                         research and teaching           Science,
                                         experience          in
                                         macroeconomics
Management       of     T. K. Shome, B.Sc. (Hons), MA, 36                Present – Director of Land
Public Land and         IAS (Retd)       years of experience in          Records & Surveys & Ex-
Public Provision of                      rural    development,           officio Secretary to L&LR
Land Information                         land administration,            Department. Lead role in
                                         computerization     of          implementation             of
                                         records,                        computerization of land
                                                                         records, integration of land
                                                                         reforms set up with
                                                                         registration offices



Dispute Resolution Chittaranjan              B. Sc. with honours in Last position – Member of
and       Conflict Das, IAS (Retd)           Statistics, 25 years of West     Bengal    Land
Management                                   experience in land Reforms Tenancy Tribunal
348 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
                                  survey,                                (2010-2011)
                                  modernisation,                         Land dispute resolving in
                                  management,         and                the capacity of District
                                  land related training                  Magistrate
                                  of officers
Policies       and Kanai      Lal B.A.     (Hons.)     in                Last position – Member of
Institutional      Mukhopadhyay, Economics, 30 years                     the West Bengal Land and
Arrangements       WBCS (Retd.)   of experience in land                  Land Reforms Tenancy
                                  reforms             and                Tribunal       (1998-2003),
                                  settlement,        land                before    that    Secretary,
                                  administration      and                Board of revenue, Govt. of
                                  dispute resolution at                  West Bengal
                                  higher level
State Coordinator  Pinaki Halder, M.A in Sociology, B.                   State Director, Landesa/
                   Ex -WBCS (Exe) Sc. in Chemistry, 25                   Rural        Development
                                  years of experience in                 Institute
                                  rural     development,
                                  land           reforms
                                  implementation


                                       Composition of Panels

 Panel       Experts name                     Position                  Organization/ institution of
                                                                                residence
          Mr. Anil Kumar           Ex-Secretary                      Board of Revenue, Govt. of West
          Chakroborty,   IAS                                         Bengal
          (Retd.)
          Mr. K. P. Sandilya,      Ex.    Special       Secretary, L&LR Department
          IAS (Retd.)              GoWB
          Mr. Tapan Kumar          Ex- Director                      Directorate of Land Records and
          Shome, IAS (Retd.)                                         Survey (DLRS), Government of
                                                                     West Bengal

          Prof.       Apurba Prof of Political Science               Netaji Institute of Asian Studies
          Mukhopadhyay
Panel 1




          Mr.        Sukumar Ex- Member                              WBLRTT, Government of West
          Banerjee,       IAS                                        Bengal
          (Retd.)
          Dr.        Biprodas Professor                              Vivekananda Institute of Science
          Bhattacharjee-                                             and Technology, West Bengal

          Swati Bhattacharjee      Chief Editor (Rural)              Ananda Bazar Patrika

          Ms. Reshmi Ganguly Program Officer                         Action Aid Association (Kolkata
                                                                     Region)

          Mr. Pinaki Halder        State Director                    Landesa, West Bengal

          Dr. Atanu Kumar Ex-Principal               Chief Govt. of West Bengal
Panel




          Raha, IFS (Retd.)   Conservator of Forests
  2




          Dr.Kulandaivel, IFS IFS                          DCF (HQ), Govt. of West Bengal


349 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
          Mr.             Atonu Managing Director                      W.B. Tribal Development Credit
          Chatterjee,     WBCS                                         Cooperative, Nodal officer for
          (Exe.)                                                       FRA

          Mr. Arindam Dutta, Addl. District Magistrate                 District Land & Land Reforms
          WBCS (Exe.)                                                  Officer, West Medinipur

          Prof.       Apurba Professor      of Political               Netaji Institute for Asian Studies
          Mukhopadhyay        Science     and  Political
                              Studies
          Mr. Ashoke Kr. Programme Officer                           Action Aid India
          Nayar
          Mr. Sashi Bhushan Manager cum Field Officer                LAMP, Bankura
          Praharaj
          Mr.          Rathin Accountant                             LAMP, Belagaria
          Mahapatra
          Mr. Pinaki Halder   State Director                         Landesa, West Bengal

          Mr. Anup K. Matilal,     Ex-Joint Secretary                Urban Development Dept., Govt.
                                                                     of WB
          Prof.    Annapurna       Prof. Public Policy               Indian Institute of Management,
          Shaw                                                       Calcutta
Panel 3




          Prof.       Nirmala      Ex. Prof. of Economics            Centre for Studies in Social
          Banerjee                                                   Sciences, Kolkata
          Mr. Saibal Thakurta      Chief Urban Planner               KMDA
          Ms.          Rashmi      Program Officer                   Action Aid Association (Kolkata
          Ganguly                                                    Region)
          Mr. Pinaki Halder        State Director                    Landesa, West Bengal

          Mr. Tapan Kumar Ex- Director                               Directorate of Land Records and
          Shome, IAS (Retd.)                                         Survey (DLRS), Government of
                                                                     West Bengal
          Mr. Anil Kumar Ex-Secretary                                Board of Revenue, Govt. of West
          Chakroborty,    IAS                                        Bengal
          (Retd.)
          Mr.         Sukumar Ex- Member                             WBLRTT, Government of West
Panel 4




          Banerjee,       IAS                                        Bengal
          (Retd.)
          Mr. P. K. Pramanik  Deputy Director General                National Informatics Centre, West
                                                                     Bengal

          Mr. Pinaki Halder        State Director                    Landesa, West Bengal

          Dr. Jayanta Munsi        District Project Manager          Landesa – West Bengal

          Dr. Pranab Kr. Das       Associate Professor            Centre for Studies in Social
                                                                  Science,
          Mr. Shyama Prasad Ex-OSD                                West      Bengal      Industrial
Panel 5




          Mukherjee                                               Development Corporation
          Sukumar Banerjee  Ex.      Advisor,                Land WBIDC
                            Acquisition
          Mr. Sunil Nair    Chief Marketing Officer                  Bengal      Aerotropolis       Projects
                                                                     Limited
350 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
          Dr.    Vivekananda Associate Professor                      Department      of   Economics,
          Mukherjee                                                   Jadavpur University
          Mr. Pinaki Halder  State Director                           Landesa, West Bengal
          Mr. Tapan Kumar Ex- Director                                Directorate of Land Records and
          Shome, IAS (Retd.)                                          Survey (DLRS), Government of
                                                                      West Bengal
          Mr. Anil Kumar            Ex-Secretary                      Board of Revenue, Govt. of West
          Chakroborty,    IAS                                         Bengal
          (Retd.)
Panel 6




          Mr.         Sukumar       Ex.      Advisor,        Land WBIDC
          Banerjee,       IAS       Acquisition
          (Retd.)
          Mr. P. K. Pramanik,       Deputy Director General           National Informatics Centre, West
                                                                      Bengal

          Mr. Pinaki Halder         State Director                    Landesa, West Bengal
          Dr. Jayanta Munsi         District Project Manager          Landesa – West Bengal

          Mr. P. K. Pramanik,       Deputy Director General           National Informatics Centre, West
                                                                      Bengal

          Mr. Sabyasachi Roy, Ex. Inspector General                   Board of Revenue, GoWB
          Dr.    Vivekananda Associate Professor                      Department     of    Economics,
Panel 7




          Mukherjee                                                   Jadavpur University
          Mr. Anup K. Matilal Ex-Joint Secretary                      Urban Development Dept., Govt.
                                                                      of WB
          Mr. Pinaki Halder         State Director                    Landesa, West Bengal

          Dr. Jayanta Munsi         District Project Manager          Landesa – West Bengal

          Mr.     Chittaranjan      Ex-Member                         WBLRTT, Govt. of West Bengal
          Das, IAS (Retd)
          Mr.        Sukumar        Ex- Member                        WBLRTT, Government of West
          Banerjee,        IAS                                        Bengal
Panel 8




          (Retd.)
          Mr.            Kallol     Senior Advocate                   Kolkata High Court and WBLRTT
          Chowdhury
          Mr. Hasanul Islam         Social Development Expert         Independent Consultant, Kolkata

          Mr. Pinaki Halder         State Director                    Landesa, West Bengal

          Mr.   Kanai     Lal Ex-Member                               WBLRTT, Govt. of West Bengal
          Mukhopadhyay,                                               and Ex-Secretary, Board of
          WBCS (Retd.)                                                revenue, Govt. of West Bengal
          Mr. Tapan Kumar Ex- Director                                Directorate of Land Records and
          Shome, IAS (Retd.)                                          Survey (DLRS), Government of
Panel 9




                                                                      West Bengal
          Mr. Anup K. Matilal       Ex-Joint Secretary                Urban Development Dept., Govt.
                                                                      of WB
          Mr. Anil Kumar Ex-Secretary                                 Board of Revenue, Govt. of West
          Chakroborty,     IAS                                        Bengal
          (Retd.)
          Mr.     Chittaranjan Ex-Member                              WBLRTT, Govt. of West Bengal
351 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
         Das, IAS (Retd)
         Mr. Gregory Rake          India Country          Director Landesa, India
                                   (outgoing)

         Mr.        Sukumar        Ex- Member                        WBLRTT, Government of West
         Banerjee,       IAS                                         Bengal
         (Retd.)
         Mr.           Kallol      Senior Advocate                   Kolkata High Court and WBLRTT
         Chowdhury
         Mr. Hasanul Islam         Social Development Expert         Independent Consultant, Kolkata
         Mr. Pinaki Halder         State Director                    Landesa, West Bengal




Annexure 4: Government Orders


                                         Attached in pdf format




352 | P a g e L a n d G o v e r n a n c e A s s e s s m e n t F r a m e w o r k – W e s t B e n g a l
