            IMPLEMENTATION COMPLETION AND RESULTS MEMORANDUM
                                 Thailand
                          IDF Grant TF-99480 for
    Strengthening quality assurance and performance excellence in Thai
                       higher education – P125572

                                       Data Sheet

A. Basic Information
ICM Date:                                   01/04/2016
Region :                                    EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country:                                    Thailand
Trust Fund Name:                            Strengthening quality assurance and
                                            performance excellence in Thai higher
                                            education
Project ID:                                 P125572
TF Number:                                  TF-99480
Grant Amount:                               USD 200,000.00
Disbursed Amount:                           USD 102,664.93
Cancellation Amount:                        USD 97,335.07
Recipient:                                  GOVERNMENT OF THAILAND
Implementing Agency (ies):                  Office of Higher Education Commission
Other Donors/External Partners:


B. Key Dates
               Process                     Original Date          Revised / Actual Date(s)

Approval:                         02/15/2011                  03/31/2011
Effectiveness:                                                01/30/2015
Restructuring(s):
Operational Closing:              01/30/2015                  01/30/2015


C. Project Team Members
                 Title                          At ICM                   At Approval

Country Director:                 Constantine Chikosi          Ulrich Zachau
Practice Manager/Manager:         Harry Anthony Patrinos       Harry Anthony Patrinos
Project Team Leader:              Lars M. Sondergaard          Lars M. Sondergaard
ICM Regional Coordinator:         Xiuru Huang
Procurement Specialist :          Sirirat Sirijaratwong        Sirirat Sirijaratwong
Financial Management Specialist : Malarak Souksavat            Malarak Souksavat
LOA Specialist :
Legal Counsel :
D. Ratings Summary
D.1 Performance Rating (ICM)
Overall Grant Performance
Relevance                                                       Moderately Satisfactory
Efficacy                                                        Satisfactory
Efficiency                                                      Moderately Unsatisfactory
Overall Outcome Performance:                                    Moderately Satisfactory
Risk to Development Outcome (Sustainability):                   Low or Negligible
Overall Outcome Performance
Bank Performance                                                Moderately Satisfactory
Recipient Performance                                           Moderately Satisfactory


D.2 Bank and Recipient Performance Rating
           Bank                   Ratings                  Recipient                  Ratings
Ensuring Quality at       Moderately Satisfactory                              See Overall Outcome
                                                    Government:
Entry:                                                                         Performance
Quality of Supervision:   Moderately Satisfactory   Implementing               See Overall Outcome
                                                    Agency/Agencies:           Performance



E. Results Framework Analysis
Program Development Objective (from Program Document):
Link to CAS and/or ESW (core diagnostics, e.g., CPAR, CFAA, PER, CEM, etc.), and relationship to
Bank operations
  The development objective of this grant is to enhance the capacity of the Office of Higher Education
Commission (OHEC) in the area of quality assurance and performance excellence in higher education.

Revised Program Development Objective
(if any, as approved by the original approving authority):


PDO Indicator(s)

 PDO Indicator 1              Operational Manual for the assessment of performance
                              excellence
                              Measurements (Number or Text)       Date
 Baseline Value               Only an English version of the Baldrige    09/30/2011
                              Performance Excellence Criteria
                              existed.
 Original Target Values       The Operational Manual was translated      07/15/2014
 (from approval               into Thai in February 2013. OHEC is
 documents)                   updating it using lesson learns during
                              initial workshop. The manual was used
                              to conduct workshops and guide
                              institutions to conduct their self-
                              assessment reports.
 Formally Revised Target
 Values
Actual Value Achieved      Final EdPEx operational manual              12/30/2014
at Completion or Target    approved by OHEC and fully
Years                      operationalized
Comments
(incl. % achievement)
PDO Indicator 2            OHEC staff and assessors trained in the new performance
                           excellence framework.
                           Measurements (Number or Text)         Date
Baseline Value             None of the OHEC's staff and assessors      09/30/2011
                           are trained in using this the new
                           performance excellence framework.
Original Target Values     More than 70 OHEC staff and assessors       07/07/2014
(from approval             trained in the new performance
documents)                 excellence framework apply skills in
                           assessing 4-5 pilot public research
                           universities.
Formally Revised Target    More than 70 OHEC staff and assessors       07/15/2014
Values                     trained in the new performance
                           excellence framework apply skills in
                           assessing 4-5 pilot public research
                           universities.
Actual Value Achieved      71 OHEC staff and assessors trained in      01/30/2015
at Completion or Target    the new performance excellence
Years                      framework apply skills in assessing 4-5
                           pilot public research universities.
Comments
(incl. % achievement)
PDO Indicator 3            Public universities assessed using the new performance
                           excellence framework.
                           Measurements (Number or Text)         Date
 Baseline Value            EdPEx is only known to a few medical        09/30/2011
                           schools in Thailand.
 Original Target Values    4-5 public universities use EdPEx           12/31/2013
 (from approval            framework.
 documents)
 Formally Revised Target
 Values
 Actual Value Achieved     21 Faculties in 5 public universities use   01/30/2015
 at Completion or Target   EdPEx.
 Years
 Comments
 (incl. % achievement)



F. Ratings of Project Performance in Progress Reports:
No.      Date               DO             IP             Actual
       Archived                                       Disbursements
                                                          (USD)
 1    02/28/2012        Moderately     Moderately          0.00
                        Satisfactory   Satisfactory
 2    03/19/2013        Satisfactory   Moderately       40000.00
                                       Satisfactory
 3    03/03/2014        Satisfactory   Moderately       63893.05
                                       Satisfactory
 4    08/27/2015        Satisfactory   Moderately      108600.95
                                       Satisfactory



G. Restructuring (if any)
H. Disbursement Graph
                   IMPLEMENTATION COMPLETION AND RESULTS MEMORANDUM
                                         Thailand
                                  IDF Grant TF-99480 for
   Strengthening quality assurance and performance excellence in Thai higher education –
                                         P125572


1.Grant Description, Development Objective and Design

1.1 Original Development Objective (DO) (as approved)

DO: The development objective of this grant was “to enhance the capacity of the Office of
Higher Education Commission (OHEC) in the area of quality assurance and performance
excellence in higher education.”

Three results indicators were designed to track this objective:
    1) A full operational manual for the assessment of performance excellence prepared and
        approved by OHEC;
    2) 50 OHEC staff and assessors trained in the new performance excellence framework.;
        and
    3) Public Universities assessed using the new excellence framework.

Short description:
Since Thailand's Education Reform in 1999, universities have been required by law to put in
place internal and external quality assurance systems. With the rapid increase in numbers of
universities, OHEC has been focusing on putting in place internal quality assurance, focusing on
“minimum standards” for universities. However, there has been a long overdue need to provide
universities with more comprehensive tools to strengthen their internal quality assurance, and
helping them to identify their strengths and weaknesses. With this in mind, OHEC did some
groundwork a few years ago and selected the world-renowned Malcolm Baldrige Quality
Framework, a tool to help universities strengthen the way they run their institutions by focusing
on seven key dimensions of management (e.g. Leadership, Strategic Planning, results, etc.). In
Thailand, this tool is known as EdPEx.

In 2011, OHEC approached the World Bank (WB) to help introduce this tool in the Thai higher
education system: (i) focusing on providing an operational manual for how to use the tool and
(ii) by training university staff in the use of the tool as well as“assessors” to assess universities
using the criteria provided in the tool. It was agreed that a US$200,000 three-year Institutional
Development Grant (IDF) could help provide funding to train assessors through hands-on/direct
experience with approximately 4-5 universities from a pool of nine leading research universities
selected by OHEC. The grant became effective on January 30, 2012 and closed three years later.

Upon completion of the project, it was envisioned that OHEC would share best practices,
conduct a benchmarking exercise, set up a special unit for performance excellence in higher
education, and provide awareness raising activities for university senior management in the
area of quality assurance and performance excellence. Furthermore, it was envisioned that the
performance excellence efforts would create stronger links between research universities and
industry.


                                                 1
1.2 Revised Development Objective (as approved by RIC) and reasons/justification
The development objective was not revised.

1.3 Link to Country Assistance Strategy (CAS)

The IDF grant supported the second pillar of the Interim Strategy Note FY2011-2012 CAS (FY03-
05) to support Thailand's effort to broaden its economic competitiveness and strengthen
institutional capacity, in this case OHEC and the universities). Thailand's level of human capital
development was (and still is) viewed as a constraint to increasing competitiveness. In the area
of education, there are indications that the overall quality and relevance of education in
Thailand is declining relative to other Asian countries. This is borne out in notable shortages of
skilled labor, a general mismatch between labor supply and demand, and low levels of
innovations among Thai firms.

Activities funded by this grant were designed to respond directly to the Government's desire to
sustain its competitiveness. Thailand needs an economy where science, technology and
engineering are integrated into the production process and where creativity, knowledge and
design capability are embodied in well-educated skilled workers who are the main source of
national prosperity. Making this transition will require improving the overall effectiveness of the
university and performance excellence is at the heart of this improvement. As such the proposal
was to contribute to improving quality of higher education, promoting accountability and good
governance. An enhanced self-assessment process to identify maturity levels of universities
according to their specific contexts would also allow for better targeted World Bank support.

1.4 Main Beneficiaries
(Original and revised, briefly describe the “primary target group”, as well as any other
individuals and organizations who benefited from the Grant)

The main beneficiaries were the staff at OHEC and the 21 faculties (and the institutions they
represented) and the individuals (approximately 70) involved in the training supported by this
grant.

1.5 Grant Components

        1) Component 1: Strategic Technical Assistance (cost US$ 140,000)

This component was designed to train OHEC staff, assessors and 4-5 research universities in the
effective use of EdPEx (using IDF funds to hire local and international consultants).

Expected outputs and outcomes:
    Trained individuals understand and support the use of the EdPEx framework
    An operational manual developed, tested and formalized as an instrument to eventually
       be used by all universities in carrying out a self-assessment.
    Number of OHEC staff and assessors trained in the new framework
    Number of research universities assessed under the EdPEx performance excellence
       framework.



                                                2
     2) Component 2: Awareness Raising to Promote Performance Excellence Framework and
Self Assessment: (Cost US$60,000)

This component was designed to build on activities under Component 1 to allow OHEC (with the
help of consultants hired by the IDF grant) to help raise awareness of the EdPEx performance
excellence framework and the self-assessment process amongst Thai universities.

This awareness-raising was envisioned to be done through a series of workshops with
management and staff of both public and private universities.

Expected outputs and outcomes:
    Establishment of a performance excellence system with faculties initiating “self-
       assessments” as an integral part of that system.

1.6 Revised Components (if restructured)
None

1.7 Other significant changes
(In design, scope and scale, implementation arrangements, schedule, and funding allocations)

The biggest design change was not hiring local consultants, as envisioned at the design stage.
This decision resulted in less-than-planned disbursements. One local consultant was hired and
worked as a project coordinator at OHEC for four months but when this person quit, no new
person was hired as a replacement.

As a result, by the end, only 54 percent of the grant was used – the bulk of which was used to
finance an international specialist. The decision to only use half of the IDF resources was OHEC’s
and did not affect the achievement of the development objectives. Early in the project, OHEC
decided that it could meet the objectives laid out in this grant while relying more on its own
resources and that of the universities who participated.

More specifically, OHEC decided to use less IDF resources because it struggled to identify and
hire two local consultants envisioned to be hired using IDF resources: a consultant who was to
have worked as project coordinator in OHEC and a local expert who was expected to work hand-
in-hand with the international consultant. After several unsuccessful recruitment attempts,
OHEC decided to move forward without a project coordinator (using instead its own staff) and
without a local expert, setting up instead a local “committee”, consisting of eminent experts
providing their time for free, or for small “speaker fees” at events.

While this implied spending less of the IDF grant, as will be discussed below, both decisions
turned out to have helped make the project a success.

2. Key Factors Affecting Implementation and Outcomes
(Describe)

Two factors played an important role in affecting both implementation and outcomes:
   1) The design of the grant was strong, having centered it on the preparation of an
       “operational manual” (for how to use EdPex) that would gradually improve during


                                                3
        training. This ensured that an internationally renowned instrument could be tailor-made
        to Thailand while, from the outset, making clear where the project was heading.

    2) The second factor was the strong interest and ownership of OHEC and the faculties
       involved. One example of this high level of ownership was that OHEC more than
       doubled the resources for this work (e.g. to finance part of the workshop costs) by using
       its own (non-IDF) resources. Throughout the project, OHEC staff were intimately
       involved in managing this project (possibly as a result of not being able to identify a local
       consultant to work as a project coordinator), providing leadership and ensuring that the
       activities were fully aligned with OHEC’s other work. Moreover, because a local expert
       consultant was not hired, OHEC, instead, had to rely on academics providing their inputs
       and leadership on a voluntary basis. This seem to have resulted in a better outcome,
       reflected in more ownership of the new tool.

3. Assessment of Outcomes
(Ratings are available in ICM Data Sheet)

Rating Summary
1. Performance Rating (ICM)
Overall Grant Performance
Relevance                                               Moderately Satisfactory
Efficacy                                                Satisfactory
Efficiency                                              Moderately Unsatisfactory
Overall Outcome Performance:                            Moderately Satisfactory
Risk to Development Outcome (Sustainability):           Low or Negligible
Overall Outcome Performance
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
Recipient Performance                                   Moderately Satisfactory

3.1 Relevance of Objectives
(Relevance of grant objectives in relation to country needs/priorities and Bank strategies)
Comments:

Given Thailand’s need to upgrade its higher education sector, the PDO remained highly relevant
throughout the project (and continues to be relevant).

In terms of relevance for the Bank’s strategies: a Systematic Country Diagnostics exercise has
recently been launched to inform a new Country Partnership Framework.

3.2 Efficacy
(Extent to which the development objectives have been achieved)
Comments:

The development objective was “to enhance the capacity of the Office of Higher Education
Commission in the area of quality assurance and performance excellence in higher education.”
The PDO was fully met to the extent that the three results indicators (tracked during the course
of the project) captured that objective. All of these indicators were met, or exceeded:



                                                 4
First indicator: a fully operational manual for the assessment of performance excellence has
been prepared and approved by OHEC. Fully achieved.

Second indicator: 50 OHEC staff and assessors trained (and shown to apply skills learn) in the
new performance excellence framework. Fully achieved: Throughout this project, a total of 5
workshops (for each cohort of universities) have been held, training more than 70 assessors (in
this new approach). A final workshop was conducted in December 2015.

Third indicator: Lessons learned from the use of EdPEx framework in 4-5 public research
universities documented for further improvement prior to sharing with the remaining
universities. Achieved: Reflecting lessons learned from workshops, OHEC has revised the
“Operation Manual” which will be used to conduct future workshops and guide future
institutions in using the EdPEx tool.

In addition to the stated results, the IDF grant proposal also hinted at more ambitious results
related to “enhancing the capacity of OHEC in the area of quality assurance and performance
excellence”, namely: OHEC would conduct a benchmarking exercise, and set up a special unit for
performance excellence in higher education. And it was envisioned that the performance
excellence efforts would create stronger links between research universities and industry. Since
no indicators were identified to track progress on these dimensions, it is difficult to judge what
progress was made during the IDF. However, by the end of the IDF, there were no
“benchmarking exercises” and there was no special unit established; rather the work on EdPex is
being done alongside other core activities.

3.3 Efficiency
(Cost effectiveness, e.g. benefits and costs compare with the expectations when grant was
made, to what extent the grant is adding value to the client country and other partners work
programs in the country/region)
Comments:

The IDF grants role was more important by the knowledge and outside experience it provided as
opposed to the money it brought on the table. Specifically, the grant’s resources helped provide
international experience (the tool itself, and the international expert who was hired to help train
OHEC staff and assessors).

Looking back, though, it would have been far more efficient to bring that knowledge and
consultancy expertise to OHEC through the use of OHEC’s own resources, and possibly
complemented with regular World Bank resources (e.g. through the use of World Bank’s regular
budget and through the use of a technical assistance task), or by contracting the World Bank
directly (under a fee-for-service arrangement).

In the end, OHEC only ended up spending a total of US$102,664.93 (from the IDF grant) over
three years, a process which required an inordinate amount of additional work on their side (to
get training in Client Connection, learn Bank procurement rules, learn how to set up a
designated account, make withdrawals, replenish the account, prepare interim financial reports,
learn how to account for bank transaction fees and the exchange rate, get auditor signoff, etc.)
and, correspondingly, work to provide that support on the World Bank’s side. To the extent that


                                                5
this work built “capacity” in OHEC to improve their own project management, this was useful
(and in line with the PDO of the grant). However, given the differences in systems, more often
than not the capacity build was on how the Bank’s systems worked. For a small, one-time
engagement of US$102,664.93, this time could have been better spent on the client and on the
World Bank’s side.

3.4 Overall Outcome Performance Rating
(Combining relevance, efficacy and efficiency)
Comments:

Overall, the outcome was moderately satisfactory. All the activities under the grant were
carried out successfully and the results indicators – as spelled out at the outset – were fully
achieved.

It was not, however, an efficient way of providing this knowledge and technical assistance.
Asking an upper middle income client to become proficient with World Bank procedures to
execute a one-time grant of US$200,000 caused a lot of scarce time being spent learning and
discussing World Bank procedures – time that should have been spent discussing how to
improve the capacity of OHEC in quality assurance and performance management.

4. Risk to Development Outcome
Comments:
The risk of non-sustainability is rated low. Although OHEC choose not to establish a unit focusing
exclusively on “performance excellence” (as envisioned at the outset), there are strong signs
that EdPex will expand further in the years to come. Below some of these signs are discussed in
more details.

OHEC has prepared a future plan for EdPex for the years 2016-2020. This plan was presented
and discussed twice at various sub-committee meetings on EdPex (in January and February of
2015). And, in April of 2015, OHEC announced this plan to expand EdPex to all 150 universities in
the countries.

Moving forward, OHEC’s aim is to roll out the tool to 10-15 faculties/universities per year,
hoping to reach 75 faculties over five years.

More broadly, OHEC has split up the 150 universities into separate groups (reflecting varying
capacity) and plan on supporting them accordingly.

Moreover, OHEC has prepared for the end of the strong hand-holding provided by the
international consultant (hired by the IDF grant). Specifically, the sub-committee which was
established to work with the international consultant now has a sufficient number of people
who fully understand the tool and will be able – together with OHEC-- to play the role which the
international consultant did during the past three years.

5. Bank and Recipient Performance
(Please describe performance as ire relates to design, implementation and outcome issues
consistently with the ratings assigned in the ICM Data Sheet)



                                                 6
5.1 Bank Performance
(a) Bank Performance in Ensuring Quality at Entry
(i.e., performance through lending phase)
Description:

Moderately satisfactory. The grant was well-designed: it was simple in design, with a
manageable but relevant set of results indicators, and it was well-aligned with CAS and OHEC’s
needs.

(b) Quality of Supervision
(Including fiduciary aspects)
Description:

Moderately satisfactory. No big issues arose during implementation, and OHEC decided to
substitute its own resources for part of the IDF grant so it was a relatively easy task to supervise.

At mid-term, there was a discussion as to whether to cancel the remainder of the grant (in the
face of the difficulties OHEC faced with Bank procedures). However, at that stage, most of the
training had already been provided, the main consultant contract to the international consultant
had already been issued – and the remaining bureaucratic hurdles (submitting IFRs, audits,
closing down account) had to be cleared irrespective of whether the remainder of the grant was
cancelled. As such, the team and counterparts decided to continue with the project, and,
instead opened up for the possibility of a study tour to Singapore (which was completed shortly
before the grant closed).

(c) Rating for Overall Bank Performance
Description:

Moderately satisfactory. The TTL and core team (of procurement and FM) were all based in the
field and provided feedback and support to OHEC, as needed.

5.2 Recipient

(a) Recipient Performance
Description:

No issues.

(b) Implementing Agency or Agencies Performance
Description:

OHEC staff (tasked with implementing the grant) did so with high professionalism, smoothly and
with few issues along the way. A key challenge was getting interim financial reports and audits
prepared and submitted on time.




                                                 7
(c) Rating for Overall Recipient Performance
Description:

Overall rating is moderately satisfactory

6. Lessons Learned
(Both project-specific and of wide general application)

       Strong ownership by the government and, in particular, OHEC facilitated smooth
        implementation.
       Ensuring that an international tool (such as EdPex) is adapted to local circumstances
        worked well by gradually revising the “operational guidelines” of the tool, taking on
        board experience from training and early implementation. Having a results indicator
        that focused on the importance of producing these guidelines was a wise decision and
        worked well.
       For an upper middle income country such as Thailand and where there are no other
        planned lending engagements with OHEC (where the client could have benefitted from
        learning World Bank procedures), a small IDF grant makes little sense as a vehicle to
        share global knowledge and build capacity. Instead, more upfront discussions about
        whether it made sense to bring EdPex to Thailand using an IDF grant would have been
        useful. Most likely, such conversations would have revealed the high costs of using
        World Bank procedures (relative to the small amounts involved) and may have led to
        discussions of alternative ways of providing this support,. e.g. having OHEC pay for the
        costs out of its own resources, or using World Bank regular budget (for TA), or hiring the
        World Bank to provide such services using a fee-for-service arrangement.

7. Follow up Activities.

As discussed above under “Risk to Development Outcome”, OHEC will continue working on
EdPEx with an ambitious plan for further expanding the use of the tool to another 75
faculties/institutions in the coming five years, providing opportunities for the World Bank to
continue to provide support and learn from this experience (for the benefit of other countries to
learn from OHEC’s experience).

8. Other Comments

None




                                                8
Annex 1. Grant Costs and Financing by Category, Disbursement profile

    (a) Project Cost by Expense Category (in USD)

Category        Category Description          Allocated         Disbursed      Undisbursed
 Totals                                          200,000.00      102,664.93        97,335.07
   1       TF99480 - CONS SERV                   140,000.00       60,920.35        79,079.65
   2       TF99480 - TRAINING & WS                  60,000.00      41,662.60       18,337.40
   3       Designated Account – A (waived)               0.00          81.98          -81.98




                                             9
10
Annex 2. Outputs by Component (Components are listed in Request for IDF Financing)
(Please describe the outputs for each activity under the grant)

See discussion on section “1.5 Grant Components”




                                            11
Annex 3. List of Supporting Documents

       1. Operation manual




                                        12
