Economic Monitoring Report

to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
September 18, 2017




The World Bank

www.worldbank.org/ps




                       1
                                                                  Table of Contents


Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................................... 5
Chapter I: Recent Developments .................................................................................................................. 9
   Economic Growth ..................................................................................................................................... 9
   Public Finance......................................................................................................................................... 13
   Money and Banking ................................................................................................................................ 15
Chapter II: What Would Happen to the Palestinian Economy If the External and Internal Constraints
Were Removed? .......................................................................................................................................... 17
   External Restrictions and the Economic Impact of Their Removal ........................................................ 19
   Internal Constraints and the Economic Impact of Their Removal .......................................................... 24
   The Path Forward.................................................................................................................................... 26
Annex 1: Stock Take of World Bank Recommendations to the AHLC Meetings Over the Years ........... 30
Annex 2: An Overview of Disbursement of Pledges Made at the Cairo Conference on Palestine
“Reconstructing Gaza”, Cairo: October 12, 2014. ...................................................................................... 34
Annex 3: Methodology Used for Quantifying the Impact of the Constraints ............................................. 38


                                                                      List of figures
Figure 1: Trade costs and duration of trade process in the Palestinian territories compared to MNA and
Israel.............................................................................................................................................................. 6
Figure 2: Projected GDP by 2025 under different scenarios ........................................................................ 7
Figure 3: Contribution to real GDP growth, 1995-2016 ............................................................................... 9
Figure 4: Palestinian exports and imports, 2000-2016................................................................................ 11
Figure 5: Distribution of credit by sector (left) and by economic activity (right) ...................................... 15
Figure 6: Trade costs and duration of trade process in the Palestinian territories compared to MNA and
Israel............................................................................................................................................................ 20
Figure 7: Projected GDP by 2025 under different scenarios ...................................................................... 26
Figure 8: Planned disbursements of Cairo Conference Pledges (2014-2017) in USD million ................... 34
Figure 9: Financing of DNA recovery needs from Cairo Conference pledges (USD million) ................... 35
Figure 10: Actual disbursements of Cairo Conference support to Gaza by category as of July, 2017 (USD
million)........................................................................................................................................................ 35


                                                                      List of Tables
Table 1: Significance of Area C in terms of natural resources ................................................................... 20
Table 2: Summary of World Bank recommendations to prior AHLC meetings ........................................ 32
Table 3: Disbursement status by donor of support to Gaza pledged at Cairo Conference on Palestine
"Reconstructing Gaza" in USD Million (July 2017)................................................................................... 36



                                                                                  2
                                                  List of Boxes
Box 1: The investment climate as experienced and perceived by the Palestinian private sector................ 17
Box 2: Challenges faced by Palestinian traders due to Israeli procedures on crossings ............................. 21
Box 3: Cooperation by the GoI and reforms by the PA lead to a success story in the energy sector ......... 28




                                                          3
                           List of Acronyms


AHLC       Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
AML/CFT    Anti-Money Laundering and Combating Financing of Terrorism
CBR        Correspondent Banking Relationships
DNA        Detailed Needs Assessment
FDI        Foreign Direct Investment
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
GoI        Government of Israel
GRM        Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism
HS         Harmonized System
IEC        Israel Electric Corporation
IMF        International Monetary Fund
IPP        Independent Power Producers
IT         Information Technology
LTU        Large Taxpayers Unit
MENAFATF   Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force
MFN        Most Favored Nation
NCTP       National Cash Transfer Program
NIS        New Israeli Shekel
NORG       National Office for the Reconstruction of Gaza
PA         Palestinian Authority
PCBS       Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics
PETL       Palestine Electricity Transmission Company Ltd.
PFM        Public Financial Management
PLO        Palestine Liberation Organization
PMA        Palestine Monetary Authority
PPA        Power Purchase Agreement
SME        Small and Medium Enterprise
VAT        Value Added Tax
WA         Wassenaar Arrangement
WDR        World Development Report
WGI        World Governance Indicators
WTO        World Trade Organization




                                    4
Executive Summary
1. Despite its potential, the Palestinian economy is currently heavily distorted and failing to generate
   the jobs and incomes needed to improve living standards. Restrictions1 on trade and the access to
   resources, along with a decade long blockade of Gaza have hollowed out the productive base. The share
   of manufacturing in the economy has halved in the last twenty-five years, while agriculture is only one
   third its previous size. The economy is import dependent with imports over three times the size of
   exports and a trade deficit close to 40 percent of GDP (one of the highest in the world), while trade is
   overly concentrated with Israel. Investment rates have been low with the bulk channeled into relatively
   unproductive activities that generate insufficient employment. As a result, growth, which has mainly
   been driven by consumption, has run out of steam. With a sharp decline because of the 2014 Gaza war
   and a drop in aid levels, growth in real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) slowed to 2 percent on average
   between 2013 and 2016, and dropped to a mere 0.7 percent in early 2017. Unemployment remains close
   to 30 percent on average, with youth unemployment twice as high in Gaza where the humanitarian
   situation has significantly worsened in recent months following the electricity crisis which has serious
   implications on the health, water and sanitation sectors as well as business activity.

2. The Palestinian Authority’s (PA) fiscal position represents an additional risk to the economy,
   while recent consolidation steps have focused on Gaza. In recent months, the PA has cut its payroll
   and net lending expenditure in Gaza where the poverty levels are the highest. Even with the recent Gaza
   measures and revenue transfers by Israel to offset fiscal leakages, the financing gap in 2017 is projected
   to be more than USD580 million. A broader consolidation effort is needed that focuses on reducing low
   priority expenditures and boosting revenues in a fair and sustainable way across both the West Bank
   and Gaza.

3. In the absence of change, the stagnant short term outlook will persist with consequent
   implications for economic and social stability. Analysis conducted by the Bank using a Computable
   General Equilibrium (CGE) model2 as the main tool suggests that by 2025 growth in the West Bank
   will not exceed 2 percent per annum, meaning a continuous real decline in per capita terms. In Gaza,
   unemployment could reach 48 percent by 2025. This would foment an already highly combustible
   social situation and derail achievements up until now.

4. The Palestinian economy will not be able to reach its full potential without a final political
   resolution, but urgent action by all parties to implement existing agreements and improve the
   domestic business environment could significantly improve the economic outlook. For a small
   economy, achieving a sustainable growth path depends to a large extent on having a private sector that
   is able to compete in regional and global markets and increase its exports of goods and services. The
   private sector is the only sustainable engine for growth, and the focus should be on removing the
   constraints and creating the right conditions for it to flourish. This report aims to provide input for
   achieving this vision of increased private sector activity and higher growth. Such a vision requires
   urgent action by the PA, the Government of Israel (GoI), and the international community to address
   the external constraints on movement, trade and access to resources, and also the internal constraints to
   create a better enabling environment for doing business.

1
  The Government of Israel states that these restrictions are in place to protect the security of Israel and its citizens.
2
  The World Bank has developed a Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model to capture the broader economic
impact of removing the internal and external constraints (see Annex 3 for further details). Consistent with the standard
for these models, parameter estimates and closure rules define the Palestinian-specific model. The exogenous variables
and key parameters are based on available studies or estimates. The results are thus more illustrative and do not claim
to capture the full complexity of the economic effects.

                                                            5
5. Addressing the external constraints is the most important factor. Our analysis suggests that the
   removal of the Israeli restrictions on Area C alone could bring about additional cumulative growth for
   the West Bank economy equal to 33 percent by 2025. This would not only enable better access to
   critical scarce resources, notably land and water, but also allow Palestinian businesses to take advantage
   of Area C’s comparative advantages in agriculture, mining and quarrying, and touri sm. As for Gaza,
   lifting the blockade would open it up for critical trade needed to rebuild its infrastructure and economy,
   and could lead to additional cumulative growth in the range of 32 percent by 2025.

6. Another important area of focus is reducing the punitive and non-transparent barriers imposed
   by the GoI on Palestinian trade -- a number of measures could be put in place in the short term
   in the context of existing agreements. The Doing Business data show that average trade costs per
   transaction for a Palestinian firm are nearly three times as high as for an Israeli firm, while the average
   duration of the import process for a Palestinian firm is nearly four times as long as for an Israeli firm
   (Figure 1). World Bank analysis shows that relaxing the dual use list alone would bring about additional
   cumulative growth of 6 percent to the West Bank economy by 2025, with a bigger impact of about 11
   percent in Gaza. It is also important to improve the costly procedures for shipping goods across the
   border and through Israeli ports (including customs clearance and storage fees, back-to-back truck
   procedures, and cumbersome inspections). Overall, alleviating external restrictions that were
   quantified could raise real GDP by some 36 percent in the West Bank and 40 percent in Gaza by
   2025.3

       Figure 1: Trade costs and duration of trade process in the Palestinian territories compared to MNA and Israel

         Average trade costs per transaction (USD)                      Average duration of trade process (days)




                                     Source: World Bank Doing Business database.

7. Addressing the internal factors that stifle business activity is also critical to unleash economic
   development and is largely within the control of the PA. A general need is to improve the business
   regulation and licensing arrangements that influence the cost of doing business in the territories. Taking
   steps to strengthen the enabling environment in sectors where private participation is feasible (such as
   energy and water) is also a priority as it would allow private sector capital to be tapped for important
   infrastructure needs. In addition, an increased focus on vocational training to bridge the skill gap in the
   labor market and accelerating land registration to fully release this factor of production into the
   economy are key areas that the PA should focus on.



3
  Despite some negative impact from allowing for “normal” movement of labor between the Palestinian territories and
Israel which could reduce the effective labor supply in the Palestinian economy in the absence of efforts to enhance
labor force participation.

                                                              6
              8. The internal constraints requiring attention go beyond sector issues. Political reconciliation
                 between the West Bank and Gaza is an utmost priority. Also, strengthening governance and institutions
                 is key for a well-functioning economy. Fiscal reform to create a more stable macroeconomic situation
                 is also needed. Rationalizing employment in the public sector, making tax collection more effective
                 and efficient, and freeing resources to provide adequate infrastructure are all areas requiring attention.
                 Our analysis suggests that alleviating the internal constraints could achieve cumulative growth
                 by 2025 in the region of 24 percent in the West Bank, and an even higher 30 percent in Gaza due
                 to a lower base effect.

              9. If progress is made in alleviating the external and internal constraints, then over the medium
                 term the economic and social payoff would be immense. Our analysis suggests that by 2025 the
                 territories could achieve higher growth rates of perhaps 6 percent per annum in the West Bank and 8
                 percent in Gaza. This growth would drive a substantial increase in job creation estimated at 50 thousand
                 additional jobs in the West Bank by 2025 relative to a baseline scenario and even higher at close to 60
                 thousand jobs in Gaza. This will result in a significant reduction in unemployment, and further progress
                 could be expected in the longer term if these efforts were sustained and enhanced.

                                                                Figure 2: Projected GDP by 2025 under different scenarios


                  20000
                                              West Bank                                                    20000                             Gaza
                  18000                                                                                    18000
                  16000                                                                                    16000
                  14000                                                                                    14000
USD million




                  12000                                                                                    12000
                  10000                                                                                    10000
                   8000                                                                                    8000
                   6000                                                                                    6000
                   4000                                                                                    4000
                   2000                                                                                    2000
                      0                                                                                        0
                               Baseline        Alleviation of     Alleviation of     Alleviation of                     Baseline        Alleviation of    Alleviation of     Alleviation of
                                                  external        external and        external and                                         external       external and        external and
                                                constraints          internal            internal                                        constraints         internal            internal
                                                                   constraints      constraints with                                                       constraints      constraints with
                                                                                   increased capital                                                                       increased capital
                                                                                      inflows from                                                                            inflows from
                                                                                          abroad                                                                                  abroad
                          Higher capital inflows from abroad                                                       Higher capital inflows from abroad
                          Improved domestic business environment and fiscal reforms by the PA                      Improved domestic business environment and fiscal reforms by the PA
                          Alleviation of Israeli restrictions                                                      Alleviation of Israeli restrictions
                          Baseline                                                                                 Baseline

                                                                      Source: World Bank staff calculations.

              10. International donors also have a key role to play to support a vision for growth and job creation.
                  Reversing the major decline in aid in recent years is particularly important to support the needed fiscal
                  adjustment and improve the environment for private savings. It is also important that donors continue
                  supporting the PA in its efforts to conduct sectoral reforms and institutional strengthening as this is key
                  to create the conditions that enable greater private sector activity and job creation. Donors can also help
                  by offering innovative financing instruments that can mitigate risks holding back transformative
                  investments by the private sector – in line with the G20’s recent emphasis at Hamburg on maximizing
                  financing for development by leveraging the private sector and optimizing the use of scarce public
                  resources. The Palestinian private sector is starting to look towards its active participation in
                  infrastructure creation, which can help limit public debt and contingent liabilities. In line with this
                  approach, the World Bank Group strategy aims to support reform of public sector institutions to address

                                                                                                       7
    policy and regulatory obstacles that stifle business enterprise and innovation. It is also establishing a
    risk mitigating financing facility to leverage the resources of development partners and catalyze both
    short-term and long-term financing. Moreover, exploring the potential for the Palestinian
    entrepreneurship ecosystem to have better linkages to regional ecosystems especially in neighboring
    Israel and Jordan can also support private sector activity.

11. A longer-term vision would, of course, also have to consider the future of a Palestinian state with
    an independent trade regime as part of a broader political agreement with the GoI. An alternative
    regime to the current customs union should primarily enable the PA to regain its capacity to conduct
    economic policy and escape from its stunted development path. To adopt an independent trade policy,
    the PA should exercise effective control over its customs territory. The PA is encouraged to seek full
    membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO) and establish a liberal trade regime. It should
    also negotiate a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with Israel, which is likely to remain its most important
    trading partner. To diversify its trade, the Palestinian economy should also deepen and negotiate trade
    agreements with other trading partners beginning with the Arab countries, the European Union, and the
    United States.

12. The main body of the report is organized in two chapters with three supporting annexes. Chapter
    I focuses on recent economic developments in the real, fiscal and banking sectors, while providing a
    near term outlook that highlights critical challenges facing the Palestinian economy. Chapter II provides
    input on a new vision for growth and job creation, with quantification of the potential gains. It contains
    critical messages for the GoI, the PA and the international donors on steps to create an environment
    conducive to the needed private sector investment. Annex 1 assesses the status of the World Bank
    recommendations to the AHLC meeting over the years – many of which relate to the constraints
    identified in Chapter II. While there are developments, overall progress from the GoI and the PA has
    been minimal. Annex 2 provides an update on the disbursement of pledges made at the Cairo conference
    in October 2014 on reconstructing Gaza. Donor support by mid-July 2017, at 53 percent of Cairo
    conference pledges, had barely changed from the December 2016 position – and there are limited
    prospects of further contributions. Most of the gap can be attributed to the larger pledgers at the
    conference. Finally, Annex 3 provides some methodological notes on the specifications of the CGE
    model and assumptions used to quantify the external and internal constraints.




                                                      8
Chapter I: Recent Developments

Economic Growth

13. The Palestinian economy has been suffering from volatile and spasmodic growth for years.
    Following the signing of the Oslo Accords and the establishment of the PA, the Palestinian economy
    enjoyed strong annual growth averaging 9 percent between 1994 and 1999, enabled by the return of
    Palestinian refugees, restoration of livelihoods, large inflows of public and private capital and increased
    private investment. This trend was quickly interrupted after the outbreak of the second Intifada in 2000
    when the GoI imposed a multi-layered system of physical, institutional, and administrative restrictions
    that fragmented the Palestinian territories into small enclaves lacking most forms of economic cohesion,
    pushing the annual growth rate to minus 9 percent. An initial period of recovery after the end of the
    Intifada was interrupted by the turmoil surrounding the internal divide in 2006/7 which caused the
    economy to slip into recession again. In the following years, growth picked up to an annual average of
    8 percent between 2008 and 2012 as large amounts of donor funding, equivalent to 32 percent of
    Palestinian GDP in 2008, in addition to substantial PA reforms and some easing of Israeli restrictions
    boosted public and private consumption.

14. The 2014 war in Gaza and a drop in donor aid has led to a severe deterioration in the economic
    conditions in Palestine in recent years. The latest war in Gaza had severe social consequences and a
    devastating impact on private sector activity causing the Palestinian economy to slip into recession in
    2014. However, growth had been slowing since before the war due to a significant drop in donor aid.
    As a result, real GDP growth slowed down to an annual average of 2 percent between 2013 and 2016,
    and dropped to a mere 0.7 percent in the first quarter of 2017 (0.8 percent in the West Bank and 0.4
    percent in Gaza).4 This drop is a clear sign that the Palestinian economy’s growth drivers of the 2007-
    12 period -- consumption supported by fiscal expansion – have run out of steam and proving
    unsustainable. In fact, most growth witnessed over the last couple of years has been driven by
    reconstruction efforts in Gaza and some private consumption financed by bank loans in the West Bank.

                                      Figure 3: Contribution to real GDP growth, 1995-2016

                                 25
                                 20
                                 15
                                 10
                                  5
                           %      0
                                       1995
                                       1996
                                       1997
                                       1998
                                       1999
                                       2000
                                       2001
                                       2002
                                       2003
                                       2004
                                       2005
                                       2006
                                       2007
                                       2008
                                       2009
                                       2010
                                       2011
                                       2012
                                       2013
                                       2014
                                       2015
                                       2016




                                 -5
                                -10
                                -15
                                -20
                                             Final Consumption          Gross Capital Formation
                                             Net Exports                GDP growth


                                             Source: PCBS and author’s calculation.



4
    Q1 2017 data is based on preliminary figures by the PCBS subject to revision.

                                                                 9
15. The Palestinian economy has not been able to generate enough jobs to absorb new labor market
    entrants, resulting in high and stubborn unemployment. Over the last two decades, the number of
    Palestinians in the labor force increased by 0.8 million, while only 0.5 million additional jobs were
    created by the private and public sectors. Hence, the number of unemployed increased by 0.3 million,
    resulting in an extremely high unemployment rate, fluctuating between 20 and 31 percent over the post
    Oslo period. Most recent data for the second quarter of 2017 show that the unemployment rate has
    recently been on the rise in both Gaza and the West Bank reaching an average of 29 percent. In the
    West Bank, it reached 21 percent by end-June 2017 despite an increase in the number of Palestinians
    working in Israel and the settlements. In Gaza, it increased to 44 percent mainly due to a deceleration
    in reconstructions activities.

16. The Palestinian labor market suffers from structural problems of inclusion particularly for
    young people and women. Currently, only 41 percent of those aged between 15 and 29 are active in
    the labor market, reflecting high pessimism regarding employment prospects. Despite a low
    participation rate, unemployment amongst this category reached 30 percent in the second quarter of
    2017 in the West Bank and a staggering 62 percent in Gaza. Another concern in the Palestinian labor
    market is related to dramatic differences in labor force participation by gender. Male participation rates
    reached 72 percent in 2017 (not far from the average in other lower middle income countries), while
    women have long been underrepresented in the Palestinian labor market with recent participation rates
    of 19 percent – compared to an average of 39 percent in comparators. Anecdotal evidence indicates that
    social norms and mobility restrictions play a key a role in keeping women outside the labor market.

17. The reduction in budget support and the resultant contraction in Palestinian growth have
    exposed the distorted nature of the Palestinian economy. For such a small economy, achieving a
    sustainable growth path depends to a large extent on the capacity of the private sector to compete in
    regional and global markets and increase its exports of goods and services. The Palestinian economy,
    however, has been losing this capacity as a result of a poor investment climate mainly driven by
    externally-imposed restrictions on trade and access to resources in addition to the lack of political
    stability and weak governance and institutions.

18. Impeded access of the private sector to trade has truncated the structural transformation of the
    Palestinian economy. In fact, the structure of the economy has substantially deteriorated since the
    1990’s. The manufacturing sector, which is usually one of the key drivers of structural transformation
    through export-led growth, has largely stagnated and its share in GDP has dropped from 19 percent in
    1994 to 11 percent currently. The share of the agriculture sector has also declined from 13 to 4 percent
    over the same period. The decline in these sectors has not been offset by an increase in high value-
    added service exports like Information Technology (IT) or tourism. In fact, in relative terms, most
    growth over the past two decades occurred in public sector services.

19. Investment rates have remained low, with the bulk channeled into relatively unproductive
    activities that generate insufficient employment. Private investment levels, averaging about 15-16
    percent of GDP in recent years, have been low as compared with rates of over 25 percent in fast-growing
    middle income economies. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the Palestinian territories at a mere 2
    percent of GDP, is also very low in comparison to most fast-growing economies. Low investment has
    not only been a result of a decline in foreign savings but also due to very low domestic private savings.
    Also, much of the investment has been concentrated in low productivity activities where returns are
    less affected by political risk, mainly internal trade and real estate development -- neither of which
    generates significant employment.

20. Progress in poverty reduction in the Palestinian territories remains a challenge as political shocks
    and episodes of violent conflict frequently erode welfare gains and increase the risk of the

                                                     10
       vulnerable falling below the poverty line. Economic growth, social assistance and a well targeted
       cash transfer program run by the PA have helped reduce poverty in the Palestinian territories in the
       years following the second Intifada. However, political instability and multiple episodes of war in Gaza
       over the last ten years have significantly eroded these welfare gains. For example, following the 2008/9
       war in Gaza, poverty in the Strip increased by 20 percentage points, pushing up the overall poverty rate
       in the Palestinian territories. The latest available poverty data is for 2011 and shows that poverty levels
       in Gaza were not able to recover to prewar levels, remaining very high at 38 percent. Poverty in the
       West Bank, however, was much lower at 18 percent in 2011. This clearly indicates a significant spatial
       disparity in poverty rates, with a large and widening gap in living standards between the West Bank
       and Gaza. Poverty rates in Gaza are also more volatile because a large share of Gazans live very close
       to the poverty line and remains at constant risk of falling into poverty with any economic shock or
       episode of war. Given that poverty is highly correlated with labor market outcomes, and given that the
       unemployment rate has been on the rise in recent years, it is anticipated that poverty levels in the
       Palestinian territories have increased since 2011, especially in Gaza. New household survey data
       available towards the end of 2017 will provide essential information on the impact of the last 5 years
       of stagnation and turmoil on poverty and shared prosperity.

21. The Palestinian economy can be characterized as an import-dependent economy. In fact, at 57
    percent of GDP, the Palestinian territories’ imports are almost 3.2 times their exports at 18 percent of
    GDP in 2016. This implies an external trade deficit of close to 40 percent of GDP -- one of the highest
    in the world. Such a trade structure is usually associated with protracted violent conflict in failed state
    contexts, such as Somalia. This trade deficit was partly financed by net factor income (12 percent of
    GDP) - essentially earnings of Palestinians in Israel, private transfers (10 percent of GDP) - mainly
    remittances of Palestinian workers in third countries, and official current transfers of about 6 percent
    of GDP, mainly (declining) government aid from bilateral donors.

                                    Figure 4: Palestinian exports and imports, 2000-2016

                               80
                               60
                               40
                               20
                          %
                                0
                                    2000
                                    2001
                                    2002
                                    2003
                                    2004
                                    2005
                                    2006
                                    2007
                                    2008
                                    2009
                                    2010
                                    2011
                                    2012
                                    2013
                                    2014
                                    2015
                                    2016




                                    Exports as a share of GDP     Imports as a share of GDP


                                           Source: PCBS and author’s calculation.

22. Further, the absolute majority of Palestinian trade is concentrated with a single trading partner
    – Israel. Although Israel is a medium-sized economy that accounts for only 0.2 percent of the world’s
    GDP,5 imports from Israel account for 63 percent of Palestinian imports while Israel accounts for 79
    percent of Palestinian exports.6 Israel’s comparative advantage at the global level is narrow, and lies
    principally in very specialized high-tech manufactures and services, chemicals and pharmaceuticals,
    and polished diamonds. Most of these products do not typically constitute a large share of the imports
    of a lower-middle-income developing country, such as the Palestinian territories. So, not surprisingly,

5
    According to estimates by the Bank of Israel for 2014.
6
    According to PCBS data.

                                                             11
    Israel’s large exports to the Palestinian economy do not conform to its comparative advantage at the
    global level: they consist mainly of fuel, food products, and low and medium-technology manufactures.
    Moreover, a gravity model of trade between the Palestinian economy and the rest of the world suggests
    that, based on its size, income and proximity to large markets such as Israel, Europe and the Gulf States,
    Palestinian exports could be twice their current levels.7

23. The heavy concentration of Palestinian trade with Israel is mainly due to an artificial substitution
    of imports driven by differential costs of internal and external trade, known commonly as “trade
    diversion.” In principle, trade diversion can happen in any trade agreement, because the absence of
    tariffs on trade between partners will somewhat offset more efficient trade with a partner outside the
    common external tariff. However, in the Palestinian case, trade diversion towards Israel mainly happens
    because Israeli restrictions make the costs of Palestinian trade with the rest of the world higher than
    costs associated with trading with Israel. For example, restrictions including dual-use regulations, high
    transport costs, and cumbersome customs clearance procedures tend to disproportionally impede
    Palestinians, and make it easier, cheaper, and simpler to buy from an Israeli trader than directly from
    overseas. Because of these restrictions, it is also often easier to sell to Israel than to sell abroad, and, if
    selling abroad, to sell through Israeli intermediaries. Another reason leading to the heavy concentration
    of Palestinian trade with Israel is the fact that Arab countries are reluctant to trade with or through Israel
    which tends to separate the Palestinian economy from several of its natural trading partners.

24. Government spending has been a significant factor in economic growth and job creation in
    previous years, but with the decline in aid and the resultant reduced government capacity to
    affect consumption, the only way forward for a sustainable economic recovery is through private
    sector growth. Tracking the relationship between government spending and growth of the Palestinian
    economy over the years suggests that increases in government expenditures played an important role
    in growth by raising public and private consumption levels. With the decline in aid, however, PA
    spending as a share of GDP has been significantly reduced and this has subdued its impact on final
    consumption resulting in lower growth. To achieve a sustainable economic recovery in the Palestinian
    territories, growth and job creation going forward will need to be private sector driven. And for this to
    happen, improvements in the external and internal environments are key.

25. Given the stalled peace process and unresolved internal challenges, the near-term economic
    outlook for the Palestinian territories remains worrying with projected growth levels insufficient
    to improve living standards. Under a baseline scenario which assumes that the current Israeli
    restrictions remain in place and no improvement in the domestic economic and political environment,
    real GDP growth of the Palestinian economy is projected to reach 3.0 percent in 2017: 2.7 percent in
    the West Bank and 4.0 percent in Gaza. This growth level implies a near stagnation in real per capita
    income and an increase in unemployment. Moreover, downside risks remain significant. In Gaza, more
    setbacks to the reconstruction process are possible. The resumption of armed conflict cannot be ruled
    out and if this happens, the Gaza economy is expected to slip back into recession. Also, recent fiscal
    measures by the PA in Gaza to reduce its payroll and electricity related spending may have severe social
    implications that can lead to unrest. As for the outcome in the West Bank, it may be worse than expected
    if the decline in donor support exceeds current projections. Also, with the ongoing political tensions,
    clashes may arise again resulting in elevated security risks that could negatively impact economic
    activity.




7
 These estimates should be viewed with caution as gravity models are not designed to analyze sources of financing
or the current account.

                                                        12
Public Finance

26. The PA’s revenues have so far performed well in 2017. Between January and June 2017, domestic
    taxes grew by 13 percent year-on-year following a strong pick up in income tax receipts (by 19 percent)
    due to higher collections from local tax offices as well as the Large Taxpayers Unit (LTU) following
    enhanced tax administration efforts by the PA. Collections from domestic customs on cars also grew
    by an impressive 23 percent due to a rate hike implemented in mid-2016. Revenues from excise on
    tobacco increased by close to 5 percent due to additional collections following the establishment of a
    new local tobacco company in 2017.8 Clearance revenues9 also performed well growing by 6 percent10
    in the first half of 2017 driven by an increase in customs, VAT and petroleum excise – in line with an
    increase in Palestinian imports, as reported by the PCBS. Notably, the GoI transferred to the PA in
    March a lump sum payment of NIS131 million covering income tax collected from Palestinians
    working in Israel over a period of several months, in addition to NIS107 million in health fees and
    equalization levies transferred in June, which also helped boost the PA’s revenues.

27. On the expenditure side, PA spending declined by close to 3 percent in the first half of 2017, year-
    on-year. This is mainly due to a significant drop in transfers as only half of the first quarter payment
    of the National Cash Transfer Program (NCTP) was disbursed while the remainder is yet to be paid to
    poor households. Also, spending by line ministries on the use of goods and services in early 2017 was
    much lower than in the previous year as expenditure plans were delayed due to delays in approving the
    2017 budget. Net lending11 increased by 8 percent due to water related costs, while electricity-related
    net lending was contained – though still high. The wage bill grew by 1.7 percent mainly reflecting the
    annual step increase that is mandatory by law.

28. The PA’s total deficit declined by about 16 percent in the first half of 2017, nonetheless, the fiscal
    situation remained tight. The PA’s total deficit amounted to USD490 million between January and
    June 2017. Aid received amounted to USD323 million (USD254 in budget support and USD69 million
    for development financing), resulting in a financing gap of USD167 million. Notably, aid received was
    19 percent lower than in 2016 mainly due to a drop in budget support while development financing
    actually increased. Despite the reduction in the deficit and as a result of the drop in budget support, the
    PA accumulated additional payment arrears in the amount of USD263 million in the first six months of
    2017 and slightly increased its net domestic bank financing by USD42 million. However, an advance
    payment on clearance revenues by the GoI enabled the PA to repay some of its arrears from previous
    years, pumping some highly-needed liquidity into the market.

29. The PA adopted a number of measures in mid-2017 to control its spending, particularly in Gaza.
    For instance, starting April 2017, the PA eliminated all allowances for Gaza employees which resulted
    in a 30 percent cut, on average, in the salaries of public employees in Gaza. In July, the PA also referred
    around 7000 civil employees in Gaza to early retirement to be followed by an additional 5000 security

8
  A new local tobacco company was licensed by the PA and established in 2017. The company is in charge of buying
all local rolling tobacco produced in the West Bank and selling it to the local market. Prior to the establishment of the
company, rolling tobacco was produced in the West Bank and sold in the black market, hence the PA was not collecting
any taxes on it.
9
  Clearance revenues are VAT and import duties collected by the GoI on Palestinian imports and then transferred to
the PA on a monthly basis.
10
   This year-on-year growth figure is calculated after adjusting for transfers by the GoI to offset fiscal leakages under
the revenue sharing arrangements between the two parties in 2016 and 2017 in order to get a better idea of the
underlying growth without these one-off transfers.
11
   Net lending represents deductions by the GoI from clearance revenues to offset utility bills owed by Palestinian
Local Government units (LGU) to Israeli suppliers.

                                                           13
    employees. Further, the PA took steps to reduce the supply of electricity to Gaza by more than 30
    percent resulting in savings in net lending.

30. Despite these measures, the financing need for 2017 is expected to remain large. The PA’s total
    deficit for 2017 is expected to reach USD1.2 billion or 8.4 percent of GDP. Aid inflows are projected
    at USD661 million. After accounting for external debt repayment, the size of the financing gap could
    thus exceed USD580 million (4 percent of GDP). Notably, this projection has high downside risks
    associated with it particularly if some of the planned measures do not materialize or if donor aid ends
    up being even lower than expected.

31. While the PA needs to further accelerate reforms that align its spending and revenue capacity, in the
    short-term actions by the PA alone will not be enough to close the financing gap. In addition to the
    above-mentioned measures for Gaza in 2017, the PA should implement reforms in the West Bank to control
    the wage bill and fully constrain non-priority spending. It also needs to avoid new hiring to replace those
    that were referred to early retirement, unless really needed. The results, however, will not be enough to close
    the 2017 financing gap. Some financing may be available through borrowing from domestic banks as the
    PA still has some space before reaching the limit set by the Palestine Monetary Authority (PMA), but this
    will also not be sufficient to close the gap and will further increase the banks’ credit exposure to the PA.

32. Therefore, in the short term, there is no feasible alternative to budget support as a key source of
    financing. Donor support during these critical times is essential to sustain reforms and enable provision of
    services to the Palestinian population. Additional actions by the GoI to systematically eliminate the PA’s
    fiscal losses under the revenue sharing arrangement instituted by the Paris Protocol will also have significant
    fiscal benefits. Long term fiscal sustainability, however, cannot be achieved without a prudent and stringent
    fiscal consolidation program by the PA. This program needs to address reform areas such as the pension
    system, civil service reform, health referrals and untargeted transfers. Consolidation efforts will also help
    create fiscal space for additional public investment in areas not viable for the private sector and through
    which the PA can create a better environment for doing business.




                                                        14
Money and Banking

33. During the first half of 2017 the Palestinian financial sector, composed primarily of traditional
    banking, remained one of the few stable segments of the Palestinian economy with healthy levels
    of growth. The Palestine Monetary Authority’s (PMA) reporting through June 2017 indicates that the
    banking system’s total assets just exceeded USD15 billion, an increase of 13 percent compared to June
    2016. Direct credit maintained a growth trajectory in line with recent years, reaching USD7.5 billion,
    a growth of USD1.1 billion over the past 12-month period. The overall credit-to-deposit ratio, which
    had a historical range of 50-60 percent in recent years, further increased from 63 percent in 2016 to 66
    percent as of June 2017. Despite the recent and modest uptick in credit-to-deposits, the banking system
    is still regarded as liquid – confirmed by the latest PMA stress tests. Nonperforming loans were
    maintained at 2 percent, reflecting the banking system’s risk-averse position in light of the continued
    political volatility. A review of credit exposure to the private sector indicates persistent sectoral
    concentration, with 50 percent of all private lending going to construction or consumer loans.

                            Figure 5: Distribution of credit by sector (left) and by economic activity (right)




                                                                                                   12%
                                          20%                                                                       25%
                                                                                             5%
                                                                                         6%

                                                                                        9%

                                                                                                                      22%
                                                                                                  21%
                      80%
                                                                              Consumptions                      Real estate and construction
                                                                              Local and foreign trade finance   Business and consumer services
                                                                              Mining and manufacturing          Cars & vehicles finance
                 PA Loans           Total private sector                      Other in private sector

                                                 Source: Palestine Monetary Authority.

34. The banking system’s credit exposure to the public sector continued to moderate in 2017. Over
    recent years, the banking sector’s credit exposure to the public sector has raised concerns. In the years
    leading up to 2016, the PA’s reliance on financing from the banking sector grew steadily, raising
    concerns over credit concentration risk. During the past 12-month period, exposure to the PA stabilized
    at approximately USD 1.4 billion, equivalent to 20 percent of all lending by the banking system. As of
    June 2017, PA loans accounted for 84 percent of the PMA imposed limit12 for the Banking system’s
    direct exposure to the PA, a decline compared to 96 percent as of June 2016. While direct lending to
    the PA has moderated in 2017, it is important to note that the banking sector’s exposure to the PA is
    not limited to direct credits. Borrowing by public employees has been steadily growing since 2014,
    reaching a total of USD1.4 billion (equivalent in size to total PA loans) as of June 2017. When
    combined, PA and public employees account for over USD2.8 billion, or 38 percent of total banking
    sector credits.

12
     The target limit for exposure is equivalent to the banking sector’s total owners’ equity at the time.

                                                                 15
35. The potential negative impact of de-risking by Israeli banks remains a cause for concern, with
    the potential to destabilize the Palestinian banking system. Citing money-laundering and financing
    of terrorism concerns, key Israeli banks signaled possible steps to limit or terminate correspondent
    banking services to Palestinian Banks. A deterioration of correspondent banking relationships (CBRs)
    with Israeli banks could have significant economic impact due to the highly-interlinked structure of the
    two banking systems, and the use of the New Israeli Shekel as the primary currency in the Palestinian
    economy. An example of the potential ramifications relates to the complexities associated with the
    transfer of NIS cash from the Palestinian banking system to the Israeli counterpart – An issue that has
    contributed to the accumulation of excess NIS liquidity in Palestinian banks, for years. The NIS cash
    issue was further compounded in 2017 following a decision by Israeli banks to limit incoming cash
    shipments from foreign banks operating in the West Bank and Gaza13 in addition to the existing
    limitation on NIS cash from Palestinian banks. This has put direct CBRs at risk of further deterioration.
    In January 2017, the GoI assumed part of the financial risk by approving an indemnity and immunity
    package for Israeli banks working with Palestinian banks to alleviate the potential for further
    disruptions to CBRs between the two banking systems. The package is yet to be operational, pending
    finalization by the GoI. The PMA has also been taking steps, with IMF and World Bank support,
    towards upgrading the Palestinian anti-money laundering and combating financing of terrorism
    (AML/CFT) system to be more in line with international practices.

36. With technical assistance (TA) from the World Bank, the PA is conducting its first self-
    assessment of ML/FT risks. This TA aims to enhance the ability of relevant AML/CFT stakeholders
    in the Palestinian territories in identifying, assessing and understanding the money laundering and
    terrorism financing risks they face. Going forward, the authorities will be able to take appropriate
    measures to manage and mitigate these risks at national and institutional levels and implement a risk-
    based strategy for AML/CFT in line with international standards. Such a strategy would allow the
    authorities to target the allocation of resources in high-risk areas, as well as develop simplified
    AML/CFT requirements in proven low risk areas, including to promote financial inclusion. The risk
    assessment is being coordinated by the Financial Follow-up Unit, with involvement from the Ministries
    of Finance and Planning, Justice, Interior, and Foreign Affairs, and the Public Prosecutor’s Office,
    Customs Services, and other relevant stakeholders. In parallel to the self-assessment process, the PA
    requested, and has been granted approval for an evaluation of its AML/CFT regime by the regional
    Financial Action Task Force (MENAFATF). The evaluation, currently scheduled for 2020, in
    combination with the self-assessment, represent key milestones towards aligning PA’s AML/CFT
    systems with international standards.




13
     Of the 15 banks licensed by the PMA, 8 are foreign owned (Jordanian and Egyptian), while 7 are locally owned.

                                                          16
Chapter II: What Would Happen to the Palestinian Economy If the
External and Internal Constraints Were Removed?
37. Comprehensive development of the Palestinian economy is ultimately forestalled by the stalemate
    in the peace process. As a result of this stalemate, Israeli restrictions have remained in place for years
    now and have imposed severe economic costs for Palestinians. The movement of people and goods into
    and out of the West Bank and Gaza, and within the West Bank, is severely limited by a multi-layered
    system of physical, institutional, and administrative impediments. External trade is tightly controlled
    and subject to a range of costly non-tariff barriers that increase transaction costs and reduce the
    competitiveness of Palestinian exports. The situation in Gaza is even more severe with a blockade
    imposed since 2007. Physical barriers are compounded by unpredictable regulatory measures and
    practices and by limited access to resources including land and water.

38. In parallel, the stalled peace process makes it more difficult for Palestinians to mobilize the
    commitment, cooperation, and coordination (using the terminology of the 2017 World
    Development Report) to implement reforms and provide effective governance. Progress in
    institution building has slowed in recent years and in some areas, previous gains have been reversed.
    Further, significant distortions arise from an economy dominated by the public sector and large utility
    subsidies provided by the PA. Economic growth is also impeded by issues related to outdated business
    legislation, inadequate infrastructure, large swathes of unregistered land and skill mismatches in the
    labor market. The political divide between the West Bank and Gaza since 2007 has created multiple
    internal challenges when it comes to policy coordination and resulted in two regulatory frameworks.
    The combined effect of Israeli restrictions and incomplete governance is to fragment the territories
    spatially and economically, as a set of external constraints (related to GoI restrictions) and internal
    constraints (linked to deficient governance) undermine growth prospects.

                  Box 1: The investment climate as experienced and perceived by the Palestinian private sector


     The Bank conducted an Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) in the Palestinian territories a few years ago to
     identify features of the investment climate that matter most for productivity and income growth, and track
     changes in the investment climate. For that purpose, a large number of firms were surveyed and asked about
     the biggest challenges in the investment climate and below are some key findings.

     1. Political instability. When asked about the obstacles to doing business, the majority of Palestinian
     businesses surveyed, both formal and informal and regardless of their location, cite political instability as the
     top obstacle to their business operations. Few other aspects of the investment climate appear to be as binding
     in light of this overwhelming constraint of unresolved political status and its consequent effects of
     fragmentation and uncertainty. The absence of a political resolution to the conflict creates an environment
     which elevates the cost of doing business, raises the risk to business operations, and creates uncertainty with
     respect to investment returns.
     2. A fragmented and complex legal and regulatory environment. For existing Palestinian firms, factors
     related to business regulation and enforcement account for over 40 percent of the identified top constraints to
     business. The regulatory environment under which Palestinian businesses operate is complex since laws and
     regulations enforced in the West Bank differ from those in Gaza and others in East Jerusalem. Further
     muddying this already complex legal and regulatory environment is the state of legislative paralysis resulting
     from the lack of a functioning parliament which stands in the way of passing new laws to modernize the current
     framework.




     The Bank conducted an Investment Climate Assessment17 (ICA) in the Palestinian territories a few years ago to
     identify features of the investment climate that matter most for productivity and income growth, and track
     changes in the investment climate. For that purpose, a large number of firms were surveyed and asked about
     the biggest challenges in the investment climate and below are the results.
       3. Logistics and access to markets. Palestinian firms report that the movement of goods and labor from the
       Palestinian territories to Israel is constrained by a collection of non-tariff barriers, security restrictions, and
       logistics inefficiencies. Beyond the typical trade regulations, trade and transport of goods to and from the
       West Bank and Gaza is complicated by a layer of commercial crossings, security restrictions, import controls,
       and associated logistics that have been subject to change in tandem with security and political events. The
       unpredictability and cost of these regulations and restrictions is a deterrent to new investments and creates
       uncertainty for existing businesses.

       4. Restrictions on factors of production.
       Land: Businesses report that the constraint on access to land in Area C for economic purposes is another
       major issue. Also, even though land within the Palestinian-controlled Areas A and B is ostensibly available
       for economic use, it suffers from a variety of constraints including the lack of legal reform on land and real
       estate which complicates using land for business purposes.
       Labor: The Palestinian workforce has high levels of educational attainment. However, businesses report that
       the workforce is not necessarily skilled and trained to fuel growth in the high value-added manufacturing or
       service sectors.

       5. Access to finance. Although 54 percent of firms identify access to finance as a major constraint, only about
       one in ten formal firms in the West Bank and Gaza identify access to finance as the biggest obstacle to
       business operations. Most formal firms (69 percent) report financing the majority of their investments and
       working capital with retained earnings. 77 percent of firms report that they have not applied for a loan because
       they do not need one, compared to the MENA average of 45 percent, and 38 percent of firms in lower-middle
       income comparator countries. This seems to indicate that the constraints lie more in identifying profitable
       opportunities for investment under the current conditions and constraints than in financing these opportunities

       6. Infrastructure. Overall, the availability of infrastructure services— including roads, water supply, power,
       telecommunications, waste treatment and disposal, and industrial parks— is constrained not only by public
       financial resources, but also by the restrictions on access to Area C in the West Bank. Reliable power supply
       in the West Bank and Gaza has deteriorated in the past few years, and water supply has not improved.
       Electricity has become the top binding constraint reported by Palestinian firms in Gaza, second only to
       political instability. It is important to note that this is the second most cited top constraint only for SMEs in
       Gaza while West Bank and East Jerusalem firms do not cite electricity as a top constraint. Telecommunication
       services have improved in terms of better competition in the telecommunications market. However, 3G and
       4G services remain unavailable due to the Israeli restrictions.

       7. Perceptions of crime and corruption as a business constraint. Since 2006 and particularly in the West
       Bank a significantly lower percentage of businesses consider crime and petty corruption as major obstacles
       to businesses. The most striking result from the Survey is the overall low incidence of expected informal
       payments, or petty bribes.


                                 Source: Investment Climate Assessment, World Bank (2014).

39. The   stagnant
      3. Logistics    short-term
                    and               outlook discussed
                         Access to Markets.                   earlier
                                                 Palestinian firms     willthat
                                                                    report   persist   well into
                                                                                 the movement    ofthe   medium
                                                                                                     goods  and laborterm
                                                                                                                        from– the
                                                                                                                               with
      Palestinian territories
    consequent      effects on    Israel issustainability
                               to social     constrained by a – collection of non-tariff
                                                                 in the absence            barriers,
                                                                                     of policy       security If
                                                                                                  changes.     restrictions,
                                                                                                                  the status  and
                                                                                                                                quo
      logistics inefficiencies.  Beyond     the typical trade  regulations,  trade  and transport   of
    persists with no improvement in the external and internal environments, economic conditions in the goods   to and  from   the
      West Bank territories
    Palestinian   and Gaza isare    likely to by
                                complicated        a layer of commercial
                                                deteriorate                crossings,
                                                              further in the   medium     term, restrictions,
                                                                                       security  exacerbating  import   controls,
                                                                                                                  economic      and
      and  associated  logistics  that  have  been  subject to  change  in tandem    with  security  and
    social fragility and fueling renewed violent conflict. In fact, our analysis suggests that growth in  political events.  The the
      unpredictability and cost of these regulations and restrictions is a deterrent to new investments and creates
    West Bank could converge to 2 percent p.a. by 2025 and to 4 percent p.a. in Gaza as reconstruction
      uncertainty for existing businesses.
    activity wears off while the blockade hinders trade and investment. Growth in real per capita incomes
    could  reach negative
      4. Restrictions         levelsof
                        on factors        the West Bank by 2025 and a mere 0.5 percent p.a. in Gaza. The economic
                                      inproduction.
    decline                 to even
              would leadreport
      Land: Businesses             thathigher   unemployment,
                                         the constraint  on accessparticularly    in Gaza
                                                                    to land in Area    C for where   it could
                                                                                              economic          reachis
                                                                                                           purposes    48  percent
                                                                                                                         another
    by  2025.
      major      Without
             issue.         the ability
                    Also, even   though landto conduct    purposeful
                                                 within the             economic activity,
                                                            Palestinian-controlled    Areas A andtheBeconomic       space
                                                                                                        is ostensibly        in the
                                                                                                                       available
       for economic use, it suffers from a variety of constraints including the lack of legal reform on land and real
       estate which complicates using land for business purposes.
       Labor: The Palestinian workforce has high levels of 18educational attainment. However, businesses report that
       the workforce is not necessarily skilled and trained to fuel growth in the high value-added manufacturing or
       service sectors.

       5. Access to finance. Although 54 percent of firms identify access to finance as a major constraint, only about
     Palestinian territories will remain stunted and inhabited by young Palestinians suffering from a lack of
     jobs and desperation, which may eventually lead to social unrest or renewed clashes with Israel.

40. Even though only a political resolution would allow the Palestinian economy to reach its full
    potential, implementing existing agreements and improving the domestic business environment
    could significantly improve the economic outlook. The private sector should be the main engine of
    growth and job creation. Therefore, efforts must focus on easing constraints that currently stifle private
    activity and setting the enabling conditions for private investment. The following section lays out the
    main external and internal constraints facing the private sector. It also quantifies the impact on growth
    of the removal of the external restrictions (along the lines of the Interim Agreement and the Paris
    Protocol) as well as the internal constraints. A general equilibrium model was used as the basic tool to
    capture the broader and dynamic economic impact of removing the external and internal constraints.
    For more details on the methodology, please see Annex 3.14

External Restrictions and the Economic Impact of Their Removal

41. Restrictions on access to resources, particularly those in Area C,15 have severely constrained
    private investment and economic activity in the West Bank and our analysis suggests that
    removing such constraints would boost the size of the West Bank economy by one-third in 8 years.
    Area C represents 61 percent of the West Bank and is under Israeli civil and security control. Hence,
    Access to Area C for most kinds of economic activity has been severely limited for Palestinians. Also,
    the continuous growth in the size of land allocated for settlement activity in Area C has significantly
    reduced land available for use by the Palestinian private sector and leaves highly limited prospects for
    a contiguous Palestinian state, even if some land does eventually pass to the PA’s control. The economic
    significance of Area C lies in that it is the only contiguous territory in the West Bank, while Areas A
    and B represent 227 isolated islands. This renders Area C indispensable to the efficient movement of
    goods and people within the West Bank, and also to connective infrastructure development. According
    to our analysis, the removal of the Israeli restrictions on Area C could bring about additional
    cumulative growth for the West Bank economy equal to 33 percent by 2025. Such growth would
    not only be enabled by better access to critical scarce resources, notably land and water, but also other
    natural resources that would allow Palestinian businesses to take advantage of Area C’s comparative
    advantages in agriculture, mining and quarrying, and tourism.




14
   Information cited in this section is based on two recent World Bank reports finalized in July 2017. The first one
titled “Palestine—Prospects for Growth and Jobs: A general equilibrium analysis” and the second one titled
“Unlocking the Trade potential of The Palestinian Economy: Immediate measures and a long -term vision to improve
Palestinian trade and economic outcomes”.
15
    The Interim Agreement between the PLO and the GoI divided the West Bank into three areas under different
jurisdictions: Areas A, B and C. Area A represents 18 percent of the West Bank, covers urban centers, and is under
full Palestinian security and civil control. Area B represents 21 percent of the West Bank, covers peri-urban areas and
small towns, and is under Palestinian civil control and Israeli security control. Area C represents 61 percent of the
West Bank and is defined by the Interim Agreement as "areas of the West Bank, outside Areas A and B, which, except
for the issues that will be negotiated in the permanent status negotiations, will be gradually transferred to Palestinian
jurisdiction.” According to the Interim Agreement, the gradual transfer should have been completed by 1997, but it
has not yet been implemented.

                                                           19
                                    Table 1: Significance of Area C in terms of natural resources

                                                                                           Natural resource in Area C as a
                                                                                           percentage of total in West Bank
              Natural resource              In Area A       In Area B      In Area C       (%)
       Nature reserves (dunums16)             52,300          42,600        607,730                            86
       Forests (dunums)                       7,000            9,000         59,016                            91
       Wells                                   223              87            28717                            48
       Springs                                  70              122            112                             37

                              Source: Applied Research Institute in Jerusalem (ARIJ), 2013.

42. Restrictions imposed by the GoI also severely hinder Palestinian trade. The customs union
    formalized under the 1994 Paris Protocol18 granted Palestinian and Israeli traders equal trade and
    economic treatment at Israeli entry/exit points, and allowed Palestinian imports and exports to enter or
    exit Israel either by sea through the Ashdod and Haifa Ports, via land through the Allenby Bridge into
    Jordan, or via the Ben Gurion Airport. However, with the onset of the second Intifada, the GoI increased
    its administrative, logistical and security measures and those have become serious obstacles to
    Palestinian trade and movement of goods and people. These measures collectively operate as a non-
    tariff barrier for Palestinian traders, weakening the competitiveness of Palestinian products. A telling
    example is demonstrated by the Doing Business data which show that average trade costs per
    transaction for a Palestinian firm are nearly three times as high as for an Israeli firm, while the average
    duration of the import process for a Palestinian firm is nearly four times as long as for an Israeli firm.
    As a result, current productivity levels in the Palestinian processed food industry are, for example, 11
    percent lower than they would otherwise be, and productivity of agricultural produce is 34–45 percent
    lower.19

         Figure 6: Trade costs and duration of trade process in the Palestinian territories compared to MNA and Israel

         Average trade costs per transaction (USD)                         Average duration of trade process (days)




                                        Source: World Bank Doing Business database.

43. Since the PA does not have presence at the points of entry/exit, most Palestinian imports and
    exports pass through Israeli ports, and undergo cumbersome and inefficient logistics,

16
   1 dunum is approximately equal to 0.25 acre.
17
   The figure for Area C is relatively low and its value can probably be attributed to Area C restrictions, which preclude
the exploration and opening of new wells in Area C. Thus, it is probable that this figure significantly underestimates
the true number of wells in the Area.
18
   The Paris Protocol is the agreement that governs economic relations between Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO).
19 Unlocking the Trade potential of The Palestinian Economy: Immediate measures and a long-term vision to

improve Palestinian trade and economic outcomes. The World Bank, 2017.

                                                                20
     administrative, and security procedures. Over 75 percent of Palestinian trade is shipped through
     Israeli ports. All goods that transit through Israeli ports must first go through one of four commercial
     crossings operated by the Israeli Authorities and built along the route of the Israeli – West Bank
     separation barrier. A survey conducted by the Palestinian Shippers Council notes a long list of technical,
     procedural and security constraints raising the cost of conducting trade through Israeli ports.20 For
     example, the commercial crossings have limited working hours and are unable to efficiently process
     Palestinian goods leading to long waiting hours and increased costs.21 Moreover, the Israeli authorities
     impose a back-to-back system in these crossings whereby all Palestinian goods must be moved from/to
     a Palestinian truck to/from an Israeli truck.22 This system in addition to long inspections and pervasive
     security checks (that are even more stringent for goods coming in and out of Gaza) add significant
     transaction costs. It is estimated that incurred security delays can increase costs by an average of
     USD538 per shipment, according to the Palestinian Shippers Council (See Box 2 for more details).

                          Box 2: Challenges faced by Palestinian traders due to Israeli procedures on crossings

       Palestinian import and export goods are required to go through a cumbersome “back-to-back” process
       at crossings as well as lengthy security and clearance procedures. First, all truck drivers need to queue
       outside the crossing, sometimes for hours, until they are allowed inside. After an initial security check, the
       Palestinian trucks arriving at the crossing are unloaded in a large, exposed, secured working area without any
       option of refrigeration. Goods are then subject to security checks on the ground and the customs process for
       export is completed. At that point, the counterpart truck will be called across and allowed to enter the holding
       area to load the goods. The Palestinian truck then returns to the West Bank. The reverse process is the same
       for imports, except that the goods entering the West Bank are put through a pallet-sized scanner during the
       back-to-back process. In Gaza, the back-to-back aspect of the procedure is even more complicated, as it
       involves three trucks, one of which operates as a “sterile” vehicle, which always remains wit hin the complex.
       Israeli trucks transporting goods destined for Gaza are scanned by x-ray, and then transfer their load onto the
       ground in a walled area or “room” for security and customs checks. Goods are then loaded onto the “sterile”
       truck inside the terminal, which then proceeds to the other side and unloads into a second fenced-in “room.”
       When that area is full, the gates to the Israeli side are closed and locked, and a third Palestinian truck will
       enter for each load, and the goods are loaded and delivered to Gaza.

       Palestinian shippers complain about limited access to information and resources . Palestinian shippers
       operating through Israeli-controlled crossings often do not have advance warning about any changes in the
       procedures and requirements at commercial crossing points by Israeli authorities. This may result in
       shipments rejected by Israeli officials, payments of fees at the facility or other costly alternatives. Generally,
       information is not available, not updated, or published in Hebrew only (not in Arabic or English).




20
   Palestinian Shippers’ Council. 2012. Capacity Development for Facilitating Palestinian Trade: A Study on the
       Palestinian
Problems             import Trade
            of Palestinian     and export    goods Ports
                                      via Israeli    are required
                                                             (Ashdod   to and
                                                                           go through
                                                                                Haifa). a   cumbersome
                                                                                          Ramallah,         “back -to-
                                                                                                        Palestinian    back” process
                                                                                                                     Territories.    April
       at crossings as well as lengthy security and clearance procedures. First, all truck drivers need to queue
http://psc.ps/files/server/projects/Last%20Study_Problem%20of%20Pal%20Trade%20via%20Israeli%20Ports-
       outside the crossing, sometimes for hours, until they are allowed inside. After an initial security check, the
Revised.pdf
21
   The Palestinian  trucks
        Israeli Crossing    arriving
                           Points     at the crossing
                                  Authority              are unloaded
                                                has advised    that hours in of
                                                                             a large,
                                                                                 serviceexposed,  securedand
                                                                                          at Tarqumiya     working   area without
                                                                                                               Tulkarem    crossingsanywill
       option by
be extended        two hours at Goods
               of refrigeration.   the end are   the subject
                                              ofthen  day butto     is unclear
                                                                 itsecurity    checks
                                                                                   if the  the ground
                                                                                        ontime  extensionandapplies
                                                                                                             the customs
                                                                                                                     to cargo   into for
                                                                                                                           process    both
directions.
       export is completed. At that point, the counterpart truck will be called across and allowed to enter the holding
22
       areato
   A door       load pilot
            to door        for outbound
                     the goods.             trade for
                                  The Palestinian       trucks
                                                      truck  thenleaving
                                                                    returns   to West
                                                                            the  the WestBank  to Israel
                                                                                             Bank.        was recently
                                                                                                    The reverse         implemented
                                                                                                                  process  is the same at
Tarqumiya    crossing.  But  the pilot is limited  to  companies     operating    in  Area  C and  its compliance
       for imports, except that the goods entering the West Bank are put through a pallet-sized scanner during      costs for Palestinian
                                                                                                                                     the
         have been higher
tradersback-to-back         than  the  original  back-to-back      arrangements.
                       process. In Gaza, the back-to-back aspect of the procedure is even more complicated, as it
       involves three trucks, one of which operates as a “sterile” vehicle, which always remains within the complex.
                                                                    21
       Israeli trucks transporting goods destined for Gaza are scanned by x-ray, and then transfer their load onto the
       ground in a walled area or “room” for security and customs checks. Goods are then loaded onto the “sterile”
       truck inside the terminal, which then proceeds to the other side and unloads into a second fenced-in “room.”
       When that area is full, the gates to the Israeli side are closed and locked, and a third Palestinian truck will
     The Israeli authorities restrict the use of containerized shipments. Containers may be used for some goods
     at the Green Line crossing points to and from the seaports of Haifa and Ashdod and at the Allenby Bridge, but
     may not be used at all at Karem Abu Salem (the only crossing point in Gaza used for Palestinian–Israeli trade).
     The alternative use of palletized shipments with strict packing regulations severely limits the quantity of goods
     transported in each shipment and increases costs. The back-to-back process on pallets limits the size of goods
     that can cross, prevents economies of scale, risks damage from the multiple handlings, and rules out transfer of
     many products that would be damaged by heat, dust, or rain. As a consequence, palletization constitutes a high
     opportunity cost to Palestinians, as it keeps traders from enjoying much higher gains.


               Source: Unlocking the trade potential of the Palestinian Economy, World Bank (2017).

44. Restrictions on revising the A1, A2 and B lists created by the Paris Protocol of 1994 have limited
    the PA’s ability to benefit from them. The A1, A2, and B lists were designed as an exception to the
    custom union’s common import policy, granting the PA autonomy to determine its own regime
    governing the import of specific products originating in Jordan, Egypt, and other Arab and Islamic
    states. These lists were seen as a first step toward the eventual establishment of an independent
    Palestinian tariff book. In practice, however, this opportunity for the PA is being undermined by the
    failure to have the lists updated. The lists impose limitations on the quantity of merchandise imported
    from Jordan, Egypt, and other Arab and Islamic countries, mainly based on Palestinian market needs
    as determined more than 20 years ago, when the protocol was signed.23 This inevitably leads to greater
    dependence on Israeli products. The PA needs to negotiate with the GoI each time for the inclusion of
    products not on the lists. Unfortunately, the number of goods specified in Lists A1 and A2 has barely
    grown since 1994, even though total Palestinian imports have increased more than threefold since then.
    This results in Palestinian consumers not able to enjoy low prices from open competition between Israel
    and third-party producers of the same products—restricting Palestinian consumption, especially in
    goods with high demand price elasticity.

45. The GoI applies a long list of dual use items whose export/re-export from Israel to the Palestinian
    territories is highly controlled, prohibiting the development of key economic sectors. Similar to
    other advanced countries, Israel controls its exports of goods that have both civilian and military uses,
    or the so called dual use items. The most common regulatory basis governing the movement of such
    goods is the 1996 Wassenaar Arrangement (WA).24 Though not a signatory to the WA, Israel uses the
    arrangement’s lists to license the export of all dual use goods manufactured or assembled in Israel.
    When it comes to exports/re-exports to the Palestinian territories, the GoI enforces further controls on
    additional items that it has deemed as “dual use” through the Defense Export Control Law of 2007 and
    a Military Order passed in 2008 stipulating that all dual use items destined to the Palestinian territories
    require a special permit and reporting duties.25 These procedures make it extremely difficult, and
    oftentimes impossible, to import dual use goods to the Palestinian territories. Currently, the dual use
    list for the West Bank includes 6 fertilizers, 2 pesticides, and 23 chemicals in their pure form in addition

23
   A significant adjustment to list A1 was agreed in July 2000 by the Ad Hoc Economic Committee that was established
as part of the 1997 Wye River Agreement. However, the changes were not implemented.
24
   The Wassenaar Arrangement is an international agreement aimed at increasing global stability through transparency
and supervision of dual-use exports. States following the arrangement maintain national export controls on listed
items. The lists, including those under the various categories of "Dual-Use Goods & Technology," very narrowly
describe items of concern and are updated annually by the WA secretariat. For more info, see
http://www.wassenaar.org.
25
   According to the GoI, the law was created as a way of protecting Israelis from attacks using material initially
intended for commercial or civilian use.

                                                          22
     to 26 types of materials, machinery, and equipment. Gaza has a more extensive dual use list that covers
     many more items including reinforcing steel, cement, aggregates, insulating panels, timber for furniture
     manufacture, amongst others. Also, traders report that nearly any item can be deemed as “dual use” at
     the entry to Gaza, even if it has been imported previously by the same importer with no special controls.
     Three major macro sectors are particularly affected by the dual-use restrictions—agriculture,
     manufacturing, and ICT—and, in particular, the subsectors of food processing, beverages, metal
     fabrication, pharmaceuticals, textiles, leather, paints, detergents, and cosmetics. In Gaza, the situation
     is very difficult as almost all economic activities are somehow impacted by the dual use list. The
     enforcement by the GoI of import restrictions on select dual-use goods and material has resulted in a
     disproportionate fall in wages in dual-use input intensive sectors. Our analysis suggests that relaxing
     the dual use list alone would bring about additional cumulative growth of 6 percent to the West
     Bank economy by 2025, with a bigger impact of about 11 percent in Gaza.

46. The decade old blockade on Gaza has had severe consequences on the development of the Strip
    and its alleviation could boost the size of the Gaza economy by one-third over eight years. After
    the takeover of Gaza by Hamas, the GoI imposed a land, air and water blockade on the Strip prohibiting
    the movement of goods and people from/to it. The blockade had an immediate negative impact on
    Gaza’s economy which shrank by an annual average of 10 percent between 2006 and 2008, while per
    capita incomes declined by an annual average of 14 percent over the same period. Even though the GoI
    took some steps to ease the blockade in 2010, exports out of Gaza continue to be extremely low as the
    monthly average of truckloads leaving Gaza in 2016 represented 17 percent of what it used to be before
    the blockade.26 Also, sales to East Jerusalem and the West Bank, which were former lucrative markets
    for Gaza’s businesses, are mostly not allowed. The GoI allows imports of consumer products and some
    construction material for donor supervised projects, but the inflow of materials remains much below
    the needs. Gaza has close to 2 million inhabitants that are not allowed to leave the Strip without special
    exit permits that Israel has been limiting, mostly to humanitarian cases. The isolation of Gazans has
    been exacerbated by additional constraints imposed by Egypt on the Rafah crossing. Years of blockade
    have undermined the living conditions in Gaza and fragmented the economic and social fabric of the
    Palestinian territories. Lifting the blockade would open Gaza up for critical trade needed to rebuild
    its infrastructure and economy, and our analysis suggests that it could lead to additional
    cumulative growth in the range of 32 percent by 2025 for the Strip’s economy.

47. Although physical restrictions are the most visible, non-transparent and highly unpredictable
    measures and practices by the GoI also have profound economic impact on the Palestinian
    economy. For instance, while the Paris Protocol of 1994 stipulated free movement of labor between
    Israel and the PA, a tight quota has been imposed on Palestinian workers in Israel.27 Obtaining visas
    for foreign investors to enter the Palestinian territories is controlled by the GoI, which has been sparing
    in issuing such travel permits. Lack of easy access to investments discourages potential foreign
    investors from exploring business opportunities in the Palestinian territories. Also, the high level of
    uncertainty linked to the political environment makes Palestinian firms highly reluctant to make further
    investments or upgrade their product lines. Further, the tight restrictions on access to resources such as
    water and the electromagnetic spectrum are other examples hindering the growth and development of
    the Palestinian private sector. Overall, our analysis suggests that alleviating the external




26
   GISHA - Legal Center for Freedom of Movement, The Gaza Cheat Sheet, accessed on May 3, 2017 and available
at: http://gisha.org/reports-and-data/the-gaza-cheat-sheet
27
   The Paris Protocol states that labor should be allowed to move freely under “normal circumstances”.

                                                      23
     restrictions that were quantified could raise real GDP by some 36 percent in the West Bank and
     40 percent in Gaza by 2025.28

Internal Constraints and the Economic Impact of Their Removal

48. Important inter-related internal constraints create obstacles that stifle business activity and hold
    back the potential to take full advantage of any alleviation of external constraints . The political
    division and strife between the West Bank and Gaza since 2007 has prevented policy coordination and
    resulted in two parallel regulatory frameworks thus further fragmenting the already limited economic
    space. The Palestinian parliament has not been operational since the internal divide creating a state of
    legislative paralysis, particularly since the President is hesitant to pass new laws under the emergency
    powers granted to him. Presidential and parliamentary terms ended in 2009 and 2010 without new
    elections. Despite a gradual but continuous improvement in institution building and governance
    between 2003 and 2010, the Palestinian territories’ performance has worsened in key areas since such
    as the rule of law, government effectiveness, control of corruption, and regulatory quality based on the
    Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI).

49. Distortions and underinvestment arise from an economy dominated by consumption of public
    services, a large and ineffective civil service, an unsustainable public sector wage bill, and lack of
    transparency and accountability. This manifests itself through labor market distortions (public sector
    salaries are much higher than private sector wages at the lower end of the scale), public finances that
    are neither adequately oriented to growth and inclusion nor financially sustainable despite substantial
    donor support, and the inability to pay for essential services (e.g. non-payment by Palestinian
    distribution companies and municipalities for electricity purchased from the Israel Electric Corporation
    (IEC), causing cuts in power supplies and frequent power outages). Inadequate public investment in
    infrastructure also constrains private investment and social progress. Current Public Financial
    Management (PFM) systems do not provide enough assurances on the quality of spending and the PA’s
    latest audited financial statements date back to 2011.

50. Productive investments are inhibited by a patchwork regulatory climate which has been
    vulnerable to capture by vested interests. While PA efforts to create supportive conditions for private
    sector development have begun, more is needed. First, the current collection of legislation governing
    business is archaic as it stems from different periods of Palestinian history. 29 Some legal differences
    also exist between the West Bank and Gaza as a result of different legislation enacted by the PA and
    Hamas since 2007, creating many internal inconsistencies. Several pending regulations that can
    significantly improve the business climate also need to be passed including the New Companies Law
    and the Competition Law as limited competition and contestability of markets further renders the state
    susceptible to capture by vested interests.

51. Given the severe land constraints, limited land registration and unclear property rights even
    within Palestinian-controlled areas are a major challenge for urban/housing and business
    development. Currently only 30 percent of land in Areas A and B is registered with a clear title. Even
    though a dedicated government agency does exist to manage land registration, at the current rate it
    would take approximately 80 years to completely register all unregistered land. A more streamlined
    and less costly process for land surveying, dispute resolution, and registration would release significant

28
   Despite some negative impact from allowing for “normal” movement of labor between the Palestin ian territories
and Israel which could reduce the effective labor supply in the Palestinian economy in the absence of efforts to enhance
labor force participation.
29
   Business laws consist of layers of Ottoman, British Mandate, Jordanian, Egyptian, and Palestinian laws as well as
Israeli Military Orders.

                                                          24
    assets and resources into the economic space, with related benefits to the financial sector through
    collateralized lending. Currently, land management is entangled with the financing of municipalities
    and rent-seeking, undercutting its role as an enabler of investment.

52. Even though access to finance is not seen as an impediment for large firms, it continues to be a
    challenge for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and informal firms. Gaps in access to finance
    for dynamic start-ups further limit the space for the Palestinian territories’ well-educated and
    entrepreneurial population, including in promising services such as tourism, IT and
    telecommunications. Greater access to finance for these firms should begin with supporting financial
    inclusion, further developing non-bank financial institutions and addressing their collateral constraints.

53. The Palestinian education system is failing to match skills to the needs of the labor market.
    Palestinian universities do not produce graduates well equipped with skills required by the private
    sector including social skills. Also, more efforts need to be focused towards vocational training and
    attracting additional students to this educational stream as the market currently suffers from a shortage
    in graduates from this field. Additional investments are also needed to develop skills of the existing
    workforce as this will be critical for increasing the productivity and competitiveness of Palestinian
    businesses.

54. Our analysis shows that PA actions to alleviate the abovementioned constraints would generate
    significant economic benefits. In fact, reforms by the PA to improve the internal business and political
    environment, strengthen its fiscal position and enhance governance and transparency would
    significantly reinforce the positive impact of an alleviation of Israeli restrictions. Our analysis suggests
    that PA reforms could generate additional cumulative growth in the range of 24 percent in the
    West Bank by 2025, and even higher at 30 percent in Gaza due to a lower base effect.

55. If progress in alleviating external and internal constraints were to be made over the medium
    term, the Palestinian territories could achieve much higher rates of growth—perhaps around 6
    percent in the West Bank and 8 percent in Gaza by 2025—and creation of new jobs over and
    above the rapid population growth. Real per capita income growth is expected to exceed 3 percent
    in the West Bank by 2025 and even higher at about 5 percent in Gaza. This growth level would result
    in an increase in job creation estimated at 50 thousand additional jobs in the West Bank by 2025 relative
    to a baseline scenario and even higher at close to 60 thousand jobs in Gaza. This will result in a
    significant reduction in unemployment, while absorbing additional participants in the labor market -
    not least women. At the same time, such growth levels would dramatically reduce the dependence on
    foreign aid.

56. Sustaining such progress in the longer run would require continued efforts. Such efforts need to
    focus on enhancing access to productive resources, trade-liberalization and integration, labor mobility
    within the Palestinian territories and between the West Bank and Gaza and Israel, and improving
    domestic governance and institutions that affect the business environment.




                                                      25
                                                            Figure 7: Projected GDP by 2025 under different scenarios




              20000
                                          West Bank                                                 20000                              Gaza
              18000                                                                                 18000
              16000                                                                                 16000
              14000                                                                                 14000
              12000                                                                                 12000
              10000
USD million




                                                                                                    10000
               8000                                                                                 8000
               6000                                                                                 6000
               4000                                                                                 4000
               2000                                                                                 2000
                  0                                                                                      0
                           Baseline        Alleviation of      Alleviation of     Alleviation of                  Baseline        Alleviation of    Alleviation of     Alleviation of
                                              external         external and        external and                                      external       external and        external and
                                            constraints           internal            internal                                     constraints         internal            internal
                                                                constraints      constraints with                                                    constraints      constraints with
                                                                                increased capital                                                                    increased capital
                                                                                   inflows from                                                                         inflows from
                                                                                       abroad                                                                               abroad
                      Higher capital inflows from abroad                                                     Higher capital inflows from abroad
                      Improved domestic business environment and fiscal reforms by the PA                    Improved domestic business environment and fiscal reforms by the PA
                      Alleviation of Israeli restrictions                                                    Alleviation of Israeli restrictions
                      Baseline                                                                               Baseline


                                                                          Source: World Bank staff calculations.



              The Path Forward

              57. As discussed above, the Palestinian economy will not reach its full potential without a final status
                  agreement between the PA and the GoI. However, urgent action to implement the existing
                  agreements and improve the domestic business environment can put the economy on a higher
                  growth path and enable greater private sector activity and job creation. Such vision could only be
                  formulated in a meaningful way with the support of all key stakeholders including the PA, the GoI and
                  the international community. Below are a number of recommendations that could help guide this vision.

              58. Granting Palestinians access to Area C is key for achieving sustainable economic development in
                  the West Bank. Currently, less than 1 percent of Area C, which is already built up, is designated by
                  the Israeli authorities for Palestinian use, while the remainder is heavily restricted or off-limits to
                  Palestinians. Recent statements by the GoI announcing intentions to allow part of the Tarqoumia
                  industrial zone and the municipal boundaries of Qaliqilya to expand into Area C are encouraging but
                  limited measures, considering the significant economic potential that lies within this area.

              59. Alleviating restrictions on the movement of goods and people to and from Gaza would be the
                  most important action to ease the Strip’s economic, social and humanitarian crises. This would
                  allow critical trade needed to rebuild Gaza’s infrastructure and economy following the multiple
                  episodes of war over the recent years. Easing the Gaza blockade should be done while considering the
                  security concerns of neighboring countries.

              60. Refining and revising the dual use list, while ensuring mutually agreed and predictable
                  mechanisms to control and supervise the trade of restricted goods, will support the development
                  of key sectors in the Palestinian economy. The unilateral and discretionary imposition of dual use

                                                                                                    26
     restrictions is resulting in significant economic costs to the Palestinian economy and is in contradiction
     with the economic underpinning of the customs union established by the Paris Protocol. Refining the
     list to make it more specific30 and easily identifiable on the basis of the Harmonized System (HS) will
     make it much easier for Palestinian traders to access needed inputs and also clarify what goods need
     special licensing. Further, the GoI should ensure predictable and clear administrative procedures,
     including a specific timeline in which the dual use screening system would need to issue a response to
     a licensing request, or otherwise deem it automatically approved. This would maintain the same level
     of security while reducing the economic risk for Palestinian traders.

61. The Palestinian Authority should pursue the revision of the A1, A2 and B lists. Efforts should
    focus on expanding the products covered by the lists to increase consumer welfare through lower prices
    and cheaper inputs for the Palestinian productive sectors. Further, quotas specified by the lists need to
    be eliminated in as many cases as possible, and where kept (for a limited number of products) should
    include an automatic increase mechanism. The PA should also aim to increase the number of
    countries/trading blocs covered by the lists based on its trade policy.

62. Improving and streamlining Israeli procedures at the crossings would significantly reduce
    transaction costs for Palestinian traders. For example, enabling a door-to-door solution which allows
    a truck to travel from the shipment’s originating point to its final destination without unloading and
    reloading is a recommended option to facilitate trade. A door to door pilot for outbound trade for trucks
    leaving the West Bank to Israel was recently implemented at Tarqumiya crossing. But the pilot is
    limited to companies operating in Area C and its compliance costs for Palestinian traders have been
    higher than the original back-to-back arrangements. A better alternative to the back-to-back
    arrangement would be the introduction of routine containerization and trailer exchange at all crossings
    and ports by use of special scanners and other standard security processes.31 This would increase the
    efficiency of the movement of goods in terms of time and costs and replacing the long and costly back-
    to-back process and manual inspections; reduce the risk of damage to goods; allow transit of large items
    such as furniture; and allow for the transportation of refrigerated and perishable items and improved
    packing of shipments in terms of both diversity and quantity—thereby increasing the ability of
    Palestinian firms to compete in regional markets. The increased efficiency would also decrease running
    costs for the GoI and maintain, if not increase, security.

63. Allowing increased mobility of labor from the Palestinian territories to Israel could help enhance
    the quality of human capital while increasing private and public incomes through remittances
    and taxes. However, this would need to go hand in hand with enhancing labor force participation in
    the Palestinian territories and strengthening domestic institutions (including in education and health) in
    order to avoid Dutch disease and an excessive exodus of Palestinian workers from the West Bank and
    Gaza. In fact, our work shows that without these internal reforms, allowing additional Palestinian
    workers in Israel could negatively impact economic growth as the Palestinian labor supply is reduced.

64. Strengthening PA institutions involved in customs, border management and national standards
    is key for improving the Palestinian territories’ trade infrastructure. Notably, according to the
    Oslo Accords, operations at the Allenby Bridge should be under joint Palestinian–Israeli control, but
    this has not been implemented. 32 A targeted program to build Palestinian capacity on all aspects of
    border management would enable the PA to gradually deploy its staff at the ports. This will facilitate

30
   See, for example, recommendations from the Middle East Partnership Initiative —Peres Center for Peace (2015).
31
   According to the GoI, plans to enhance infrastructure and technology at some of the commercial crossings do exist.
32
   Upon the agreement’s signing, Palestinian customs agents were never employed at the Allenby/King Hussein Bridge.
Finally, in the aftermath of the Second Intifada in September 2000, any other Palestinian presence or operation at the
bridge was permanently suspended. Since then, Israel has had sole control.

                                                         27
    interactions with Palestinian traders and ensure transparent and efficient processes and smooth
    coordination with the Israeli authorities under the existing customs union. When it comes to Palestinian
    national standards, as in the case of other modern industrial economies, they need to be compatible with
    the ones adopted by target markets to enable domestic producers to tap into them. A quality policy and
    legal framework is being developed and the PA needs to continue these efforts, particularly to finalize
    the reassigning of the institutional mandates for quality assurance of various agencies in line with
    international practices. The PA also needs to review and strengthen systems and laws related to the
    administration of its quality infrastructure.

65. Efforts by the PA to improve the domestic environment are also key for creating conditions that
    enable greater private sector activity and job creation. The utmost priority is political reconciliation
    between the West Bank and Gaza and holding the long due presidential and parliamentary elections as
    this is critical for strengthening governance and institutions, which are key for a well-functioning
    economy. Although the PA has already started implementing reforms to modernize the business
    regulation, more needs to be done on this front along efforts to accelerate land registration, improve
    access to finance and reduce the skill mismatch in the labor market.

66. In addition, efforts by the PA are needed to create supportive conditions for private sector
    investment in infrastructure. This mostly requires adopting policy measures in specific sectors to set
    up the institutional arrangements and offer the right incentives that would encourage the private sector
    to get involved in infrastructure projects, including for water and electricity.

                 Box 3: Cooperation by the GoI and reforms by the PA lead to a success story in the energy sector


      Recent developments in the energy sector, in particular, the energization of the Jenin high voltage substation
      and signing of an interim Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) between Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
      are promising steps towards a financially sustainable energy sector. This interim agreement paves the way
      for further negotiations towards the main long term PPA and energization of three additional substations.
      These substations will provide the West Bank with additional electricity allowing supply to keep pace with
      growing demand. In addition, the PPA will provide reduced tariffs which will enable better cost recovery.

      Thanks to this agreement, the Palestinian Electricity Transmission Company Ltd. (PETL) has become
      operational, receiving 60MW of power through the Jenin substation and selling the energy to electricity
      distributors in the West Bank. This transaction allows PETL to earn a revenue stream moving it closer to
      operational sustainability. A reliable cash flow will allow the private sector, in the form of Independent
      Power Producers (IPPs), to sell generated electricity to PETL and be re-assured that PETL will be able to
      pay them. This will mobilize private sector players by ensuring them, and their investors, that there is a
      commercially viable and sustainable flow of funds and that power sales contracts with PETL are
      bankable. The signing of the interim PPA and energization of the Jenin substation were first steps in this
      right direction.

                                                  Source: World Bank staff.

67. A sustainable fiscal position for the PA is also a prerequisite for a healthy economy. More
    sustained and fundamental reforms are needed to improve the quality of expenditures and revenue
    collection. Particular attention should be given to making the pay and pension systems for government
    employees sustainable and fair to the rest of society, as further gains are limited without these far
    reaching and politically difficult reforms. Continued efforts by the GoI to fully eliminate fiscal




                                                            28
     leakages under the revenue sharing arrangement between the two parties would also have a
     significant positive impact on the PA’s fiscal situation. 33

68. International donors will also have a key role to play through reversing the decline in aid and
    providing innovative financing mechanisms. Reversing the major decline in aid in recent years is
    particularly important over the medium term while the Palestinian territories make progress on
    increasing fiscal space and improving the environment for private savings. Enhancing public financial
    management and investment planning while ensuring proper coordination and integration into the
    budget of donor-funded activities should be a sine-qua-non in this regard. Donors can also help through
    offering innovative financing instruments that can mitigate risks holding back transformative
    investments by the private sector. For example, as part of its new strategy in the West Bank and Gaza,
    the World bank plans on establishing a risk mitigating financing facility for the private sector,
    leveraging the resources of development partners and catalyzing both short-term and long-term
    financing. The facility will provide partial risk guarantees and first loss components as mechanisms to
    mitigate payment risks, thus providing comfort to private investors and lenders to infrastructure
    projects.

69. Assistance by donors to support public reforms that encourage private sector participation is also
    important. As the PA conducts efforts to encourage private sector participation, particularly in
    infrastructure, the donor community could support such efforts by providing relevant technical support to
    help guide this important reform.

70. A longer-term vision would, of course, also have to consider the future of a Palestinian state with
    an independent trade regime as part of a broader political agreement with the GoI. An alternative
    regime to the current customs union should primarily enable the PA to regain its capacity to conduct
    economic policy and escape from its stunted development path. Such a vision could also help provide
    a more favorable setting for mutually beneficial economic relations with Israel, as well as enhance the
    prospects for improved stability and security for both sides. To adopt an independent trade policy, the
    PA should exercise effective control over its customs territory including placing Palestinian customs
    officers at the relevant crossing points through which Palestinian imports and exports flow as this would
    allow it to levy its import taxes directly and set and enforce sanitary and phytosanitary as well as
    industry standards. The PA is encouraged to seek full membership in the World Trade Organization
    (WTO) and establish a liberal trade regime consisting of a moderate Most-Favored Nation (MFN)
    applied tariff. As an integral part of its new trade regime, the PA should also negotiate a Free Trade
    Agreement (FTA) with Israel, which is likely to remain its most important trading partner in the
    foreseeable future. To diversify its trade, the Palestinian economy should also engage broadly in “open
    regionalism,” by negotiating new trade agreements or operationalizing and deepening existing
    agreements with its main trading partners, beginning with the Arab countries, the European Union, and
    the United States.




 For more information on the nature and size of fiscal leakages, please see the World Bank’s report to the April 2016
33

AHLC meeting.

                                                         29
Annex 1: Stock Take of World Bank Recommendations to the AHLC
Meetings Over the Years
71. As mentioned earlier in the report, the Palestinian economic outlook is worrying and bold actions
    are needed by all parties to get the Palestinian economy out of its deteriorating trajectory. Most
    needed actions have been identified in previous reports by the World Bank to the AHLC meeting but
    implementation has been limited. In our September 2016 report to the AHLC, a stock take of all
    previous World Bank recommendations to the meeting was conducted. This exercise was intended to
    provide a baseline for evaluating progress in achieving the Palestinian territories’ development
    priorities. In addition, it was hoped that it would galvanize the reform efforts of all parties to address
    the immediate need while setting in place reforms that will deliver over time. In this report, the stock
    take is updated to show progress since September 2017 using the same three pillars 1) fiscal
    sustainability, 2) economic development and 3) Gaza reconstruction and recovery. The following
    summarizes main developments in these pillars.

Fiscal Sustainability

72. While the PA has managed to reduce its spending so far in 2017, more needs to be done on
    structural reforms that are key to achieving long term fiscal sustainability. There has been some
    progress on controlling health referrals with the arrangements earlier developed for Israeli hospitals
    now extended to six local facilities, with an additional three hospitals in the pipeline. Notably, however,
    it will not be possible to significantly reduce outside referrals until the main source of hemorrhage,
    which is a very generous health insurance system, is reformed. progress in referrals will remain
    Progress has also been made on steps to control electricity net lending – although the problem is now
    emerging with other utility payments, mainly water. As mentioned earlier in the report, recent measures
    have been adopted to reduce spending on the wage bill and net lending in Gaza, but there have been no
    structural changes to control the wage bill in the West Bank nor implement parametric reforms to
    support the pension systems sustainability.

73. The PA’s revenues have so far performed well in 2017 due to better administration, but more
    needs to be done. A geographic decentralization of tax administration offices has significantly helped
    boost revenue collections in 2017 through facilitating efforts to widen the tax base. In fact, the number
    of registered taxpayers has exceeded 200,000 - up by more than 20,000 a year ago. Nevertheless, tax
    avoidance is still widespread, particularly amongst high earning professionals and the PA needs to focus
    efforts on this group. Strengthening enforcement and audit techniques can also help further expand the
    tax base. Additional efforts are also warranted on the policy front. For example, the IMF recommends
    restoring the top income tax bracket of 20 percent, introducing a 10 percent dividend tax, and
    eliminating some of the generous tax exemptions, such as those offered by the Investment promotion
    law. Finally, laws should be amended to enable the PA to apply penalties for non-compliance.

74. The GoI has continued to transfer one off payments to the PA to offset fiscal leakages in 2017,
    but a more systematic approach to fully eliminate these losses is yet to be adopted. Efforts should
    focus on implementing the Paris Protocol’s provisions regarding full information sharing on trade that
    takes place between both parties, including Israeli sales to Gaza. As stipulated by the Protocol, this
    could be done through setting up an “interconnected computer system” between the Israeli and
    Palestinian VAT authorities. Immediate focus should also be on revising the high Israeli handling fee,
    and a systematic transfer of the health and equalization levies, as agreed in the electricity agreement
    signed between the two parties in 2016. To date, there has not been a positive GoI response to requests
    in these areas, although proposed senior official talks are a promising development. Talks are also now


                                                      30
    underway between the GoI and the PA to initiate the introduction of bonded warehouses for Palestinian
    imports and the transfer of some customs authority to the PA over the coming years. This is a potentially
    positive development, although care will be needed in the implementation to ensure that revenues are
    protected and no additional costs are imposed on the Palestinian private sector.

75. There has not been any material progress in improving the public financial management (PFM)
    system in recent months, although the PA has in that period prepared its first comprehensive
    PFM strategy. It is intended that this will guide a more active reform agenda in the coming years.

76. Budget support from donors has continued to decline and this has been a key factor behind the
    large financing gap. As a share of GDP, budget support has fallen from 32 percent in 2008 to under
    6 percent in 2016. It is expected to further decline to under 5 percent in 2017.

Economic Development

77. The Israeli constraints on movement, access and trade continue to be a main impediment to
    economic growth in the Palestinian territories. In particular, and as indicated earlier in the report,
    restrictions related to Area C and the blockade on Gaza represent the biggest challenges to growth, and
    their removal can generate momentous economic benefits. Nonetheless, progress in easing these
    constraints have not yet materialized. Area C continues to be mostly off limits for Palestinians and the
    number of master plans approved for this Area has not increased since our last reporting. Also,
    restrictions on the movement of goods and people in and out of Gaza have not been eased.

78. At a domestic level, the PA has initiated steps to reduce the cost of doing business and improve
    the business climate but these have yet to be fully implemented. A draft Companies Law has
    recently been submitted to the cabinet, and is expected to be approved by the President during 2017.
    Similarly, a draft competition law has been prepared although the timing of its implementation is less
    clear. The abolition of land titling fees has led to an increase in land registration while consideration
    is also being given to new institutional arrangements to accelerate land registration but no decisions
    have yet been made.

79. A recent success in the energy sector is highly encouraging, but more needs to be done. As
    mentioned, earlier, the GoI and the PA have recently signed a PPA to energize the Jenin substation
    which will increase the electricity supply in northern West Bank. Thanks to this agreement, the
    Palestinian Electricity Transmission Company has moved closer to operational sustainability (see Box
    3 for more details). However, more needs to be done. Diversification of electricity supply from other
    neighboring countries needs to be pursued but it is hindered by problems of land access, security and
    payment risk. For instance, restrictions of access and construction in Area C are major obstacles to
    build and upgrade interconnectors with Jordan, and security issues in Sinai reduce the viability of
    additional electricity from Egypt. Most urgent, though, is the need to increase energy supply to Gaza.
    The additional 161kV power line from IEC to Gaza would bring much needed relief; however, the
    question of payment has not been resolved yet.

Gaza Reconstruction and Recovery

80. Most physical damages after the last Gaza war have been fixed, except for housing, but recovery
    needs remain large. Good progress has been made in most sectors, with physical damages repaired.
    However, the lion share of fully damaged houses is yet to be replaced and recovery needs that go beyond
    physical destruction remain enormous. Progress remains slow as a result of limited funding, slow
    material entry, and political divisions between the PA and the de-facto authorities. Disbursements after
    the Cairo conference in October 2014 have reached a plateau at around 50 percent which is causing a

                                                     31
          funding shortage that curtails progress particularly in those sectors with the highest financing needs
          identified in the DNA, e.g., in the housing sector. Good progress has been made in developing a results
          tracking mechanism to complement the pledge tracking under the leadership of the National Office for
          the Reconstruction of Gaza (NORG). However, with financial support for NORG ceasing,
          achievements establishing an institutional structure to support and monitor progress with the Gaza
          recovery is at risk. Despite some progress in accelerating materials entry through the Gaza
          Reconstruction Mechanism (GRM), materials remain in short supply and long delays in approval and
          delivery prevail, particularly for more complex infrastructure projects.


                            Table 2: Summary of World Bank recommendations to prior AHLC meetings

                                                                                                    Progress   As of
                                                                                     Responsible
                                  Actions                                                           Sept       Sept
                                                                                        Party
                                                                                                    2016       2017
FISCAL SUSTAINABILITY
Expenditures
Control the oversized wage bill                                                            PA
Control medical referrals to Israel                                                        PA
Control medical referrals to local facilities                                              PA
Implement administrative reforms for the pension system                                    PA
Implement parametric reforms to restore the pension system's sustainability                PA
Reduce the size of net lending                                                             PA

Revenues
Enhance the PA's tax effectiveness in Gaza                                                PA
Increase the number of registered large taxpayers                                         PA
Strengthen legislation to penalize non-compliant taxpayers                                PA
Revise government fees and charges upwards                                                PA
Transfer to the PA fiscal losses accumulated over the years                               GoI
Implement institutional measures to reduce fiscal losses on clearance
                                                                                      PA and GoI
revenues

Public Financial Management
Improve budget preparation procedures                                                      PA
Align budget execution with available resources                                            PA
Clear the backlog of outstanding financial statements 2012-2015                            PA
Develop systems for monitoring and reporting expenditure arrears                           PA

Budget support
Provide sizeable, predictable and timely support to the PA's budget                     Donors
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Area C
Expand spatial plans for Palestinian villages in Area C                                   GoI
Increase number of building permits approved in Area C                                    GoI
Grant approval to Palestinian business projects in Area C                                 GoI

The Gaza economy
Allow exports out of Gaza to reach pre-2007 level                                         GoI

                                                             32
                                                                                             Progress   As of
                                                                               Responsible
                                   Actions                                                   Sept       Sept
                                                                                  Party
                                                                                             2016       2017
Significantly reduce items on restricted dual use list for Gaza                   GoI
Create a unified PA in both the West Bank and in Gaza                             PA

The business climate
Adopt the Secured Transactions Law & establish a movable asset registry            PA
Adopt the new Companies Law & the Competition Law                                  PA
Accelerate land registration in Areas A and B                                      PA
Improve access to finance for SMEs                                                 PA
Reform the education system to bridge gap between graduates' skills and
                                                                                   PA
labor market needs

Securing energy for development
Sign an interim PPA to energize the Jenin substation                           GoI and PA
PETL operating on commercial basis                                                 PA
Diversify electricity supply                                                   GoI and PA
Increase power supply to Gaza                                                  GoI and PA
GAZA RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY
Complete a DNA to guide reconstruction and recovery                               PA
Accelerate disbursements of Cairo Conference pledges                             Donors
Establish and monitor time line indicators for review and approval of dual
                                                                                  GoI
use items
Include delivery monitoring in GRM system                                      GoI and PA
Set-up results-based tracking program to monitor recovery                          PA
Establish Gaza import mechanism able to handle Gaza's long term recovery
                                                                               GoI and PA
needs
Strengthen NORG and institutional structure for cross-sector coordination of
                                                                                   PA
decentralized recovery planning
Legend
              On track
              Some progress achieved
              No progress




                                                            33
Annex 2: An Overview of Disbursement of Pledges Made at the Cairo
Conference on Palestine “Reconstructing Gaza”, Cairo: October 12,
2014.34
81. By end of July 2017, almost three years post the 2014 Gaza war, total disbursement of pledges to
    support Gaza is estimated at USD1.851 billion,35 and the overall disbursement ratio reached 53
    percent. Based on available data, 32 participants, out of the total 53 participants, have already fully
    delivered their original pledge at Cairo Conference to support Gaza.

82. Actual disbursements, as of July 2017, fell short of planned disbursements by USD1.5 billion.
    Figure 8 below shows the actual and expected flow of funding of Support to Gaza over the period 2014-
    2017. The actual disbursements were supposed to reach 97 percent as opposed to the actual
    disbursement ratio of 53 percent by July 2017.

                  Figure 8: Planned disbursements of Cairo Conference Pledges (2014-2017) in USD million


                                         Actual disbursements      Delayed funding
      4000

      3500

      3000

      2500                                                                    1396           1528
                                                                1333
      2000                                      1258
                                 882
      1500
                  807
      1000                                                                    1796           1851
                                                1409            1596
        500                      1229
                  967

          0
              Oct 2014- end Oct 2014- end Oct 2014- end Oct 2014- end Oct 2014- end Oct 2014- mid
              of May 2015 of Aug 2015 of Feb 2016 of July 2016 of Dec 2016            july 2017


                                        Source: World Bank staff calculations.

83. If donor funding continues to be paid at the current pace, pledges are estimated to be fully
    disbursed by the end of 2020. Since the last data collection in December 2016 (reflected in the May
    2017 AHLC report), disbursements have increased by USD55 million.

84. As of today, 18 percent of the total recovery needs have been addressed. Out of the USD1.851
    billion that has been disbursed, USD708 million is directly attributed towards priority interventions
    outlined in the Gaza DNA and Recovery Framework, which is an increase of USD38 million from the

34
   Following the 2014 Cairo Conference, the World Bank received a request from the PA and Norway to monitor
disbursement of donor pledges made at the Conference for Gaza reconstruction. Given that the scheduled end date of
contributions is October 2017, this will be the last reporting by the Bank.
35
   Disbursement figure may change once further data is collected from donors who have not yet provided information
about disbursements and allocation of pledges. Support to Gaza figure refers to pledges made at the Cairo Conference
and therefore does not reflect all support spent in Gaza after the 2014 war.

                                                           34
     latest data collection in December 2016. The USD708 million covers 18 percent of total recovery
     needs.36 The infrastructure sector attracted the largest portion of funds with actual disbursements
     estimated at USD463 million.

                      Figure 9: Financing of DNA recovery needs from Cairo Conference pledges (USD million)




     Total funding received* (end of July
     2016)                                                612
     Total funding received* (end of Dec
     2016)                                                670
     Total funding received* (end of July
     2017)                                                 708
     Total DNA recovery needs
                                                                                                            3,875




                                           0               1,000        2,000           3,000             4,000          5,000

                                               Source: World Bank staff calculations.


        Figure 10: Actual disbursements of Cairo Conference support to Gaza by category as of July, 2017 (USD million)



     Humanitarian and emergency aid
     Budget support                               $303
     Others                                 $86
                                                                                                  $16
     Fuel                                 $138                   DNA                               $90
                                                                 $708                 $463
     UNRWA General Fund                                                                            $131
                                          $336
     Infrastructure                                                                              $8
     Productive                                    $280

     Social protection and livelihood
     Social development



                                               Source: World Bank staff calculations.




36
  Total recovery needs, identified in the DNA and Recovery Framework, are estimated at USD3.875 billion to cover
the economic / human costs of the conflict and finance interventions to help Gaza recover and build back better.

                                                                 35
Table 3: Disbursement status by donor of support to Gaza pledged at Cairo Conference on Palestine "Reconstructing Gaza" in
                                                  USD Million (July 2017)



            Donor                                                Support to Gaza          Disbursement of
                                                                                          Support to Gaza

            Qatar*                                                   1000.00                   216.06
            Saudi Arabia*                                             500.00                   107.80
            European    Union1                                        348.28                   312.28
            USA                                                       277.00                   277.00
            Kuwait*                                                   200.00                   62.63
            Turkey2                                                   200.00                   139.48
            UAE                                                       200.00                   59.08
            Norway3                                                   144.98                   173.91
            European Investment Bank4                                 70.00                     N/A
            Switzerland5                                              65.28                    66.96
            Germany                                                   63.32                    61.70
            World Bank                                                62.00                    62.00
            Algeria*                                                  61.40                    61.40
            Japan6                                                    61.00                    61.00
            UK                                                        32.16                    32.16
            Italy7                                                    23.68                    11.53
            Spain                                                     22.80                     14.6
            Sudan8                                                    20.00                     N/A
            The Netherlands                                           15.31                    15.31
            Canada                                                    14.66                    14.66
            Denmark                                                   14.46                    14.46
            Australia                                                 13.18                    13.18
            France9                                                   10.13                    10.13
            Sweden                                                    10.00                    11.37
            Finland                                                    9.31                     9.31
            Luxembourg                                                 8.97                     N/A
            Russia                                                     8.74                     8.74
            Belgium10                                                  7.92                     7.92
            Bahrain*                                                   6.50                     5.15
            Austria11                                                  5.22                     5.22
            India                                                      4.00                     4.00


                                                           36
               Ireland                                                           3.17                        3.17
               Brazil12                                                          2.46                        2.46
               Argentina*13                                                      2.14                        N/A
               South Korea                                                       2.00                        2.00
               China                                                             1.60                        N/A
               Estonia                                                           1.27                        0.95
               Greece                                                            1.27                        0.63
               Mexico                                                            1.10                        1.10
               Indonesia                                                         1.00                        N/A
               South Africa                                                      1.00                        0.00
               Croatia                                                           0.40                        0.35
               Chile                                                             0.25                        0.25
               Slovenia                                                         0.190                       0.190
               Hungary                                                           0.16                        0.16
               Poland                                                            0.10                        0.10
               Malaysia                                                          0.10                        0.10
               Singapore                                                         0.10                        0.10
               Bulgaria                                                          0.06                        0.06
               Slovakia                                                          0.05                        0.05
               Romania                                                           0.05                        0.05
               Serbia                                                            0.05                        0.00
               Portugal                                                          0.03                        0.03
               TOTAL**                                                          3,499                       1,851



** The figure of total support to Gaza was slightly revised based on updated information from donors of previous estimates.
1 European Union contribution includes contribution to UNRWA General Fund pro-rata Gaza for 2014-2015.

2 Turkey’s figure does not reflect TIKA’s disbursements for 2017 of USD7.62 million

3 Norway did not specify the allocation of its total support between West Bank and Gaza. The amount to Support Gaza is an estimate.

4 European Investment Bank contribution is in the form of a loan.

5 Switzerland did not specify the allocation of its total support between West Bank and Gaza. The amount to Support Gaza is an estimate.

6
  Japan pledged USD200 million for Palestinian territories. No specific-pledged amount for Gaza reconstruction. So far, about USD199 million
was disbursed of which USD61 million for projects in Gaza, 106 for West Bank and Gaza, 28 million for West Bank and 4.2 million for others.
7 Italy’s contribution includes a soft loan to the Palestinian National Authority of EUR15 million.

8 Sudan’s contribution is in the form of in kind assistance (100 thousand tons of cement and USD3 million of medical supplies).

9 France’s contribution includes total aid for Palestinian territories for the year 2014 only.

10 Belgium’s contribution is its 2014 General Fund contribution to UNRWA.

11 Austria's contribution of USD8.8 million is programmed for the benefit- with some minor exceptions- of people living in Gaza.

12 Brazil’s contribution is in the form of In-Kind (6000 tons of rice).

13 Argentina’s contribution is in the form of technical assistance agreement to support Gaza which was signed with MOPAD.

* Data provided by UNRWA and/or the Palestinian Authority.




                                                                    37
Annex 3: Methodology Used for Quantifying the Impact of the
Constraints

85. A Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model was developed as the basic tool for analysis in
    order to capture the broader and dynamic economic impact of the removal of the external and
    internal constraints. A Social Accounting Matrix (SAM) for 2014 (in transaction prices) was
    constructed based on the latest available 2004 Input-Output table covering 16 activities. Accounts were
    divided between the West Bank and Gaza using the available national accounts for each in order to be
    able to analyze the two regions separately.37 A key constraint was the absence of national income
    accounts; in particular, data were not available on the functional income distribution between labor and
    capital and had to be based on sector surveys used for the 2001 SAM for Palestine applying the same
    ratios to each sector in the West Bank and Gaza. Further, we did not have detailed information on labor,
    including between skilled and unskilled labor, which is an important shortcoming in particular as the
    impact of potentially more free movement of labor from Palestine to Israel likely would affect mainly
    unskilled workers.38 Official data also does not distinguish land from other capital, which would be
    particularly useful for analyzing the Palestinian situation given the restrictions on access to land.39
    Finally, trade prices are generally not available as external trade is only recorded in value terms making
    it difficult to analyze detailed trade policy regimes.

86. The CGE model broadly follows the standard for these models, with parameter estimates and
    closure rules defining the Palestinian territories-specific model. CGE models are by nature focused
    on the real sector, with details on fiscal operations and external current account transactions added as
    available and needed for the analysis at hand. They normally do not include a monetary and financial
    sector, including assumptions about budget and current account financing and analysis of debt
    dynamics, and with the focus of our analysis on growth and jobs, we have also not attempted to do that
    in our model. Further, in line with common practice, investment behavior is not modeled but rather
    determined by the overall level of savings with no distinction between public and private investment.
    In the case of the Palestinian territories, this is somewhat of a mute-point as only some 20 percent of
    public investment is captured by the budget (according to the Ministry of Finance).

87. In order to analyze the impact of non-tariff trade barriers, restrictions on mobility and access to
    land and other natural resources, and other distortions arising from the domestic policy and
    institutional environment, we estimate trade-related and nontrade-related tariff equivalents
    (TEs). While Doing Business indicators may provide some useful information on the severity of Non
    Trade Barriers (NTBs), they are not in economic terms and cannot be used in our model. We estimate
    the TEs based on the 2014 industrial survey of cost structure in 45 sectors. Trade-related TEs are
    estimated in two steps: (i) estimation of the average cost of storage, transportation, and border crossing
    (based on our own surveys); (ii) application of this cost to the share of traded-inputs in production.
    Nontrade-related (“capital”) TEs are estimated as the residual operating surplus, adjusted for the
    “normal” rate of return. The TEs are then aggregated to the 16 sectors in the SAM. We find that trade-
    related TEs are around 2-3 percent, as expected highest in sectors that rely more on traded inputs.
    Capital TEs are very high in some sectors such as construction and international trade & repair (as well

37
   PCBS publishes sector production, trade, and consumption data for each region. Government and external income
and transfers (net of remittances) were allocated to each region based on population size, and the I/O table imposed
on each region balancing the SAM using the standard entropy technique.
38
   Parallel work underway has collected more detailed labor market data that could be incorporated into the CGE
framework in the future.
39
   The Ministry of Finance finds that land values are grossly underestimated based on actual property tax collections.

                                                         38
    as real estate in the West Bank and agriculture in Gaza) due to the combined impact of external
    restrictions and domestic distortions. It is generally not possible to distinguish the impact from one
    versus the other, though in some sectors such as real estate it is plausible that the major impact comes
    from the external restrictions on access to land.

88. In our CGE model, both trade- and capital TEs work through the price system as ad-valorem
    taxes. The trade-TEs are applied to import prices and the revenue of the tax (equivalent) accrues to
    foreign agents (export-related TEs act as a tax on exports paid by households and again accruing to
    foreign agents but these are already reflected in FOB export prices and any reduction would be reflected
    in higher export prices). The capital TEs work as an indirect tax and applies to domestic producer prices.
    Unlike the indirect tax, the revenue from the capital TEs (excess rents) accrue to households rather than
    the government (households own the factors and are getting the both the normal and the excess return).
    Regretfully, we only have one household type in the model; distributional impacts would be very
    interesting to trace in a multiple household model (capital versus labor income-based households).

89. A number of scenarios related to alleviation of external and internal constraints were explored.
    The general political assumptions underlying the scenario analysis are: full implementation of the Paris
    Protocol; access to Area C as required by the Interim Agreement; lifting of the blockade on Gaza; and
    political reconciliation between the West Bank and Gaza. In addition to a baseline scenario that assumes
    no significant changes in recent trends or in prevailing constraints, we explore five main scenarios: (i)
    Full access to Area C (West Bank only); (ii) Improved trade conditions (including lifting the blockade
    on Gaza) and labor mobility between Palestine and Israel; (iii) Reduced fiscal leakages from Palestine
    to Israel; (iv) An improved domestic business environment and fiscal reforms by the PA; and (v)
    Increased foreign capital inflows at a presumed rate of around 0.5 percent of GDP per year. We do this
    in a sequential, linear/additive way, starting with alleviation of externally-imposed constraints and
    moving towards alleviation of internal constraints. Each scenario thus builds on the previous, but
    without any interaction between assumptions or parameters. Exogenous variables and key parameter
    estimates are based on recent trends, other studies, evidence from other countries, and in some cases
    our own judgement. The results are thus more illustrative than meant to capture the full complexity of
    linkages between external and internal constraints and real projections of the economy under different
    external and internal environments. As our focus is on the medium term, our simulation period is 2017-
    2025. The assumptions related to each of these scenarios are described in the following tables.




                                                     39
West Bank
    Percentage Change from Previous Year                           Baseline:              Scenario 1            Scenario 2             Scenario 3            Scenario 4            Scenario 5
                PARAMETERS                                        2017 2018 - 2025     2017    2018 - 2025   2017    2018 - 2025    2017    2018 - 2025   2017    2018 - 2025   2017    2018 - 2025
Factor productivities
  TFP Labour                                     Index            0.4%          0.4%      1.0%       1.0%       1.0%        1.0%       1.0%        1.0%      1.9%       1.9%       1.9%        1.9%
  TFP Capital
    Manufacturing, Construction, and other       Index            0.4%          0.4%      2.4%       2.4%       2.7%       2.7%        2.7%        2.7%      3.0%       3.0%       3.0%        3.0%
    Electricity                                  Index            3.0%          3.0%     3.00%      3.00%       3.0%       3.0%        3.0%        3.0%      3.0%       3.0%       3.0%        3.0%
    Agriculture                                  Index            0.4%          0.4%     13.4%      17.4%      13.7%      17.7%       13.7%       17.7%     14.0%      18.0%      14.0%       18.0%
    Mining                                       Index            0.4%          0.4%     10.9%      19.9%      11.2%      20.2%       11.2%       20.2%     11.5%      20.5%      11.5%       20.5%
    Water                                        Index            0.4%          0.4%     10.9%      19.9%      11.2%      20.2%       11.2%       20.2%     11.5%      20.5%      11.5%       20.5%
    Hotels & Resturants                          Index            0.4%          0.4%     10.9%      19.9%      11.2%      20.2%       11.2%       20.2%     11.5%      20.5%      11.5%       20.5%
    Percentage Change from Previous Year
                  VARIABLES                      Units
HOUSEHOLDS
Labour force                                   Individuals        2.0%          2.0%      2.0%        2.0%      1.1%        1.1%       1.1%       1.1%       1.6%       1.6%       1.6%        1.6%
Household saving rate                          Percentage         0.3%          0.3%      0.3%        0.3%      0.3%        0.3%       0.3%       0.3%       4.3%       4.3%       4.3%        4.3%
Non-tax revenue                               Nominal US$         5.0%          5.0%      5.0%        5.0%      5.0%        5.0%       6.4%       5.0%      13.9%      12.5%      13.9%       12.5%
External transfers (debit)                    Nominal US$         5.0%          5.0%      5.0%        5.0%      5.0%        5.0%       5.0%       5.0%       5.0%       5.0%       5.0%        5.0%

GOVERNMENT
Real Government consumption:                   Real US$           2.8%          2.8%      2.8%        2.8%      2.8%        2.8%       2.8%        2.8%      2.5%       2.5%       2.5%        2.5%

Effective Import Tariff Rates:                Percentage          0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%     -2.0%        0.0%       3.3%        0.0%      3.3%       0.0%       3.3%        0.0%
Effective Other Indirect taxes rates:         Percentage          0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%       5.3%        0.0%      6.5%       1.2%       6.5%        1.2%
Direct tax rates (Personal)                   Percentage          0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Direct tax rates (corporate)                  Percentage          0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%

Transfers to households:                      Nominal US$         5.0%          5.0%      5.0%        5.0%      5.0%        5.0%       5.0%        5.0%      5.0%        5.0%      5.0%        5.0%
External government transfers (debit)         Nominal US$         5.0%          5.0%      5.0%        5.0%      5.0%        5.0%       5.0%        5.0%      5.0%        5.0%      5.0%        5.0%

Water Prices                                  Nominal US$         0.0%          0.0%
Water Subsidy rates                            Percentage     -             -           -25.0%      -25.0%    -25.0%      -25.0%     -25.0%      -25.0%    -50.0%      -50.0%    -50.0%      -50.0%

Electricity Prices                            Nominal US$     -             -
Electricity Subsidy rates                      Percentage      0.00%         0.00%        0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%

TARIFF EQUIVALENT
Trade tariff equivalent rates:                Percentage          0.0%          0.0%     -5.0%       -5.0%    -15.0%      -15.0%     -15.0%      -15.0%    -15.0%      -15.0%    -15.0%      -15.0%
Capital tariff equivalent rates:              Percentage          0.0%          0.0%     -5.0%       -5.0%      -5.0%       -5.0%     -5.0%       -5.0%     -9.0%       -9.0%     -9.0%       -9.0%

EXTERNAL SECTOR
Official transfers (credit)                   Nominal US$         0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        1.6%        1.6%      1.6%        1.6%      1.6%        1.6%
Private transfers (Credit Remittances, etc)   Nominal US$         3.8%          3.8%      3.8%        3.8%     12.5%      12.5%       12.5%       12.5%     12.5%       12.5%     12.5%       12.5%

Nominal exchange rate:                          Index             0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
Current account deficit (external savings):   Nominal US$         4.5%          4.5%      4.5%        4.5%      4.5%        4.5%       4.5%        4.5%      4.5%        4.5%     8.00%      8.00%

Export prices
  General                                                         2.0%          2.0%      2.0%        2.0%      3.1%        3.1%       3.1%        3.1%      3.1%        3.1%      3.1%        3.1%
Import prices
  General                                     Nominal US$         2.0%          2.0%      2.0%        2.0%     -8.0%        2.0%      -8.0%        2.0%     -8.0%        2.0%     -8.0%        2.0%
  Electricity                                 Nominal US$         1.5%          1.5%      1.5%        1.5%      1.5%        1.5%       1.5%        1.5%      1.5%        1.5%      1.5%        1.5%
  Petroleum products                          Nominal US$         1.5%          1.5%      1.5%        1.5%     -8.5%        1.5%      -8.5%        1.5%     -8.5%        1.5%     -8.5%        1.5%


Capital Depreciation rate                                         2.5%          2.5%
Income elasticities
  General:                                                       1.00         1.00
  Electricity:                                                   1.50         1.50
  Agriculture:                                               Residual     Residual




                                                                                                    40
Gaza
    Percentage Change from Previous Year                           Baseline:             Scenario 1             Scenario 2                    Scenario 3                Scenario 4            Scenario 5
                PARAMETERS                                        2017 2018 - 2025     Not Applicable        2017    2018 - 2025           2017    2018 - 2025       2017    2018 - 2025   2017    2018 - 2025
Factor productivities
  TFP Labour                                     Index            2.5%          2.0%                            2.5%           2.0%           2.5%           2.0%       3.1%       2.6%       3.1%        2.6%
  TFP Capital
    Manufacturing, Construction, and other       Index            4.5%          2.3%                            8.2%           6.0%           8.2%           6.0%       8.5%       6.3%       8.5%        6.3%
    Electricity                                  Index            0.0%          0.0%                            0.0%           0.0%           0.0%           0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
    Agriculture                                  Index            4.5%          2.3%                            8.2%           6.0%           8.2%           6.0%       8.5%       6.3%       8.5%        6.3%
    Mining                                       Index            4.5%          2.3%                            8.2%           6.0%           8.2%           6.0%       8.5%       6.3%       8.5%        6.3%
    Water                                        Index            4.5%          2.3%                            8.2%           6.0%           8.2%           6.0%       8.5%       6.3%       8.5%        6.3%
    Hotels & Resturants                          Index            4.5%          2.3%                            8.2%           6.0%           8.2%           6.0%       8.5%       6.3%       8.5%        6.3%
    Percentage Change from Previous Year
                  VARIABLES                      Units
HOUSEHOLDS
Labour force                                   Individuals      3.2%         3.2%                               2.0%           2.0%           2.0%           2.0%       2.5%       2.5%       2.5%        2.5%
Household saving rate                          Percentage       0.0%         0.0%                               0.0%           0.0%           0.0%           0.0%       2.5%       2.5%       2.5%        2.5%
Non-tax revenue                               Nominal US$      10.0%        10.0%                              10.0%          10.0%          11.4%          10.0%      18.9%      17.5%      18.9%       17.5%
External transfers (debit)                    Nominal US$       5.0%         5.0%                               5.0%           5.0%           5.0%           5.0%       5.0%       5.0%       5.0%        5.0%

GOVERNMENT
Real Government consumption:                   Real US$           5.0%          5.0%                            5.0%           5.0%           5.0%           5.0%       4.7%       4.7%       4.7%        4.7%

Effective Import Tariff Rates:                Percentage          0.0%          0.0%                           -2.0%           0.0%           3.3%           0.0%       3.3%       0.0%       3.3%        0.0%
Effective Other Indirect taxes rates:         Percentage          0.0%          0.0%                            0.0%           0.0%           5.3%           0.0%       6.5%       1.2%       6.5%        1.2%
Direct tax rates (Personal)                   Percentage          0.0%          0.0%                            0.0%           0.0%           0.0%           0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Direct tax rates (corporate)                  Percentage          0.0%          0.0%                            0.0%           0.0%           0.0%           0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%

Transfers to households:                      Nominal US$         5.0%          5.0%                            5.0%           5.0%           5.0%           5.0%       5.0%        5.0%      5.0%        5.0%
External government transfers (debit)         Nominal US$         5.0%          5.0%                            5.0%           5.0%           5.0%           5.0%       5.0%        5.0%      5.0%        5.0%

Water Prices                                  Nominal US$         0.0%          0.0%
Water Subsidy rates                            Percentage     -             -                            -              -              -              -                -0.125     -12.5%    -12.5%      -12.5%

Electricity Prices                            Nominal US$         0.0%          0.0%
Electricity Subsidy rates                      Percentage     -             -                            -              -              -              -              -0.125%      -12.5%   -0.125%    -12.500%

TARIFF EQUIVALENT
Trade tariff equivalent rates:                Percentage          0.0%          0.0%                          -10.0%         -10.0%         -10.0%         -10.0%     -10.0%      -10.0%    -10.0%      -10.0%
Capital tariff equivalent rates:              Percentage          0.0%          0.0%                            0.0%           0.0%           0.0%           0.0%      -3.0%       -3.0%     -3.0%       -3.0%

EXTERNAL SECTOR
Official transfers (credit)                   Nominal US$         5.0%          5.0%                            5.0%           5.0%           6.1%           6.1%       6.1%        6.1%      6.1%        6.1%
Private transfers (Credit Remittances, etc)   Nominal US$         5.0%          5.0%                           24.4%          24.4%          24.4%          24.4%      24.4%       24.4%     24.4%       24.4%
Exports of goods and services                  Real US$           5.0%          5.0%                           13.0%          13.0%          13.0%          13.0%      13.0%       13.0%     13.0%       13.0%

Nominal exchange rate:                          Index             0.0%          0.0%                            0.0%           0.0%           0.0%           0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
Current account deficit (external savings):   Nominal US$         6.0%          6.0%                            6.0%           6.0%           6.0%           6.0%       6.0%        6.0%    18.50%     18.50%

Export prices
  General                                     Nominal US$         2.0%          2.0%                            4.0%           4.0%           4.0%           4.0%       4.0%        4.0%      4.0%        4.0%
Import prices
  General                                     Nominal US$         2.0%          2.0%                          -16.0%           2.0%         -16.0%           2.0%     -16.0%        2.0%    -16.0%        2.0%
  Electricity                                 Nominal US$         1.5%          1.5%                            1.5%           1.5%           1.5%           1.5%       1.5%        1.5%      1.5%        1.5%
  Petroleum products                          Nominal US$         1.5%          1.5%                          -16.5%           1.5%         -16.5%           1.5%     -16.5%        1.5%    -16.5%        1.5%


Capital Depreciation rate                                         2.5%          2.5%
Income elasticities
  General:                                                       1.00         1.00                               1.00           1.00           1.00           1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00
  Electricity:                                                   1.50         1.50                               1.50           1.50           1.50           1.50       1.50       1.50       1.50       1.50
  Labour                                                         0.85         0.85                               0.35           0.35           0.35           0.35       0.35       0.35       0.35       0.35
  Agriculture:                                               Residual     Residual                           Residual       Residual       Residual       Residual   Residual   Residual   Residual   Residual




                                                                                                    41
