                              D



LAND GOVERNANCE ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK
              FOR &
 BACKGROUND NOTE  BDIMENSION
                    IHAR     RANKING

                  FINAL STATE REPORT




          Chandragupt Institute of management patna


                      4th March, 2014
     Chandragupt Institute of Management Patna
                    September,
                           i   2014
             [Type the document subtitle]

LAND GOVERNANCE ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK
              FOR &
 BACKGROUND NOTE  BDIMENSION
                    IHAR     RANKING


                FINAL STATE REPORT




                State Coordinating Team:

                  Dr. V. Mukunda Das

                      B.L. Mishra

                Dr. Debabrata Samanta

                   Bidhanesh Misra




     Chandragupt Institute of Management Patna
                           ii

                  september, 2014
The Land Governance Assessment Framework is an instrument developed by the World
Bank and partners, and used in Bihar with a view to assess the current status of land
governance in the State and to identify areas and issues which require urgent policy
intervention. The LGAF framework consisted of 27 land governance indicators (LGI) that
covered a set of 9 themes listed below.
      Land Rights Recognition
      Forest and Common Land Management
      Urban Land Use Planning and Development
      Public Land Management
      Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investors
      Public Provision of Land Information
      Land Valuation and Taxation
      Dispute Resolution
      Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies
‘Dimensions’ with pre-coded statements (on a scale from A to D) were made from each
indicator. Accordingly there were 116 dimensions in the LGAF, which were ranked based on
actual condition / situation prevailing in the state. The state reports on LGAF contain the
following: status of present land governance, strengths and weaknesses. Best practices
measures were also suggested to make land governance transparent and effective in Bihar.
With these components it is hoped that the state report will help understand the present status
as it has followed a widely applicable score which is accepted worldwide. The implications
for policy makers, emanating from this are that they should take efforts in improving the
situation / factors which received the ranks C and D. It is expected that this effort by policy
makers could bring effectiveness and transparency in land governance in Bihar. Similarly the
suggested policy prescriptions in the report highlighting short term, medium term and long
term measures need to be considered in the context of the set goals. It is hoped that the
concerned department will initiate steps to implement all policy prescriptions and monitor the
implementation regularly.




Dr. V. Mukunda Das
Director
Chandragupt Institute of Management Patna




                                              iii
                           ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Land Governance Assessment Framework-State Report prepared by Chandragupt
Institute of Management Patna (CIMP) can be regarded as a very useful document on Land
Governance in the context of Bihar. A large number of documents were assessed from
several offices related to land. Further interviews were conducted with many persons directly
or indirectly related to the subject matter – Land. The study team takes this opportunity to
acknowledge the support and contribution of all those persons who were directly or indirectly
involved in completing the report.
The institute acknowledges with thanks all those persons who facilitated the completion of
this report. The institute specifically acknowledges the support received from Shri A.K.
Sinha, IAS, Chief Secretary, Govt. of Bihar, Shri Vyasji, IAS, Principal Secretary, Revenue
and Land Reforms Department, Govt. of Bihar, Hukum Singh Meena, IAS, Secretary,
Revenue and Land Reforms Department, Govt. of Bihar, Shri Deepak Kumar, IAS, Principal
Secretary, Forest and Environment Department, Govt. of Bihar, Dr. S. Siddharth, IAS,
Secretary, Urban Development Department, Govt. of Bihar, IG, Registration Department,
Govt. of Bihar and Industrial Development Commissioner, Govt. of Bihar, Managing
Director, BIADA who helped us in conduct of this study by way of directing their officials
for providing relevant information and clarifying doubts / issues.
We are grateful to Dr. C. Ashok Vardhan, IAS, Retired, Chairman, Board of Revenue, Govt.
of Bihar who has contributed substantially to complete this study. The Expert Investigators
Shri J.K. Jha, Shri Pankaj Kumar Singh, Shri Srinarayan Tiwari, Shri Madan Mohan Deo and
Shri Bishwanath Prasad helped in sharing their valuable insights and context analysis. We
acknowledge their contribution in the study.
The CIMP team comprising Shri B.L. Mishra, Dr. Debabrata Samanta and Shri Bidhanesh
Mishra has taken a lot of efforts in data collection, literature review, analysing the data,
organizing state level seminars, panel discussions and completing the report in time.
The help and support provided by Shri Satya Prakash Sharma who has worked as Nodal
Officer of the Revenue and Land Reforms Department, Govt. of Bihar in conduct of this
study is also acknowledged.
The role played by various panellists in contributing to the ranking process with detailed
justifications is also to be appreciated. Among the panellists are CA A.K. Mishra, Ex-
Chairman, Institute of Chartered Accountant, Bihar, Shri K.P.S. Kesari, Ex-Chairman, Bihar
Industries Association, Amarendra Kumar Sinha, Bihar Administrative Service, Govt. of
Bihar, Anju Helen Bara, Assistant Professor, Centre for Development Studies, Central
University of Bihar, Dr. Sangeeta Chandra, Assistant Professor, Chanakya National Law
University, M.Setti, Farmers’ Club, Ara, Shri Anandi Prasad, Progressive Farmers’ Club,
Nalanda and Omkar Kumar Sinha, Progressive Farmers’ Club, Nalanda, Shyam Kishore Jha,
Deputy Director, Bihar Judicial Academy, Patna, Gyananad Roy, Senior Advocate, Patna
High Court, Rajeev Roy, Advocate, Patna High Court, Dr. PKUS Rama Rao, Lecturer,
Chanakya National Law University, Atish Kumar Das, Assistant Professor, Central
University of Bihar, Sayan Banerjee, Assistant Professor, Chandragupt Institute of
Management Patna, A.K.P Sinha, Secretary General, Bihar Chamber of Commerce and
Industries, Patna, Suman Kumar, Chief Administrative Officer, Bihar Industrial Area
Development Authority, Abhimany Singh, Land Development Officer, Industrial
Development Authority, Nisheeth Jaiswal, Vice President, Bihar Industry Association, Dr.

                                             iv
S.C Roy, Prof., Chanakya National Law University, Awadhish Kumar, Faculty member, AN
Sinha Institute of Social Science, Patna, Aviraj Pandey, Faculty member, AN Sinha Institute
of Social Science, Patna, Anuj Sharma, Assistant Professor, Chandragupt Institute of
Management Patna, Rajeev Verma, Assistant Professor, Chandragupt Institute of
Management Patna, Aviraj Pandey, Faculty member, AN Sinha Institute of Social Science,
Patna, Awadhish Kumar, Faculty member, AN Sinha Institute of Social Science, Patna, R. S
Chaudhary, Chief Town Planner (Retd.), Govt. of Bihar, Biswashree Chandra, ASSEFA,
(Civil Society Organisation, Hari Shankar Singh, Architect, Urban Development and Housing
Development Deptt, Govt. of Bihar, Kumar Sarvanand, Architect Planner, Urban
Development and Housing Development Deptt, Govt. of Bihar, Dr. Vijaya Bandyopadhyaya,
Chandragupt Institute of Management Patna, Anoop Singh, Architect and Consultant, DDF,
Sriparna Iyer, Deputy Team Leader, Support Programme for Urban Reforms in Bihar
(SPUR), Government of Bihar, N Kumar, Bihar Chambers of Commerce and Industries, Mr.
Sachin Chandra, Bihar Industry Association, Anil Kumar Sinha, Bihar Industry Association,
Barna ganguli, Assistant Professor, Asian Development Research Institute (ADRI), Patna,
Anjan Kumar Verma, Asian Development Research Institute (ADRI), Patna, Manikant,
Builders’ Association, Patna, Baruna Nandan Singh, Retired DIG, Registration Department,
Government of Bihar, Birendra Kumar Singh, Retired AIG, Registration Department,
Government of Bihar and Nanhe Kumar, Builders’ Association, Patna, Baruna Nandan
Singh, Retired DIG, Registration Department, Government of Bihar and Birendra Kumar
Singh, Retired AIG, Registration Department, Government of Bihar.
The LGAF in Bihar is part of a larger initiative. In 2012, the State Governments of
Jharkhand, Odisha, West Bengal, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh by way of the Department
of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, have requested the
World Bank to support the undertaking of an independent land governance assessment using
the LGAF approach. The State of Bihar joined this initiative in October 2013. The six State
institutions and LGAF teams are supported by the Technical Advisory Group (TAG), a
highly qualified and capable team of nationally recognized experts each covering one of the
LGAF thematic areas. The LGAF process and TAG are coordinated by the TAG secretariat,
hosted by the Center for Sustainable Development (CSD) in New Delhi. CSD coordinated
also the work with DoLR and the World Bank, which has provided financial support and
methodological guidance on the use of the LGAF instrument.
Last but not the least, I am thankful for entrusting us with the LGAF study. The Institute is
happy to record its appreciation to Technical Advisory Group members for the support,
advice and guidelines in bringing out this report with quality. Needless to add to this list, our
appreciation to the TAG Secretariat, New Delhi for their support and cooperation especially
Dr. T. Haque. The State Anchor Smt. Rita Sinha (IAS retired) was a source of motivation and
constant guidance. She has taken pains in travelling to Patna for reviewing the report and
provided valuable suggestions. I take this opportunity to extend our sincere thanks to Mr.
Klaus Deininger, Lead Economist. The study would not have been complete with all the
requirements but for the support of Mr. Klaus Deininger, Mr. Shankar Narayanan and Thea
Hilhorst from World Bank.


Dr. V. Mukunda Das
Director
Chandragupt Institute of Management Patna
                                               v
                                    CONTENTS

CHAPTER                               PARTICULARS                                    PAGE No.
           Foreword                                                                       iii
           Acknowledgements                                                              iv-v
           Contents                                                                    vi-viii
           List of tables                                                                ix-x
           Abbreviation                                                                xi-xiii
           Executive Summary                                                             1-14
     1     Introduction                                                                 15-16
     2     Methodology                                                                  17-19
     3     State General Context                                                        20-24
     4     Theme wise analysis                                                         25-148
    4.1    Land Right Recognition                                                       25-39
    4.2    Forest and Common Land Management                                            40-52
    4.3    Urban Land Use Planning and Development                                      53-74
    4.4    Public Land Management                                                       75-88
    4.5    Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investors                                89-99
    4.6    Public Provision of Land Information – Registry and Cadastre               100-112
    4.7    Land Valuation and Taxation                                                113-119
    4.8    Dispute Resolution and Conflict Management                                 120-129
    4.9    Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies                          130-148
     5     Summary & Recommendation                                                   149-167
     6     Dimension Ranking                                                          168-179
           Bibliography                                                               180-182
Annexure
           Distribution of operational holding and area amongst various categories      184
   4.1.1
           of farmer
   4.1.2   Distribution of ceiling surplus land as on 31st March, 2013                  185
   4.1.3   Status of pending cases in different courts under Land Ceiling Act           186
           (2012-13) March, 2013
   4.1.4   Status of LPC issued from 16/08/2011 to 16/08/2013                           187
           Sanctioned strength of the survey and settlement wing of revenue             188
   4.1.5
           department
   4.3.1   State Profile – Bihar as on 31st March, 2011                               189-190
   4.3.2   Details of ULBs in Bihar                                                     191
   4.3.3   Details of slums identified in major towns as on 31st December, 2013         192
           Progress Report on National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA)              193
   4.3.4
           as on 30th November, 2013
   4.3.5   Progress on Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and            194
           Medium Town (UIDSSMT) as 30th November, 2013
   4.3.6   Progress on Urban Infrastructure and Governance (UIG) as on 30th             195
           November, 2013
   4.3.7   Progress of Basic Services for Urban Poor (BSUP) as on 30th                  196
           November, 2013
   4.3.8   Progress of Integrated Housing for Slum Development Programme                197
           (IHSDP) as on 30th November, 2013
                                            vi
 4.3.9   Details of project completed by the BSHB as on 31st October, 2013            198
4.3.10   Height of building and FAR as per present and proposed norms                 199
4.3.11   Minimum size of plots for different categories of building as per            200
         proposed bye-laws
4.3.12   Plot Size wise Permissible Set Backs and Height of Buildings as per          201
         proposed bye-laws
4.3.13   Provision of exterior open spaces around the buildings as per proposed       202
         bye-laws
4.3.14   Far as per road width as per existing and proposed bye-laws                  203
         Height restriction with respect to approach funnels as per proposed          204
4.3.15
         bye-laws
         Height restriction with respect to transitional area as per proposed bye-    205
4.3.16
         laws
4.3.17   Off Street Parking Space as per proposed bye-laws                             206
         Land Use Classification and Permissible Uses as per modified building       207-210
4.3.18
         bye-laws 1996
         Land Uses Permitted / Prohibited in Different Use Zones in Proposed         211-224
4.3.19
         Building Bye-Laws 2013
4.4.1    Details of Khas Mahal Land in the state as on 31st March, 2013                225
4.4.2    Details of Gairmazruha Malik land in the state as on 31st March, 2013         226
4.4.3    Details of Gairmazruha Aam land in the state as on 31st March, 2013           227
4.4.4    Details of Ceiling surplus land in the state as on 31st March, 2013           228
4.4.5    Details of Bhoodan land in the state as on 31st March, 2013                   229
         Land Acquired by Govt. for various Central / State Government’s             230-232
4.5.1
         Projects since the year 2005-2006.
         Land Allotted / Land Rates & Position of Vacant Land Details                233-234
4.5.2
         (Industrial Area as on 30.11.2013)
4.5.3    Details of Industrial Plots allotted to private investor till 31.03.2014     235
4.5.4    Number of industrial plot allotted during last three years in Bihar          236
         Application Status for allotment of land on 31.10.2013 with Bihar            237
4.5.5
         Industrial Area Development Authority
4.5.6    Schedule of activity and time framework for payment of money                 238
4.5.7    Sliding scale for deciding minimum compensation of land                      239
         Time limit for services under Right to Public Services Act 2011 for          240
4.6.1
         Registration Department
         Disposal of applications under right to public service Act in                241
4.6.2
         Registration Department as on 31th March, 2013
         Exemption of stamp duty under Information & Communication                    242
4.6.3
         Technology Policy 2011
         Exemption of registration fee under Information & Communication              243
4.6.4
         Technology Policy 2011
         Exemption of registration fee under Bihar Industrial Incentive Policy        244
4.6.5
         2001
         Services under Right to Public Services Act 2011 for Registration            245
4.6.6
         Department
4.7.1    Registration and Stamp Fee on various types of documents                    246-248
4.7.2    Multiplying factors for deciding holding tax                                  249
4.7.3    Structure of ARV for Tax Calculation – Patna                                  250
                                           vii
4.7.4    Tax Structure for Vacant Land in ULBs of Bihar                               251
4.8.1    Interdependency of land conflict causes                                      252
4.8.2    Dispute resolution mechanism under various acts                            253-257
4.8.3    Institution and disposed of cases in Revenue Court in Bihar                  258
         Number and description of civil suits instituted in various year in the      259
4.8.4
         state.
4.8.5    Cases instituted in Patna District / Subordinate Courts                     260
4.8.6    Number of cases decided in the Sub-ordinate courts of Bihar                 261
4.8.7    Civil cases decided in District / Subordinate Court in Patna                262
4.8.8    Disposal by various type of Lok Adalat during various year                  263
         Details of Disposal & Legal Awareness Programme by Mobile Lok               264
4.8.9
         Adalat during various year
4.9.1A   Organizational Structure of Department of Revenue and Land Reforms          265
         Organizational structure of office of the Director, Land Records Survey     266
4.9.1B
         and Settlements.
4.9.1C   Organizational structure of Directorate of Consolidation                     267
4.9.1D   Organization Structure of Forest & Environment Department                    268
         Organizational Structure of Principal Chief Conservator of Forest Level    269-270
4.9.1E
         Setup
4.9.1F   Organizational Structure of Department of Registration                       271
4.9.1G   Organizational Structure of Urban Development Department                     272
4.9.1H   Organizational Structure of BIADA                                            273
 4.9.2   Mapping of Institutional Activities related to Land in Bihar               274-285
         Position of Sanctioned and Working Strength in Revenue and Land            286-287
4.9.3
         Reforms Department as on 31.12.2013.
         Number and description of civil suits instituted in various year in the     288
4.9.4
         state
         Details of cases with respect to sharecroppers as on 31st March, 2013 in    289
4.9.5
         Bihar.
4.9.6    Encroachment of public land as on 31st March, 2013 in Bihar                 290
         Category wise distribution of surplus ceiling land in Bihar as on 31st      291
4.9.7
         March, 2013.
  5      Minutes of State Validation Workshop Bihar on 26th June, 2014              292-296
         List of Participants of State Validation Workshop held on 26th June,       297-303
 5.1
         2014
         Press Clipping Regarding State Validation Workshop held on 26th            304-311
 5.2
         June, 2014




                                          viii
                                 LIST OF TABLES

Table
                                                Title                                Page No.
 No.
 1.1    Land Utilisation as on 30/6/2010                                               15-16
 3.1    Distribution of land holding pattern as per agriculture census 2010-11          20
 3.2    Details of digitization of maps as on 30th June, 2014                           23
4.1.1   Progress of revisional survey as on 31st March, 2013                            27
4.1.2   Selected Districts for Special Survey in Bihar                                  27
4.1.3   Details of house sites allotted under various schemes                           34
4.2.1   General information regarding forests in Bihar                                  40
4.2.2   National park and world life sanctuary in Bihar                                 41
4.3.1   Progress achieved as on 31st November, 2013                                     61
4.3.2   Allocation of loan by HUDCO                                                     61
4.3.3   Progress under integrated house for slum development programme as on 30th       61
        November, 2013
4.3.4   Minimum Distance from Electric Line                                               65
4.3.5   Minimum Distances Required for Storage Shed of Liquefied Petroleum Gas            65
        Cylinders
4.3.6   Table 4.3.6: Allocation of loan by HUDOC                                          68
4.3.7   Slums identified in five big cities.                                              68
4.3.8   Property tax collected by Patna Municipal Corporation                             69
4.3.9   Slums identified in five cities.                                                  72
                                                                        st
4.4.1   Summary of Balance Available Public Land in Bihar as on 31 March, 2013            76
                                                                 st
4.4.2   Public land distributed to landless beneficiaries till 31 March, 2013             78
4.4.3   Transfer of Public Land for Homestead till December, 2013                         78
                                                                     st
4.4.4   Status of Encroachment of Public Land in the state as on 31 March, 2013           79
4.4.5   Time limit for various stages of land acquisition                               83-84
4.6.1   Details of digitisation of cadastral survey map as on 31.03.2014                 100
4.6.2   Progress of revisional survey                                                  100-101
4.6.3   Revenue and Expenditure of Registration Department, Government of Bihar        107-108
4.7.1   Property tax collected by Patna Municipal Corporation during the various         116
        years
4.7.2   Land rent collected during various years.                                        116
4.7.3   Number of deed registered and revenue receipt in various years.                  116
4.8.1   Disposal of cases by various type of Lok Adalat in Bihar.                        122
4.8.2   Details of Disposal & Legal Awareness Programme by Mobile Lok Adalat           122-123
4.8.3   Number and description of civil suits instituted in various year in the state.   124
4.8.4   Cases instituted in Patna District / Subordinate Courts                          124

                                               ix
4.8.5 Number of cases decided in the Sub-ordinate courts of Bihar                      125
4.8.6 Civil cases decided in District / Subordinate Court Patna                        125
4.9.1 Number and description of civil suits instituted in various year in the state    136
4.9.2 Details of cases with respect to sharecroppers as on 31st March, 2013 in Bihar   136
4.9.3 Encroachment of public land as on 31st March, 2013 in Bihar                      136
4.9.4 Collection of Land Rent during various years in Bihar                            142
4.9.5 Category wise distribution of surplus ceiling land in Bihar as on 31st March,    143
      2013
4.9.6 House sites allotted to mahadalit families from various types of government      144
      land as on 31st December, 2013
4.9.7 Allocation of loan disbursement for house construction                           144




                                          x
                          ABBREVIATION

ACF         Assistant Conservator of Forest
ADM         Additional District Magistrate
ADM LR      Additional District Magistrate Land Reforms
ADR         Alternative Dispute Resolution
AOA         Article of Association
ARV         Annual Rental Value
BELTRON     Bihar State Electronics Development Corporation Ltd
BIADA       Bihar Industrial Area Development Agency
BIPARD      Bihar Institute of Public Administration and Rural Development
BLDR Act    Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act
BLJR        Bihar Law Journal Report
BLR Act     Bihar Land Reforms Act
BLT         Bihar Land Tribunal
BPL         Below Poverty Line
BPPHT Act   Bihar Privilege Person Homestead Tenancy Act
BSHB        Bihar State Housing Board
BSUP        Basic Services to Urban Poor
BT Act      Bihar Tenancy Act
BUDA        Bihar Urban Development Agency
BUIDCo      Bihar Urban Infrastructure Development Corporation
CAA         Constitutional Amendment Act
CBO         Community-based organizations
CCF         Chief Conservator of Forest
CDP         City Development Plan
CEPTU       Centre for Environmental Planning and Technology University
CF          Conservator of Forest
CFR         Community Forest Resource
CGRC        Centralized Grievance Redressal Cell
CGRC        Centralized Grievance and Redressal Cell
CLR         Computerized Land Record
CPC         Civil Procedure Court
CPRs        Common Property Resources
CSMC        Central Sanctioning & Monitoring Committee
DCLR        Deputy Collector Land Reforms
DFID        Department for International Development
DFO         Divisional Forest Officer
DGPS        Digital Global Positioning System
DLC         District Level Committee
DM          District Magistrate
DUDA        District Urban Development Agency
DUDA        District Urban Development Agency
EDCs        Eco Development Committees
EIA         Environmental Impact Assessment
EM          Entrepreneurship Memorandum

                                     xi
ESQR      European Society for Quality Research
ETS       Electronic Total Station
EWSs      Economically Weaker Sections
FAR       Floor Area Ratio
FRA       Forest Right Act
FRC       Forest Right Committee
GCA       Gross Cropped Area
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
GIS       Geographic Information System
Govt.     Government
HIG       High Income Group
HPL       Hindustan Prefab Ltd.
HQ        Head Quarter
HUDCO     Housing And Urban Development Corporation Ltd.
HUNNY     HUDCO Nav Nagar Yojana
IAY       Indira Awas Yojana
IHSDP     Integrated Housing for Slum Development Programme
IOC       Indian Oil Corporation
ISHUP     Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor
IT        Information Technology
ITC       Industrial Training Centre
ITES      Information Technology Enabled Service
ITI       Industrial Training Institute
JFMC      Joint Forest Management Committee
JNNURM    Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
LSG.      Local Self Government
LIG       Low Income Group
LIS       Land Information System
LPC       Land Possession Certificate
MGNREGA   Mahatama Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
MIG       Middle Income Group
MIS       Management Information System
MOA       Memorandum of Association
MVRs      Minimum Market value registers
NABARD    National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
NAC       Notified Area Committee
NBC       National Building Code
NGOs      Non-Governmental Organizations
NGRBA     National Ganga River Basin Authority
NLRMP     National Land Record Modernisation Program
NOC       No Objection Certificate
NSA       Net Sown Area
NSSO      National Sample Survey Organisation
OBC       Other Backward Caste
OGs       Out growths
OTFD      Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
PCC       Project Clearance Committee
                                 xii
PCCF      Principal Chief Conservator of Forest
PESU      Patna Electricity Supply Unit
PHED      Public Health and Engineering Department
PMC       Patna Municipal Corporation
PPP       Public Private Partnership
PRDA      Patna Regional Development Authority
PVTGs     Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
PWD       Public Works Department
R&R       Rehabilitation and Resettlement
RA        Requisitioning Authorities
RCC       Reinforced Cement Concrete
RCD       Road Construction Department
RoRs      Record of Rights
SC        Scheduled Caste
SDO       Sub Divisional Officer
SEWA      Self Employed Women's Association
SHGs      Self Help Groups
SIA       Social Impact Assessment
SIA       Social Impact Assessment
SLNA      State Level Nodal Agency
SPV       Special Purpose Vehicle
ST        Scheduled Tribe
TDR       Transferable Development Right
U/S       Under Section
UA        Urban Agglomeration
UD&HD     Urban Development & Housing Department
UIDSSMT   Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Town
UIDSSMT   Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Town
UIG       Urban Infrastructure and Governance
UK        United Kingdom
ULBs      Urban Local Bodies
VAT       Value Added Tax
WC        Water Closet




                                 xiii
                            EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Land is a valuable but scarce and sometimes contested resource in Bihar. The State
Government plays a critical role in guiding land policy in ways that improve tenure security
and leads to inclusive growth. The basis for efficient, transparent, and equitable land
governance systems are updated and reliable records and maps, while regular analysis of the
information that these incorporate can guide decision making. Urban development is of
immense importance in view of the significant contribution it makes towards the overall
growth and development of the economy of states. The balance between industrial and
agriculture land use is critical for the state’s development and optimal allocation of land
requires routine access to up-to- date data such as on actual land use.
1. Land governance Assessment framework
The Land Governance Assessment Framework is a participatory, evidence driven instrument
to assess the current status of land governance in state, to identify areas and issues which
require urgent policy intervention was assessed across nine distinct focus areas: (i) Land
Rights Recognition (ii) Rights to Forest and Common Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations
(iii) Urban Land Use Planning and Development (iv) Public Land Management (v) Transfer
of Public Land to Private Use (vi) Public Provision of Land Information: Registry and
Cadastre (vii) Land Valuation and Taxation (viii) Dispute Resolution and (ix) Review of
Institutional Arrangements and Policies. Each of these focus areas has been assessed using a
set of land governance indicators which have been further divided into various dimensions.
The LGAF framework consists of 27 land governance indicators (LGI), each broken down
into “dimensions” with pre-coded statements (on a scale from A to D – total of 116
dimensions). Dimensions were ranked based on actual conditions prevailing in the state.
The LGAF implementation started in the state of Bihar in October 2013 and was carried out
by CIMP, involved 9 experts and 50 panellists; the report is validated in June 2014.
2. Findings
Bihar has a total population of 103.811 million people of whom 89% live in rural areas with
agriculture being a key economic activity. The state accounts for 2.88 per cent of India’s land
mass but supports 8.58 per cent of the country’s population. Bihar has set important steps
with respect to Policies, Acts and Rules to improve land governance. Land mark initiatives
are the enactment of Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009, Bihar Land Tribunal Act,
2009, Bihar Agricultural Land (Conversion for Non-Agriculture purpose) Act, 2010, Bihar
Land Mutation Act, 2010 Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011 and the Bihar
Khasmahal Policy, 2011 for urban areas.
2.1 Land Right Recognition
The law recognizes individuals' rural land tenure rights as well as urban land rights held by
individuals, households, for apartments and group housing, for commercial complexes, and
also in slums. A considerable amount of land is held also by religious trusts.
The law regularizes also the status of raiyats in rural areas. There is a clear, practical process
for the formal recognition of possession, but this process has not been implemented
effectively. The process includes document and physical verification based on formal or
informal evidences.



1Census of India,2011

                                                1
Record of rights is generally prepared through Survey. In this regard, it may be noted that,
record of rights, whether first time or second time, is done only when people approach for
registration and mortgage and, accordingly applicable registration fee and stamp duty are
charged. Record of rights can be corrected and created by decree of Civil Court. Completion
of record of rights requires mutation. On demand recording of rights should include proper
safeguard to prevent abuse, but is limited in practice.
In legal parlance, the long term unchallenged possession is termed as adverse possession. In
private land such adverse possession does not create or extinguish the title over the land but
in public land adverse possession makes a difference as to decide the factum of the title.
Continuous possession for 12 years gives the people the right on land subject to satisfactory
documentary proof. Circulars have been issued from time to time by the State Government to
regularize, or not to regularize those long term unchallenged possession. Non-documentary
form of evidence can be used for obtaining recognition of a claim to land or property along
with other documents i.e. tax payment receipt, land rent payment receipt, patta allotted by the
government in case if other form of evidences are not available. But non documentary proof
does not have conclusive evidence. People have to go through a quasi-judicial / judicial
mechanism. In Bihar although legislation exists to formally recognize long-term,
unchallenged possession in Bihar, formal recognition is granted to very few applicants due to
difficulties.
The enactment of the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885, provided ‘record of rights’ (RoR - vide
sections 101-115), lays out the respective rights and obligations of the state and tenants, and
makes provisions for survey of the land. A number of laws protect and enforce the group
rights on the common lands as well. Group rights are mostly recognized under the statute or
the customary laws having the same force as enacted law and especially in the context of
forest land were group and individual right are recorded and enforceable.
In practice, individuals and some groups in rural and urban areas can experience a lack of
protection of tenural rights and have their rights contested. This is mainly the result of gaps in
the implementation of the Acts. Moreover, maps and many records are almost one century
old and no longer reflect ground reality. Following the enactment of the Bengal Survey Act,
1875, cadastral Survey was taken up district-wise and completed in 1922, but subsequent
resurveying was either incomplete or not undertaken at all (see section 3.6).
Since independence, the State Government has made efforts to create land rights for
vulnerable and disadvantaged sections of the population. A positive result is the issuing of
Basgit Purcha (grant) by circle officers to 580,214 families in Bihar under the Bihar
Privileged Person Home Stead Tenancy Act, 1947. Eligible persons were attached with the
household of a land holder doing domestic and agriculture chores to which the land lord
allotted a portion of private land for homestead land thus formalising a customary system.
This act was dormant in Bihar but operationalised in a campaign mode, under the Mahadalit
Vikas Mission (2009).
Sharecroppers are another vulnerable but important category in Bihar with an estimated 15-
20 percent of all cultivators working on farm land as oral bataidar (sharecropper). Land
owners tend to rotate sharecroppers every two to three years, reason why bataidars will not
undertake a long term investment in the land. Despite legal provisions towards protecting
sharecroppers from (the threat of) eviction, few obtained any occupancy rights and the
position of sharecroppers continues to be a matter of concern.
In Bihar, only 12.8% of land parcels are recorded in the name of women. Following
succession, the record of rights in Bihar mostly carries the name of the male coparceners.
There is only an obligation for widows and spinsters to record a raiyati in her name. The
                                                2
State ggovernment introduced legislation to increase women’s land ownership, such as by
amending section 27 of theBihar Land Ceiling Act in 2009, that now indicates for District
Collectors to allocate 50% of surplus “ceiling” to women from eligible categories
(Mahadalit). Also, the parcha and pawna for allottees of land and house sites are now being
issued in the name of wife and husband jointly, with the wife’s name being mentioned first.
It is also observed that in Bihar, many flats and houses were not registered due to disputes
between builders and purchasers, death of builders or their disappearance. To assist harassed
purchasers, the government through the Bihar Apartment Act, 2006, notified in 2006-07 that
such aggrieved people can apply to Patna Municipal Authority for registration by giving a
copy of the agreement and proof of making the entire payment for purchase. On receipt of
such applications, the municipal authority has given permission, after verification, to the
owner for unilateral registration of the flat and house with a copy to registration office. This
unique approach has helped many people in the state. Also in 2006, the Registration
Department in Patna started a unique practice of registration at door step, for which a camp
was organized by the registry office in various localities of Patna town after giving proper
publicity.
2.2 Forest and Common Land Management
In Bihar, the area of notified forest area is 6492.9 km2 of which 10% is reserved forest and
90% protected forest. In addition, there are national parks which cover 3339.458 sq. km.
Local forest dwellers are entitled to some usefructuary rights and privileges (including
fisheries) as mentioned in the Khatiyan of land of protected forest. These rights formally
ceased to exist when the 13 national parks and wildlife sanctuaries in Bihar were converted
into reserve or protected forest, even although customarily such rights are recognized.
Forest and common land are clearly identified in Bihar and are recorded as such. Common
lands with natural resources on them mostly recorded as jungle/jhari/jhar /jhankar etc. in the
revenue records and hence fall under the Supreme Court judgment declaring all such areas as
forest lands thus attracting the provision of the Forest Conservation Act, 1980. In all such
cases, non-forest use of common lands is not permissible. In practice, conversion is taking
place for public interest schemes by State nodal officers from the forestry department. The
requisitioning party has to compensate for environmental losses by depositing net asset value
of fallen trees and replant trees elsewhere.
In as much as, the boundary demarcation of communal land is concerned, there is no
indigenous land anymore in Bihar, since Jharkhand became a separate State. The common
land in Bihar is categorized as Gairmazruha Aam, which is basically community land, owned
by the village community. These include village pathways, village waste land, play grounds,
orchards, and cremation and burial places. They further include the village water bodies and
bandhs, ahar, pynes, reservoirs, tanks etc (see also 2.4). Even if the nature of these lands have
changed, the consent of the Gram Sabha is mandatory for Government to change land use or
promote settlement through pattas. In course of the revisional survey and in day to day
operations of the lower level revenue bureaucracy, numerous Gairmazruha Aam plots have
been recorded in private names; rent receipts issued and rent being collected. No systematic
attempt has been made to enquire into the privatization of common land, whether the
settlements made in favour of private individuals were made by competent authority or
encroachers / grabbers have illegally been recorded.
People’s rights accrue by virtue of adverse possessions, while the records are in the name of
government of Bihar. Despite revenue land being recorded as Jungle / Jhari (bush), the forest
department has not extended its control over such land, consequently, non-forest activities
continue without seeking the permission from the forest authorities. There are settlements
                                               3
inside forest area which fall outside the Forest Right Act and should be evacuated, but which
is not being implemented. Forest villages were not mapped and demarcated in the first
Cadastral survey and still do not have a recognised status because the Department of
Environment and Forest has not undertaken a resurvey. No conversion of forest villages into
revenue villages is required as no forest village exists in Bihar.
While ownership remains with the government, certain individual rights accrue through the
legal provisions of the Forest Rights Act. However, much remains to be done in Bihar with
regard to the application of the Forest Right Act in letter and spirit. Reportedly, 20 sub
divisional level committees, 13 district level committees and 1299 Forest Right Committee
(FRC) have been constituted. Functions of various committees at various levels are matter of
further enquiry. Out of the 2930 claims filed, 585 claims are under process and 31 titled
deeds were disbursed up to the year 2013. About 350 Gram Sabhas are yet to claim
individual rights.
It is not evident that, whether Gram Sabha members have visited every hamlet to interact
with tribal and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (OTFD), collected information and oriented
them about their rights and provided them with training. There is a hiatus between law and
practice and orienting the target groups to their rights and obligations under FRA. Existence
of vested interests and collusion with local bureaucracy impede the target groups to take
advantage of their legal entitlements.
There are certain restrictions on rural land use, like conversion of agricultural land for non-
agricultural use. To promote farm consolidation, restrictions exist for land transferability to
others than the direct neighbor of the plot (if willing to buy) (see para 16(3) of the Bihar
Ceiling Law). The absence of Rural Land Use Board in Bihar is a constraint for proper
planning, zoning and to develop long-term perspective on land use by developing Land Use
Plans. However, there is an Urban Land Use Planning Board in the state.
2.3 Urban Land Use Planning and Development
Though there are a number of Acts and Rules to guide and govern urban development, urban
land ownership and transfer and disaster preparedness such as earth quacks, urban
development has been left to the whims and fancies of people, builders and contractors.Urban
expansion is unplanned. As a result there is inadequate infrastructure, inadequate width of
road, absence of proper drainage system, and inadequate parking space evident in urban areas
of the state..
After introduction of The Bihar Municipal Act, 2007 all activities of urban development are
guided by this Act and the unified draft building bye-laws developed in 2013. Other Acts and
Rules to guide urban governance in Bihar are ‘The Bihar Planning and Development Act,
2012’, ‘The Bihar Apartment Ownership Act, 2006’and ‘Bihar State Slum Policy, 2010’. The
promulgation of Urban Land Planning Act, 2012, may lead to better planning of urban land
and identification and removal of encroachment from public lands in urban areas.
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)2have responsibilities in the fields of administration, legislation,
town planning, environment and architecture. There are 11 Municipal Corporations, 42
Nagar Parishads and 86 Nagar Panchayats, but which are confronted with shortage of
technical personnel, particularly in town planning and architecture. Urban Land Use,
Planning, and Development suffers from want of statutory Master Plan or City Development
Plan (CDP) in which urban land uses are generally shown and notified. For effective use of
urban land there are 7 zones namely; residential, commercial (retail), commercial
(wholesale), industrial, public and semi-public uses and agricultural.

2The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act (74th CAA), schedule 12th.
                                               4
Various types of land use permitted and restricted in different zones is further clearly
demarcated and these restrictions serve public purpose and safeguard people from disaster.
The restrictions in the Act and Rules serve public purpose and would contribute to clear and
transparent processes of urban expansion through Master Plans. However, no Master Plan for
urban development has yet been approved for any city in the state.
Building bye-laws are not respected due to poor monitoring of provision of various acts.
Acquiring a building permit for a residential dwelling is a cumbersome and time-taking
process. Development control is almost absent. It is estimated that about 60 per cent people
are living in house without obtaining a completion certificate; about 70 to 80 per cent of those
living in houses and apartments have no occupancy certificate and around 55 per cent of
multi-storied buildings in Patna are facing vigilance cases for violation of Floor Area Ratio,
height, map and approved building plans.
The State Slum Policy of 2010 is developed within the framework of the National Slum
Policy, and has important and foresighted provisions to provide tenure security to slum
dwellers, basic services and construct 22,372 dwelling units for Lower Income Groups and
Economically Weaker Sections and to marginalised slum dwellers. The government has
identified 1838 slums in 28 cities but lacks a data base to guide development. The National
Slum Policy mandates states to allocate clear land ownership or long term lease to slum
dwellers wherever possible. Slums eligible for in-situ up-gradation have to participate in
sharing the costs. The ULBs in Bihar plan to transfer government or municipal land through
negotiated settlement with the slum dwellers at a price not exceeding 33 percent of the
market value, based on the stamp duty records. Slum dwellers will be required to pay the
amount up front and could take loan from micro-finance institutions for this purpose. Those
who paid the land lease will have the right to sell their dwelling unit with the lease on the
land to any other low-income group person, but with prior approval of association or society.
This policy is not implemented yet and even in Rajiv Awas Yojana people have only leases
for the houses, and not for the land.
In 2006 the Bihar Government has commenced on a fast track implementation of the reform
agenda including a revision of laws and more decentralization of governance. Urban
development is supported by programs like Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal
Mission (JNNURM) and Support Programme for Urban Reforms (SPUR) to support policy
and institutional development, revenue generation, management of urban infrastructure and
services delivery, municipal capacity to attract private investment and empowered poor
communities and socially excluded groups. The master Plan finalization for Patna is in
process and City Development Plans are prepared for 28 urban bodies under the
JNNURM3.The process of GIS-based mapping of urban area has started and base maps of 17
towns are ready. Work is in progress for preparation of base map of other towns.
2.4 Public Land Management
The types of Public land in Bihar are (i) Gairmazruha-Khas/Malik (17,96,229.59 acres), (ii)
Gairmazruha Aam (9,07,809.99 acres), (iii) Khas Mahal (5036.03 – urban land), (iv)
Kaisera-hind (Central Govt. Land) (v) Ceiling Surplus land (3,63,415.71 acres) and (vi)
Bhoodan Land (6,48,593.14 acres of which 3,45,349.02 acres are confirmed). Each category
(except for Bhoodan and ceiling surplus) was clearly identified, recorded and demarcated
during the Cadastral Survey (1892 to 1922). All these almost one century old records are


3However, a revival of Town Planning Organization under Urban Development & Housing
Department could be considered instead of depending solely on private consultants.

                                               5
maintained and assigned to eligible private individuals and institutions, but many records are
in dilapidated condition and no longer reflecting ground reality due to lack of resurveying.
The information related to public lands are available to people, who can collect it from
concerned government offices.
Public lands are managed through Bihar Government Estates (Khas Mahal) Manual, 1953,
and Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act, 1950. The criteria for public land ownership are
clearly defined and assigned to right level of Government from Halka Karamchari at the
grass root level to State Level Officials.The Gairmazruha Aam land is regarded as village
common (see 2.2) and State government can only distribute these lands only if there is
change land use with consent from the gram sabha. The state government has not yet come
up with a policy for Gairmazruha Aam land in urban areas with respect to the competent
authority for issuing no objection.
The Gairmazruha Khas/Malik land, land donated under Bhoodan Yagna and private land
vested by government under Bihar Land reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area), Act 1956 are all
under direct control of State Government and can be distributed and settled in favour of
landless/housesiteless eligible beneficiaries. The public lands such as Anabad Bihar Sarkar,
Anabad Surva-Sadharan, Roads, Railway lines, irrigational channels, embankment, grave-
yards etc. have been recorded in Khatiyan and kept under direct ownership of the
Government.
However, various public offices are suffering from shortage of manpower, infrastructure and
capacity gap. Most of the departments are running at 50-60% of sanctioned strength. There is
also data gap related to public land. Most of the Departments are not having the details of the
land they possess and its condition, particularly encroachment.
Encroachment of public land is a wide-spread problem in the State. In an effort to better
manage public lands, State Government issues from time to time notifications. Responsibility
for the removal of encroacher is vested with Circle Officer under the Bihar Land
Encroachment Act, 1956, which was done for 24% of encroached urban land and 36% in
rural areas by March 2013.In district headquarters, special efforts through a drive are now
undertaken to identify urban public land within municipal area by conducting special Survey
and subsequently remove encroachers followed by the protection of the public land by
constructing boundary wall after removal.
Protecting public land is ignored at the grass root level in rural areas, where there is steady
depreciation of the CPR since independence and their privatization in connivance with local
bureaucracy, particularly during revisional surveys. Circle officers have not opposed claims
made during survey operations or consolidation proceedings, even when on frivolous or
concocted grounds. Cases are not filed despite legal provisions to that effect. There is no
material on record to suggest how many cases of public land privatization have been filed in
the Deputy Collector Land Reforms Court, as per the Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act,
2009.
Bihar has an active policy with respect to distribution and settlement of public land by
eligible, vulnerable groups and a significant portion of public land have been distributed.
However, large chunks of public lands were found unsuitable for distribution and the State
will have to launch special survey for assessing the reasons and what strategies can be used
for making them suitable for distribution (see also 2.5).
The decision to distribute bhoodan land, ceiling surplus land, gairmazarhua aam land and
gairmazarhua khas land to weaker sections of the society is a welcome effort in the state for
meeting equity concern. Most of the beneficiaries of total 23,11,944 beneficiaries are women.
Till December, 2013, a total 505808 numbers of homeless families have been provided land
                                              6
to build their house. House-sites have been allotted to Mahadalit (extreme backward class)
families from the land taken from Gairmazruha Aam, Gairmazruha Khas, and land purchased
from raiyat to enable them to construct houses.
Since the allotment of land is being made from the public land (government land), the
allotment/ issue of parcha and mutation should go simultaneously. However, out of the total
land allottees of 23,11,944 as on 31st March, 2013 possession has been given to 90.6% of
them, mutation for 80.8% and rent fixation for only 59.3% of the total allottees. Although
the land is allotted to landless people of the state, the major problem is giving them the
possession and legal entitlement. Dispossession has been reported in number of cases. Nearly
1 lakh dispossession is reported in case of Bhoodan land. Tackling the issue of giving
possession and restoring disposed land to the actual beneficiaries should be tackled through
effective implementation of policy.
2.5 Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investor
Land plays crucial role in the development strategy and investment process in Bihar. The
Government of Bihar has promulgated a series of regulations and policies to attract
investment and invite more long-term, capital-intensive, high-tech projects. Every five year
the State Government adopts a new industrial policy to incorporate changes in the investment
dynamics. The State Government devised a new method under the 'Aao Bihar' (Come to
Bihar) call for investors.
Land is acquired by the government through Department of Revenue and Land Reforms by
the District Land Acquisition Officer and District Collector and District Magistrate. In Bihar,
most of the lands acquired in last seven years are for public purposes only.The Revenue and
Land Reforms Department acquired 2683.62 acres of land in 2012-13 only for public
purposes. After delivery of possession under the Land Acquisition Act, requisitioning bodies
put the same in destined use. The Director of Land Acquisition Bihar maintains information
regarding the process of land acquisition.
The government decided to pay the same value for the same class of land in the same project
irrespective of number of villages and differences in the MVRs, with the class being
determined by a high level committee at the district level. This procedure has facilitated land
acquisition process. Although manipulated sale deeds may be used to hike land price on the
eve of land acquisition process and the sole safe guard for the State is that the governing rate
should be what prevails on the date of notification. However, problem with the identification
of the real title holder for acquisition and compensation can cause delays.
According to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, only people who have a recorded status of
ownership get compensated, not the people whose livelihood depend upon the land. The
Bihar Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy, 2007 makes provision for displaced
agricultural laborers and have been rendered unemployed. They will be given lump sum
minimum wages for 200 days and job cards under prevalent national / state rural employment
guarantee scheme.Compensation for non-land owners will become available under the new
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 has been replaced by the Central Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 with effect from 1st January, 2014. It is a response
to protest by landowners over acquisition of land in different parts of the country in general,
including in Bihar.
In Bihar, it has been observed that most land acquisitions for public purposes were made
under the urgency clause, which shortens the land acquisition process and expedites payment
of compensation. Soon after the notification, 80 percent of the compensation is paid, while
the remaining 20 percent is to be paid when the entire estimate is sanctioned by the
competent authority. Although data of delay in payment is not available, a sample survey
                                               7
found that only 50-70% of the land owners received compensation within one year. Delay
also incurs in interest payment. Hence speedy disposal from the point of cost effectiveness
has been emphasized in various government circulars issued to District Collectors. There are
independent and accessible avenues for judicial review against land acquisition and
compensation. However, cost and time in the process of judicial review affects the
accessibility.
The Industry Department transfers the acquired land to Bihar Industrial Area Development
Authority (BIADA) to allocate land for construction of Industrial estates/Industrial Park.
Land to private investors is being allotted by BIADA based on the clear and transparent
criteria and process, irrespective of investor’s status. Less than 10% of the total land acquired
by the government since 2011 has been transferred to the private sector. The total plots
available in an industrial area are demarcated to various categories and for their allocation
BIADA follows a clear and transparent evaluation process with many pre-fixed criteria, but
using information provided by the investors. A project Clearing Committee (PCC) evaluates
investment proposals and gives approval. BIADA coordinates investment policy within the
State Government. However, comprehensive and consolidated information on spatial extent
and duration of concessions/leases is not readily available in one place and different
departments rely on different sources of information. Moreover, the process is cumbersome
and a large number of investors are waiting for allotment of land.
BIADA allot the industrial plot at the cost for the government of land acquired, plus 10%
administrative charges and land development cost. In Bihar there is no system of sharing
benefits arising from changes in permitted land use with the people. There is a system for
advance payment of leases, which is implemented strictly with a threat of cancellation in case
of non-payment. Lease payment collected is more than 90% of the estimated amount.
BIADA, as the nodal agency, monitors the clauses in the lease agreement, collects rent,
monitors the status of functioning of the industry and in case of failure cancels the contract
and auctions the plot. Still, 422 industries in industrial areas are reported to be closed, but no
action has been taken to rehabilitate them or seize their plot as mentioned in their letter of
allotment. Also, no third party monitoring has been conducted as yet and only part of the
results are accessible to the public.
Under new land acquisition policy of Government of Bihar, The State Government devised a
new method under the 'Aao Bihar' (Come to Bihar) call for investors. Farmers willing to sell
land would submit the details to the District Magistrate (DM) concerned, who, in turn, checks
that the rights are not disputed. The DM, then forward the verified details of the land to Bihar
Industrial Area Development Authority (BIADA), which would put the details on its website
showing the price quoted by the farmers concerned. The investors would then have a
reference pool of chunks of land to acquire for their ventures.
However, the non-availability of updated land records emerged as a challenge for land
transfer as the rights under-raiyats and share croppers are not recognised and surveyed
properly. Those wanting to sell have incentives to properly negotiate with investors, but their
rights are unclear due to obsolete record of rights. Therefore, in new policy government is
acting as facilitator. This approach seems to be working well and is found attractive by
investors. The State Government is also planning to survey the barren and uncultivable land,
waste land, undulating land, land not fit for agriculture for acquisition purpose, to encourage
productive use of waste land and identify land for resettlement.
2.6 Public Provision of Land Information
Registration of land has been made mandatory since 1864 in Bihar and which is done in 38
District Registration Offices in all the District Head Quarter and 83 sub-registry offices.
                                                8
Registration fee4, Stamp duty, landlord fee, process fee and service charge are payable at the
Registry/Sub-Registry Offices for the transfer of land. Based on the Bihar Tenancy Act,
1885,the Cadastral Khatiyan, provided the right of the records of a raiyat and establish right
and possession of a person on the occupant land.
The exact number of record of rights is not available. The total number of villages in Bihar is
45,769 out of which computer data entry is done for 32,616 villages and available on-line.
Verification of computerized data was done for 28,140 villages. Updating of data has been
done in case of 3256 villages and Kheshra panjis have been prepared for 3445 villages. The
number of Kheshra was 2,98,50,807 in 32 districts of Bihar (urban and rural). There is no
bifurcation of the rural and urban RoR. As the revenue records are not updated, there are
many cases of overlaps of right. There are large numbers of cases of civil disputes pending in
the competent courts of Bihar. Since the cases are not being disposed of on priority basis,
many persons stake claim over the same piece of land. Most of the land records are neither
fully computerized nor updated in circle offices and not interlinked with the registry offices,
reason why it is difficult to ensure legitimacy, which is only, performed ex-post. However, it
has been observed that the fraudulent cases are minimal.
About 60-70% of public restrictions are recorded. Certain classes of documents are not
compulsorily registrable such as Partition deed approved by the court or revenue offices,
inheritance, will, and oral gift by Mohamedans and are not included in the non-encumbrance
certificate. Encumbrances are recorded only when people who transfer or offer land as
security come for registry. Recording of encumbrances is not done in a consistent and reliable
manner.
There are 1,06000 maps in Bihar (Cadastral Survey Maps – 62000 and Revisional Survey
maps -44000) of which 4374 numbers of maps are either damaged or no longer available to
the concerned Circle Office/Sub-divisional office. For the remaining maps, 72716 maps have
been scanned and digitized. The aim is to complete this work in December 2014 and make all
maps available on-line.
A revisional survey was started in the state in 1956 but fully completed in only 12 districts,
partly completed in 14 districts and could not be taken up in 12 districts. Even where it
completed, it took a long time and the data are now obsolete. The Special Survey and
Settlement Act, 2011 was passed followed by Rules, 2012 to conduct survey in whole of the
state, in a time-bound manner (completion by 2015) by using technologies like aerial survey
technique, Digital Global Positioning System (DGPS), and Electronic Total Station (ETS).
The work has started in 13 districts. Aerial photography has been completed in 7696 villages.
Data processing has started for 2033 revenue villages. Khanapuri has been completed in 237
villages and the map has been published for one village. Progress of special survey is slow
and shortage of staff is more prominent reason.
In Bihar more than 90% of the records of privately held land in the registry are readily
identifiable on maps, but the information held in records is not linked to maps yet. However,
there is no system to mention the name of land holders on the map. Khesra (Plot) numbers
are provided on the map, on basis of which the record in registry is identifiable on the map.
Mutation is required to mention the name of current owner in the land record,



4Registration fee for registry of the land has been prescribed by the Registration Act, 1908, the stamp
duty has been determined by the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, landlord and process fee are levied under
The Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885, and the service charge by the Registration Department.

                                                   9
Since 2006 with support of the Government of India all the registry offices have been
computerized, and linked with main server of the Registry Department. All registry records
of 2006 onwards can be seen on bhumijankari.com and registry information is up-to-date and
reflects ground reality. The registry records prior to 2006 can be accessed manually.
Digitization of registry records from 1995 to 2005 is in an advanced stage and is likely to be
completed soon. Bihar has developed a self-sustaining system of computerization. The
registry office charges Rs. 25/- per page on documents of transfer and Rs. 20/- per page for
scanning of other deeds, which generate sufficient funds to maintain computerization and
infrastructure in the department. Due to this unique self-sustaining model the Registration
Department of Bihar got Prime Minister’s Award for excellence in public administration for
the year 2007-08.
Although registry offices have been computerized, but due to lack of infrastructure and non-
linking of computer of registry office with Circle Offices, automatic mutation and updating of
records are not facilitated. Since the computerization of Registration offices, it has become
very easy to obtain sale deeds on the day of registration itself. Registration offices have not
been linked yet with Circle Offices. This linking can reduce the mutation process of current
15-30 days to 1-2 days.
Computerization of land records has not followed a uniform approach, producing non-
synchronization of data. The lack of staff is another reason, which also affects updating of
records. The main concerns are thus non-linking of registration office computer with the
circle office to facilitate automatic mutation, as well as difficulties in searching registration
records prior to 2006 i.e. prior to computerization of registration.
The BLDR Act and Mutation Act together have helped the raiyat/under-raiyat in getting land
record corrected in cost effective and time effective manner. Before 2009, any wrong entry in
survey records was challengeable only in Civil Court and used to be a long drawn process.
With the passing of Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009, a revenue functionary,
‘Deputy Collector Land Reforms’ can adjudicate cases pertaining to record of rights.
Similarly, section 9 of the Mutation Act empowers the additional collector of a district to
cancel illegal zamabandi.
In Bihar, the registry fee has a clear rationale, their schedule is public and all payments are
accounted for. The Registry Department charges 2 percent registry charge and 8/6 percent
stamp duty to make the system financially sustainable5, but is higher than what is stipulated
by the Government of India (5 per cent of the stamp duty). The total fee collected from
registration fee and stamp duty exceeds registry department expenditure (39.27 times higher
than administrative expenditure in the year 2012-13). Investment in human resources and
physical infrastructure is sufficient to maintain high service standards but does not allow for
proactively responding to future needs and new developments in the sector.
Registry office is following the prescribed service standard scrupulously.In Bihar, an
initiative has been taken to provide prompt service to people in a transparent way without
harassment. Under the Right to Public Services Act, 2011 citizen charter of Registration
Department has been prepared and is displayed in all Registry Offices. Two Registry Officers
(Bhagalpur, Muzaffarpur) have been fined for non-compliance of the Act. In all the District
Registration offices, ‘May I help you’ booths have been established which provides

    5The government has provided several exemptions to promote agriculture, communication technology and
industry in the state. All dwelling units located in the slums and having a plinth area of less than 250 square feet
have been exempted from the payment of holding tax.


                                                        10
information regarding the enclosures required to be attached with a document, amount of
stamp duty, registration and other miscellaneous fees chargeable on different kinds of
documents, standard format for sale or mortgage contracts.
2.7 Land Valuation and Taxation
Valuation of land is determined for the purpose of registration of land transfers and
compensation. Registration fees and stamp fees are major sources of revenue for the state
government (see 2.6). There is clear process of land valuation in Bihar. Minimum Market
Value Registers (MVR) for various types of land, buildings and flats are based on their
location and use, and have been prepared and regularly revised and updated at district level
by a committee headed by District Magistrate6. Valuation of land based on MVR is also
applicable for land acquisition for calculating compensation. The land value in MVR gets
inflated every year, which is a procedure that needs to be revisited.
The assessment of value of land and property for tax or compensation purposes reflects
market prices, although differences between recorded values and market prices across
different uses and types of users were observed.
The process of property valuation based on Annual Rental Value (ARV) located on different
types of roads and different uses are clear. The holding tax in urban area is 2.5 percent of the
ARV. Valuation roll is publicly accessible at every registration office, municipality and on
their website. Exemptions on the payment of land/property taxes are limited, based on equity
or efficiency grounds and applied in a transparent and consistent manner.
The collection of property tax in urban areas has improved gradually and is estimated at
around 50 per cent for Patna town. Similar conditions are assumed to be prevailing in other
towns and there is a need to bring unregistered holdings into tax fold to increase the revenue
for providing better services. Holding tax is only collected in urban areas and around 80-90%
of the holding tax payers mentioned in tax-roll pay regularly. Land rent is collected in both
rural and urban areas both and around 90% of land holders or their parents are listed in the
tax roll. In 2012, 47.18% of the land rent was paid, and 100% stamp duty and registration
fees had been collected. The holding tax has not been revised after 1993 and efforts for
introduction of new tax structure are rejected by people. Though collection of holding tax is
80 per cent of the assessment, the collection of land rent is also very poor. Individually, the
revenue from the land rent and holding tax are not sufficient to meet the cost of tax
collection, but when considering also the revenue collected from other tax related to land and
property (including stamp duty) the total revenue is between 1 to 3 times of the cost of
collection.
 Service delivery and a proper rapport between the residents of a town and Municipal
authority are most essential for improving payment, if people realize that the tax and fees
paid by are being utilized properly for their benefits. The role of municipal authority in this
regard is very important.
2.8 Dispute Resolution and Conflict Management
In Bihar, responsibilities, regarding conflict resolution, are clearly assigned unambiguously in
various land related Acts. There is distinct hierarchy in all the districts in Bihar. Disputes are
first resolved at the grass root level by the concerned Anchal Adhikari (Circle Officer).
Appellate and Revisional authority also belong to revenue hierarchy. However, Bihar Land
Tribunal is independent appellate authorities.

6The minimum market value of land and other immovable properties are determined following Indian
Stamp Act, 1899 (Act II of 1899) and notification by Registration Department, Government of Bihar.

                                               11
Until 2010, land disputes constituted 70-80% (20866 cases 2010) of total civil cases instituted
in different courts of Bihar and it was estimated that 70 per cent of the criminal cases were
rooted in land dispute. Land disputes constituted a large case load in the Civil Courts and
Honourable High Court. Cases remain pending in the Courts for long periods, while many
settled cases were again referred to another Higher Court for appeal or revision of the
decision. Disputes and litigation can be over the record of rights, boundaries, entries in
revenue records, unlawful or wrong registration and unlawful mutation, unlawful occupation
of raiyati land, forcible dispossession of allottees and settlees of public land, etc. They may
cause unnecessary harassment to bona fide allottees, settlees, raiyats and other types of
occupants. Corruption, bribery, fraud, nepotism, favouritism and clientalism in land
administration and land management are widespread problems that also lead to land disputes.
The BLDR Act, 2009, has proven to be a land mark legislation that legislation that is widely
appreciated, also outside Bihar7. It was designed to improve the effectiveness of dispute
resolution mechanisms and establishing new forums for the adjudication of land disputes has
great impact. In 2011, the percentage of land related cases had dropped to only 21 percent
(833 cases in 2011). More than 90% of the cases are resolved within 1 year. However, in the
formal system (Civil Court) 90% of land related disputes take two years or more to get
resolved.
The Bihar Land Dispute Resolution (BLDR) Act, 2009, is unique in nature which provides a
uniform and common forum, procedure and mechanism to achieve the objective of effective,
efficacious and speedy resolution of land related disputes. The Act is omnibus, cost and time
effective and has a clear time frame for disposal and procedure. The first instance is to be
done at the court of the Deputy Collector, Land Reforms (DCLR), while the Divisional
Commissioner has become the appellate authority. Under this Act 29649 cases were filled till
31st March, 2013. Out of these cases 20296 cases i.e. 68.45% have been disposed off. The
system is proving beneficial to the people of the state especially poor and economic weaker
section of the society in getting justice in a cost effective way. However, the jurisdiction of
Deputy Collector Land Reforms (DCLR) under BLDR Act 2009 is limited to determination
of rights only, not title. In complicated cases, involving question of title, party concerned is
advised to move Civil Court.
Another landmark initiative is the Bihar Land Tribunal, which since its inception in January
2013 has resolved a large number of the backlog of land related cases within a very small
span of time. The Bihar Land Tribunal was constituted in January 2013 to provide additional
platform for dispute resolution. Till June, 2014, 488 cases were disposed off out of the 1480
cases and appeal filed. This pace of disposal of cases with limited staff is remarkable.
People are encouraged also to try to settle land disputes first in Lok Adalat which is cost
effective and time effective. There are various types of Lok Adalats (Lok Adalat, Special Lok
Adalat, Mega Lok Adalat, Pension Lok Adalat, Labour Lok Adalat) and awareness
Programme is organized in the state on their use. Disputes resolved through Lok Adalats are
recognized in the formal judicial dispute resolution system8 and awards are deemed to be a
decree of a civil court. The Lok Adalat is becoming an effective alternative dispute resolution
forum in Bihar and on 23rd November 2013 over 1.5 Lakh cases including 9,120 in the state
capital were settled (but which are not all land disputes)9.

7http://dolr.nic.in/dolr/downloads/pdfs/Draft_National_Land_Reforms_Policy_July_2013.pdf

8Under Section 19 read with section 21 of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987

9Report of the Bihar State Legal Service Authority.
                                                 12
To ensure quick, transparent and effective justice by the Gram Kachahari, the State
Government has provided services of Nyaya Mitra (Law Graduates) to every Gram
Kachahari. This has facilitated the Sarpanch in getting legal advice deciding the cases
expeditiously as well as judiciously.
Finally, there are special types of disputes that need special attention. A number of cases
under section 45B of the Ceiling Act are pending since long time in Bihar, making the
determination of surplus land becomes very complex. Also the process of disposal of cases
involving sharecroppers for dispute resolution machinery found very slow. As on 31st March,
2013, 15.39 percent cases relating to sharecroppers were only disposed off, leaving the
pending cases to 84.61 percent. There is also a large number of pending cases for
dispossession in the state.
2.9 Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies
The Department of Revenues and Land Reforms is the principal department for land
administration and headed by the Minister. This department has separate wings for Land
Administration, Survey and Settlement and Land Consolidation known as directorates. These
are the (1) Directorate of Land Records and Survey; (2) Directorate of Land Acquisition and
(3) Directorate of Consolidation. Other matters pertaining to land administration, such as
management of land ceiling, bhoodan land and other related matter are being looked after by
the different sections of the Revenue and Land Reforms Department. Rural and local bodies
also have a role in land administration and gram panchayats are also managing the
Gairmazarhua aam land. The Urban Development and Housing Department which controls
ULBs are responsible for urban land management through ULBs. The Forest and
Environment Department manages the forest land and their control.
Policies are formulated at the government level and programmes emanating there from are
implemented and supervised at the anchal (circle), sub-divisional, district and divisional
level. There is a clear separation in the roles of policy formulation, implementation and
arbitration. Original, Appellate and Revisional Authorities have been clearly defined under
respective Revenue Acts. There is also no overlap in the responsibilities of Ministries and
agencies dealing with land.
The roles and responsibility of functionaries dealing with the land administration, regulation
and management are clearly defined. However, almost all the departments in the state have
huge shortage of staff and some of the key departments are being managed through dual
charge by the official head. Shortage of manpower is evident in all layers of the department
and shortage is highest at the grass root level offices. Moreover, officials from Revenue and
Lad Reforms Department at field level have a range of other general administrative
responsibilities, including magisterial and executive functions, in addition to land
administration functions and which is one reason why records are poorly maintained. Apart
from manpower shortage, lack of skill to effectively perform duties was also observed.
Under Special Survey and Settlement Operation, modern technology is being used for
preparation of record of rights and generation of revenue maps, but most of the officials/staff
engaged with this work are not conversant with the modern systems, knowledge of
ETS/DGPS etc. Circle Officers drawn from various departments may lack specialized
expertise to discharge duties with regard to land revenue administration.
The State Government has started taking steps to strengthen structure of Revenue and Land
Reforms Department through reviewing and streamlining of procedures, setting out service
standards, regular monitoring, massive capacity building all over Bihar, introduce new



                                              13
technologies, recruitments to fill the sanctioned posts and the creation of Revenue cadre10.
The sanctioned post for various revenue officials have been created vide this notification
right from Circle Inspector to Additional Collector / Dy. Director under various sections of
Revenue Department. Since these officials will remain in the Revenue Department
throughout their career, their training, grooming and experience in course of time will help
them to discharge their duties efficiently and effectively. This newly created separate revenue
cadre is expected to address the problem of manpower, skill gaps and specialized expertise.
 There is no unified system for collection and maintenance of data for land possessed by
different State Government Departments, Central Government Departments and Public
Sector Corporations. Therefore, these data are not available. Hence, information regarding
the management of such land is lacking. Presently, the state has no Land Use Policy and Land
Use Plan for rural areas. There is an urgent need to frame rural Land Use Policy based on the
existing Act/Rules/Policies.
3. Key policy recommendations:
    1. Completion of Special Survey. Computerization and Digitization of record of rights
        and maps based on the Special Survey.
    2. A State Land Use Policy for rural land, based on existing laws and policies, should be
        developed. Setting up a Land Use Board in Bihar for making 10-15 years Perspective
        land use plan and monitoring the implementation of land use plan is another
        requirement.
    3. Set up a unified system for collection and collation of data for land possessed by
        different State Government Departments, Central Government Departments and
        Public Sector Corporations. This will help in developing data base for efficient
        management of land in future.
    4. A vigorous special / massive, time bound programme should be started, focusing on
        giving possession to dispossessed persons, with proper co-ordination between revenue
        and police officials. A need based system of summary trial may help in solving the
        dispossession cases in rural areas of Bihar.
    5. Set up effective Grievance Redressal machinery for Land disputes.
    6. Enumeration of Common Property Resources and Common Land in each National
        Sample Survey.
    7. E-linking of registry office computer with circle office for automatic mutation and
        updating of land record.
    8. Bringing down stamp duty on registration of sale deed at par with other states i.e. 5
        per cent.
    9. Strengthening of land related departments with adequate trained manpower and
        infrastructure.




                                          th
10vide notification number 4020 dated 15 January, 2010

                                               14
                                            CHAPTER 1

                                      INTRODUCTION
Bihar is an agricultural state with about 76% of its population engaged in agricultural pursuits.
Though endowed with good soil, adequate rainfall and good ground water availability, Bihar has not
realized its full agricultural potential. Its agricultural productivity is one of the lowest in the country
leading to rural poverty, low nutrition and migration of labour.
        Agriculture is the mainstay of the state economy. The contribution of agriculture in state
gross domestic product has increased in the last five years. At current prices, agriculture, animal
husbandry and fisheries contributed Rs.24791 crore in 2005-06, which shot up to Rs.54864 crore in
2011-12. As the state economy is rapidly growing in all sectors, the overall contribution of
agriculture, animal husbandry and fisheries in the state’s gross domestic product has declined from
29.63 percent to 20.92 percent during this period.
         Bihar remained bereft of the first green revolution. Now the State is at the threshold of
piloting ‘Rainbow Revolution’ in the country. As the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Bihar opines, “the
ingredients of much desired Rainbow Revolution won’t essentially be the same as it was for the first
green revolution in the country.” The Rainbow revolution would be system based, sustainable and
evergreen. A new era in agriculture development has already been started in 2006. The state took a
major step forward for the holistic development of agriculture through the Agriculture Road Map.
         Considering the progress of first Agriculture Road Map, aiming to trigger the processes of
development in agriculture and allied sectors, Government of Bihar launched the second Agriculture
Road Map for the years 2012-17. Its main objective is to increase productivity of major crops so as to
bring it closer to highest yield of crops in the country. Bihar is the only state to have an agriculture

                                                    15
cabinet for focused policy guidelines, effective coordination and monitoring of the implementation
of the schemes.
        The state has a geographical area of 94,163 sq km with population of 103.81 million.
Administratively the state is divided into 9 divisions, 38 districts, 101 subdivisions, 534 blocks, 8463
panchayats, and 45103 revenue villages. The land use utilisation statistics of Bihar is as set forth in
the table below.
Table 1.1: Land Utilisation as on 30/6/2010
Geographical Area                                                     94163 Km2
Forest Land                                                            6845 km2
Area Not Available for Cultivation
       Land Area                                                   1332514 hectare
       Perennial Water Area                                         207392 hectare
       Temporary Water Area                                         149818 hectare
Total Area put to non agriculture use                              1689724 hectare
Barren and uncultivable land                                        431715 hectare
Permanent Pasture and Grazing Land                                   15782 hectare
Land under Miscellaneous Tree Crops                                 243979 hectare
Cultivable Wasteland                                                 45375 hectare
Current Fallow                                                      857627 hectare
Other Fallow                                                        121998 hectare
Net Sown Area                                                      5331733 hectare
Total or Gross Cropped Area                                        7295805 hectare
Area Cultivated More than Once                                     1964072 hectare
Cropping Intensity (GCA/NSA)                                            137%

         Agriculture remains the primary activity and main livelihood for rural population in
the state. In such a context, land becomes the most important resource, which the state must
use in ways that leads to inclusive growth as well as ensure a balance between land used for
industrial purpose and land for agriculture. This balance is critical for the state’s
development. The other constraint to land as a resource is its limited supply. Therefore, it is
critical that the state develops a fair estimate of its available land resources, maintains a
highly detailed record of it and governs the resources such that efficient and optimal
allocation of land is achieved. All this requires an efficient, transparent, accountable and
equitable land governance system. In this context, the Land Governance Assessment
Framework of the World Bank is being implemented in Bihar with a view to assess the
current status of land governance in Bihar, to identify areas and issues which require urgent
policy intervention. The LGAF implementation started in the state in October 2013 and the
land governance in Bihar was assessed in nine focus themes as envisaged in the framework.
The nine focus themes are: (i) Land Rights Recognition (ii) Rights to Forest and Common
Lands & Rural Land Use Regulations (iii) Urban Land Use Planning and Development (iv)
Public Land Management (v) Transfer of Public Land to Private Use (vi) Public Provision of
Land Information: Registry and Cadastre (vii) Land Valuation and Taxation (viii) Dispute
Resolution and (ix) Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies.
         The LGAF framework consists of 27 land governance indicators (LGI) that covers a
set of 9 panel topics. Each indicator is further broken down into a number of “dimensions”
with pre-coded statements (on a scale from A to D). In total, there are 116 dimensions in the
LGAF, which are to be ranked based on situation prevailing in the state. The study will help
                                                  16
in assessing the status of present land governance, strengths, weaknesses and suggest the
measures to make the land governance transparent and effective.




                                      CHAPTER 2

                                METHODOLOGY
The Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) is a diagnostic tool to help evaluate
the legal framework, policies, and practices regarding land governance and to monitor
improvement over time. It emerged from a collaborative process between the World Bank
and its partners that was based on the recognition of the increasingly important role of land
governance to help countries deal with the challenges of the 21st century in terms of climate
change, urbanization, disaster prevention, and management of increased demand for land in
an integrated way that provides a basis for demonstrating progress over time.
The LGAF is a diagnostic tool to assess the current land governance system under 27 land
governance indicators (LGI) that cover a set of following 9 panel topics:
10.     Land Rights Recognition
11.     Forest and Common Land Management
12.     Urban Land Use Planning and Development
13.     Public Land Management
14.     Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investors
15.     Public Provision of Land Information
16.     Land Valuation and Taxation
17.     Dispute Resolution
18.     Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies


                                             17
   Each indicator is further broken down into a number of “dimensions” with pre-coded
   statements (on a scale from A to D). In total, there are 116 dimensions in the LGAF, which
   are to be ranked based on actual condition / situation prevailing in the state.
   A four-step methodology followed to conduct the study, as shown below.

                                     Step II                        Step III                       Step IV
           Step I
                                     Observe                                                        Report
           Prepare                                                    Analyze

1. Develop Technical and                                          1. Summarize data and         1. Validating Draft
                             1. Prepare survey instruments
   Financial Proposal                                                evidences                     report
                             2. Mapping and Observations
2. Develop detailed Study                                         2. Prepare Background Report
                                                                                             2. Develop Final Report
                             1. Collect data / evidence as per       and Dimension Ranking
   Plan
                                requirement of deliverables
                                                                  3. Conduct Panel discussion
3. Team Formation            2. Discussion with stakeholders at
                                different levels                  4. Develop Panel Aide
4. Finalize mechanisms for                                           Memoire and
   information mapping.
                                                                  5. Draft State Report




   To conduct the study following steps were followed.
   Step I : A team of Expert Investigators (EI) formed at the state level with expertise in land
   governance, land tenure and land reform system, land revenue and urban governance.
   Step II : This team of EI developed survey instruments, collected qualitative and quantitative
   data, background information, evidence, case studies to prepare background report and assess
   each dimension with legal provisions along with its policy implications.
   Step III : Under each Panel theme a panel of experts formed with local experts, subject
   expert, academicians, grass root level workers, activists etc.
   Step IV: Each panel discussed and assessed each of the dimensions under the ambit of the
   panel and ranked each dimension in a scale from A to D, based on pre coded data, evidences,
   legal provisions, case studies, good practices etc through a participatory process.
   The panel also identified gaps in legal provisions, administrative and institutional set up,
   implementation mechanism and policy implications and provided inputs for improvement.
           The methodology of this study involves identification and engagement of State
   Coordinator for the study and Expert Investigator for each Panel. The expert investigator and
   the state co-ordinating team members contacted the various departments and had detailed
   discussion on each issue and collected data.
   Database
   For collecting data / case study / background information / evidence and discussing various
   issues on each theme, following Government Departments were contacted;
                                                    18
1.      Department of Revenue and Land reforms
2.      Department Of Forests & Environment
3.      Department of Welfare
4.      Department of Registration
5.      Wakf Board
6.      Religious Trust Board
7.      Department of Urban Development
8.      Municipal Corporations
9.      Departments of Mines and Geology
10.     Department of Panchayati raj
11.     Department of Rural Development
12.     Department of Agriculture
13.     Department of Statistics
14.     Bihar Industrial Area Development Authority
15.     HUDCO
16.     Department of Industries
17.     Department of Fisheries
18.     Bihar Land Tribunal
19.     Patna High Court
20.     Patna District Court
21.     Bihar Judicial Academy
22.     Bihar State Legal Service Authority
Reports
The outputs of the study has been divided into four stages:
    23. Preparation of Context Analysis
    24. Preparation of Background report and Dimension Analysis
    25. Conduct Panel discussion for each nine panel and Preparation of Panel Aide Memoire
    26. Preparation of State Report
Context Analysis
Based on the available literature, different land related act and rules and discussion with
various departments Context Analysis was prepared under coordination of LGAF State
Coordinating Team. The context analysis was vetted by TAG members and discussed in a
specially convened workshop at Hyderabad from 6th to 9th January, 2014.
Background Report and Dimension Analysis
In second steps various data were collected by contacting the concerned department, viewing
their website and through publically published data in District Statistical Handbook and
Annual report of various departments. After collecting data each theme was discussed in a
small group consisting of Expert Investigators, State Co-ordinating team members and some
senior officials of the concerned department and the background report and dimension
analysis was attempted.
        Background report and dimension analysis were vetted by concerned TAG members.
State anchor visited Bihar and had detailed discussion of Background Report and Dimension
Ranking. The Background Report and Dimension Ranking were revised based on these
discussions. Again, the same was discussed in a specially convened workshop at Delhi on
14th February, 2014. The suggestions made in the workshop and views of TAG members
were incorporated in the Background Report and Dimension Analysis. A copy of the
Background Report and Dimension Analysis was sent to the Principal Secretary, Revenue
and Land Reforms Department, Govt. of Bihar and Secretary, Revenue Department, Govt. of

                                            19
Bihar for their perusal and comments. The concerned chapter of the background and
dimension ranking were also forwarded to the Urban Development Department, Registration
Department, Industries Department, Forest Department and Bihar Industrial Area
Development Authority (BIADA) for perusal and comments. Discussion with several senior
officials of the concerned department took place and their viewpoints also incorporated in the
Background Report.
Panel Discussion and Panel Aide Memoir
Nine panels consisting of experts of each theme, such as faculty members from CIMP,
Central University, Chanakaya National Law University, A.N. Sinha Institute of Social
Studies, Asian Development Research Institute (ADRI), NGOs, farmers’ club representative,
Social Activists, senior officials from Industries Association, Chamber of Commerce and
Institute of Charter Accountant participated. Each of the panel reports prepared by the expert
groups were reviewed in respective panel discussion. Power point presentations were made
on background, key findings, strength, weakness, best practices, policy recommendation and
dimension ranking. Each dimension of particulars theme was reviewed and discussed in
detail before coming to a consensus for ranking. In many a case earlier scores proposed by
EIs were changed based on the deliberation by the panellists. Issues pointed out in the
discussion and deliberation inn the panel discussion were also incorporated in Revised
Background Note and dimension ranking. The Aide Memoire of all nine panel discussion
prepared to document discussion made in the panel.
Draft State Report
The State Report is based on Revised Background Report, Panel Aide Memoire and
Dimension Ranking.




                                          CHAPTER 3

                          STATE GENERAL CONTEXT
3.1.1. Bihar is an agricultural state with a total population of 103.81 millions of which
approximately 88.70 per cent live in rural areas and the remaining 11.30 per cent live in
urban areas. With a total area of 94,163 sq kilometres, the state accounts for about 2.88 per
cent of India’s land mass and supports 8.58 per cent of the country’s population.
Demographically, the state has 47.8 per cent of the female population as per 2011 census.
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes constitute 15.72 per cent and 0.91 per cent of the
population in the state (as per 2001 census). The literacy percentage as per 2011 census is
63.82 per cent (male 73.39 per cent and female 53.33 per cent). Density of population of the
state is 1102 as per 2011 census, highest density of population was reported in Sheohar
district which is 1882 and the lowest density of population was reported in Kaimur which is
488 per sq km. Male / Female ratio is 916 female per thousand of male.
3.1.2. The economy of the state is predominantly agrarian in character. Agriculture is the mainstay of
the state economy. The contribution of agriculture in the state gross domestic product has increased
in the last five years. At current prices, agriculture, animal husbandry and fisheries contributed
Rs.24791 crores in 2005-06, which shot up to Rs.54864 crores in 2011-12. As the state economy is
rapidly growing in all sectors, the overall contribution of agriculture, animal husbandry and fisheries
in the state’s gross domestic product has declined from 29.63 percent to 20.92 percent in this
                                                  20
period. The net state domestic product from secondary sector is 37893 crores as on 2011-12 and
155163 crores in tertiary sector. The total net domestic product at current price during 2011-12 was
247920 crores. Thus the share of primary, secondary and tertiary sector in net domestic product at
current price during 2011-12 was 15.28%, 62.59% and 22.13% respectively. Despite 15.28% share
from the primary sector in the state net GDP, the size of workforce dependent on agriculture
continues to be high, which underlines direct dependence on land of a large proportion of the
state’s population.
3.1.3. Distribution of land holding pattern in the state indicates that majority of the farmers is small
and marginal in the state which can be seen from the following table.
Table 3.1: Distribution of land holding pattern as per agriculture census 2010-11
                                  No. of
                               Operational                           Area operated
SI. No. Size Class (in ha)                             % Holding                          % Area
                                Holdings                                (in ha.)
                                  Total
   1. Marginal                  14744098                 91.06         3668727.64           57.44
   2. Small                      948016                   5.86         1185695.24           18.56
   3. Semi Medium                414664                   2.56         1072969.00           16.80
   4. Medium                      81484                   0.50          414941.12            6.50
   5. Large                        3129                   0.02           45227.71            0.71
   6. All Classes               16191391                100.00         6387560.71          100.00
(Source: Agriculture Census 2010-11)
        It appears from the above table that 96.92 per cent small and marginal farmer which
controls 76 per cent of the land area. The number of landless people in the state is alarming which
gives equity concern. 11.28 million people are working as agricultural labourer and most of them are
landless.
3.1.4 Economic development, in general, has increased the demand for land across the state. Rising
investments in infrastructure and roads have added to the pressure on land resource and also led to
an increase in value. While this has happened, a commensurate improvement in well-functioning
mechanism for use, transfer, acquisition and taxation has not followed suit. In this context, there is a
need for improvement of land governance in the state to drive development.
3.1.5. Administratively, the state is divided into 9 divisions, 38 districts, 101 sub divisions, 534
community development blocks and 44874 revenue villages. Map of state indicating districts is
appended below.




                                                  21
3.1.6. The exact number of record of rights is not available in the state. However, the number of
Kheshra was 2,98,50,807 in 32 districts of Bihar (urban and rural). There is no bifurcation of the rural
and urban RoR. The total number of Kheshra for Arwal, Sheohar, Muzaffarpur, Nawada, Kaimur and
Supaul is not readily available.
3.1.7. The Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885, deals with respective rights and obligations of the state
and tenants. In the pre-zamindari abolition period, there were many nomenclatures related to
tenancy including estate, proprietor, landlord, tenure and tenure holders. After the enactment
of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, which led to the abolition of the zamindari, many such
nomenclatures died out and they are no longer in current usage. Tenancy law primarily
concerns with agricultural land, falling in rural areas. In pre- independence period, the
zamindars or intermediaries used to collect rent from the raiyats and deposit the same in the
treasury. They were also called landlords. After the abolition of the zamindari, the raiyats
came into direct contact with the government.
3.1.8. The current post-independence scenario has been duly reflected at appropriate places in
the Bihar Tenancy Act, and in Acts which came into effect in the post-independence era.
Explicit provisions with regard to the rights and obligations of the raiyats vis-à-vis the state,
has been made a formal part in all these enactments. It will be pertinent to point out that
while recognition of individual land rights is essential, no less essential is the stipulation of
laws regarding the obligations of the individual raiyats towards the state.
3.1.9. Now the tenure system in the state is ryotwari system under which individual cultivators are
recognized as proprietors of their land with rights to sub-let, mortgage and transfer land through
sale or gift. Tenure of land was secure as revenue payment was made directly to the government. As
revenue return from the land was low, indebtedness grew and this in turn led to the sale /
dispossession of land.
                                                  22
3.1.10. A raiyat is supposed to cultivate the land personally and not to engage another person
on a crop share basis. If somebody else is attached to agricultural operation under a raiyat on
crop share basis, he will be called an under-raiyat. Chapter VIII of the Bihar Tenancy Act,
1885 is devoted fully to under-raiyats. Section 48 C of the Act provides that if an under-raiyat
has held land continuously for a period of 12 years under a lease or otherwise, he / she shall
acquire the right of occupancy in that land. Nonetheless, there is major shortcoming in this
section. Its proviso says that no such occupancy rights shall accrue if the land held by the
raiyat is less than 5 acres of irrigated or 10 acres of other land. By implication, the provision
with regard to benefits accruing to under-raiyats including protection against ejectment are
not available to vast majority of under-raiyats who work under small and marginal farmers.
3.2. Land Administration in Bihar
In Bihar, the Department of Land Reforms and Revenue headed by the Minister is primarily
responsible for land administration. The Revenue Department has following three
directorates:
    1. Directorate of Land Records and Survey
    2. Directorate of Land Acquisition and
    3. Directorate of Consolidation
The work relating to land records and survey, land acquisition and land consolidation are
being looked after by the respective directorate under the Land Reforms and Revenue
Department. Other matters pertaining to land administration such as land ceiling, bhoodan
land and other related matter are being looked after by the different sections of the Revenue
and Land Reforms Department.
The organizational structure of Revenue and Land Reforms Department and their three
directorates are enclosed herewith as annexure 4.9.1A, 4.9.1B and 4.9.1C.
The Revenue Department officials at field level in Bihar, as in the case of several states, have
a range of general administrative responsibilities along with land governance. This includes
magisterial and executive functions. Specific land governance related function such as land
registration and valuation are being looked after by a separate department known as
Registration Department. In addition to the revenue department, the rural and local bodies
also have a role in land administration. The village level rural local bodies, called gram
panchayat, manage the Gairmazarua aam land, while the urban local bodies are responsible
for the maintenance of the urban land under their jurisdiction. Moreover, Forest and
Environment Department manages the forest land and their control. The Urban Development
and Housing Department which controls ULBs are responsible for urban land management
through ULBs. The Principal Secretary of the respective departments (Revenue and Land
Reforms, Forest and Environment, Registration, Urban Development and Housing and
Industries) is the Principal Executive Head for the overall land administration / management
in their respective areas. The organizational structure of the related department has been
enclosed as annexure 4.9.1D, 4.9.1E, 4.9.1F, 4.9.1G and 4.9.1H.
Almost all the departments in the state have huge shortage of staff. Some of the key
departments / directorates / sections are being managed in dual / multiple charges.


3.3. Land record in Bihar
After completion of cadastral survey, the revisional survey could only be completed fully in
12 districts and partly in 14 districts. Revisional survey could not be started in 12 districts.
Now the special survey has been started but the progress of the same is not so good. The

                                               23
progress of special survey is also poor. Till November 2013 the progress of the special survey
is as under.
Aerial photography done                                 -       7696 villages of 5 districts
Formation of ground control points                      -       15594 villages
Processing of data received from aerial photography -           2033 villages
Khanapuri done                                          -       237 villages
Publication of map                                      -       1 village
Due to non-completion of revisional survey, the land records are not up-to-date. Under the
National Land Records Modernization Project (NLRMP) of the Ministry of Rural
Development, digitization of Record of Rights (RoRs) and maps has been started.
The Cadastral Khatiyan finally indicates the right of the records of a raiyat and establish right
and possession of a person on the occupant land. There are 1,06000 maps in Bihar (Cadastral
Survey Map-62000, Revisional Survey map-44000), out of which 72716 nos. of maps have
been scanned and digitized. The detail of progress of digitisation has been given in following
table:
Table 3.2: Details of digitization of maps as on 30th June, 2014
Particulars                         Total                Available          Digitisation done
Cadastral Survey                   62,000                  61,731                61,006
                                                           (99.57)               (98.83)
Revisional Survey                  44,000                  39,895                11,710
                                                           (90.67)               (29.35)
          Total                   1,06,000                1,01,626               72,716
                                                           (95.87)               (71.55)
(Source: Revenue and Land Reforms Department, Government of Bihar)
Figure in bracket indicate percentage.
About 4374 numbers of maps are either damaged or not available. Department is making
arrangement to procure a copy of these maps from the concerned Circle Office/Sub-divisional
office. Maps of five districts viz. Bhahua, Buxar, Bhojpur, Patna, Nalanda have put on
website for public use.
 71.55% of maps have already been digitized. Government is making effort to complete 100%
digitization of maps by December, 2014 and placing them on website.
3.4. Computerization of Land Records
So far as the computerization of land records in Bihar is concerned, data entry work has been
completed in 13 districts namely Darbhanga, Madhubani, Kishanganj, Araria, Sheikhpura,
Bhagalpur, Bhojpur, Vaishali, Muzaffarpur, Rohtas, Jamui, Madhepura & Buxar. Availability
of data on website: - Land records data of nine districts namely Darbhanga, Madhubani,
Kishanganj, Bhagalpur, Bhojpur, Buxar, Muzaffarpur, Rohtas and Katihar are available on
website. Rest of the districts will follow in phase wise manner.
3.5. Equity concern in Land Administration
For meeting the equity concern, the government has allotted land to landless people from
ceiling surplus land and bhoodan land. Similarly, the government has taken a big initiative of
allotting land to houseless persons for construction of house. Land from various pools has
been allotted to the economically weaker sections of society not having house site for
construction of houses. Even lands have been purchased for allocation to weaker sections of
the society for construction of house. But the major problem is giving possession of the land
and dispossession of the allotted land.
3.6. Recent Initiatives
                                               24
The government has taken many initiatives to improve land administration in the state; some
of them are as under.
4.     Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009 which is omnibus, cost effective and time
       effective.
5.     Bihar Land Conversion Act 2010
6.     Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011
7.     Bihar Urban Planning and Development Act, 2012
8.     Establishing of Land Tribunal in the State
9.     Self sustainable model of 100 per cent computerisation of registry office
10.    Creation of revenue cadre
11.    Started the process of filling vacant posts in various land related departments
3.7. Overall, in Bihar, there are a number of initiatives to improve aspects of land
administration system. It is encouraging that the need to invest in improved system is well
recognised. However, these initiatives seem to be working in isolation and there seems to be
an absence of an overall strategy to improve the land administration system.




                                     CHAPTER 4

                          THEME WISE ANALYSIS
                                            25
                         4.1. LAND RIGHT RECOGNITION

4.1.1 INTRODUCTION
For last few decades, the growth of urbanisation, industrialisation and infrastructure
development has increased the importance of land significantly. In Bihar there are instances
of encroachment, dispossession, displacement and alienation of land. Since independence the
State Government of Bihar has made enormous efforts to secure land rights and tenurial
rights of people. Several Acts and rules have been promulgated to recognise land right and
ensure equity on land resources.
4.1.1.1 Recognition of Land Rights and Enforcement
The Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885, deals mainly with respective rights and obligations of the state
and tenants. Tenancy law is primarily concerned with agricultural land falling in rural areas.
In the pre-independence period, the zamindars or intermediaries used to collect rent from the
raiyats and deposit the same in the treasury. They were also called landlords. After the
abolition of the zamindari, the raiyat came into direct contact with the government. The
government, being the ultimate owner of the land, is the landlord.
        The current post-independence scenario has been duly reflected at appropriate places
in the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 and in acts which came into effect in the post-independence
era. Explicit provisions, with regard to the rights and obligations of the raiyats, vis-à-vis, the
state, have been made a formal part in all these enactment. It will be pertinent to point out
that while recognition of individual land right is essential, no less essential is stipulation of
laws regarding the obligations of the individual raiyat towards the state.
        The Bihar Tenancy Act 1885 under section 20, defines a settled-raiyat, as a person
who has continuously held land situated in any village, whether under a lease or otherwise,
whether wholly or partly, for a period of twelve years, shall be deemed to have become a
settled raiyat of the village, even if the particular land held by him has been different, at
different times, he will be deemed to have held the land in a village continuously. Raiyat
includes his or her heirs as well. Land held by several co-sharers shall be deemed to have
been held by each co-sharer. If a raiyat abandons land and recovers possession u/s 87, his
continuity will be deemed on the first plot of land he used to cultivate.
    Section 23 of the Bihar Tenancy Act provides for the rights of raiyat in respect to the use
of land. This also carries obligations. He may use the land in any manner which does not
materially impair the value of the land or render it unfit for the purposes of the tenancy.
However, the manufacture of bricks and tiles for the domestic or agriculture purposes of the
raiyat or his family or for any educational purpose, excavation of tanks or digging of wells
for drinking or other domestic purposes and the construction of building for the same
purpose, will not be supposed to impair the value of land materially or to render it unfit for
the purpose of tenancy.
    A raiyat means primarily a person who has acquired a right to hold land for the purpose
of cultivating it by himself or by members of his family or by hired servants or with the aid of
partners on a crop share basis. If somebody else is attached to agricultural operation under a
raiyat on crop share basis, he will be called an under-raiyat. Section 48 C of the Bihar
Tenancy Act, 1885 provides that if an under-raiyat has held land continuously for a period of
12 years under a lease or otherwise, shall acquire the right of occupancy on that land.
Nonetheless, there is major short coming in this section. Its proviso says that no such
occupancy rights shall accrue if the land held by the raiyat is less than 5 acres of irrigated or
10 acres of other land. By implication, the provision with regard to benefits accruing to
                                               26
under-raiyats including protection against ejectment are not available to vast majority of
under-raiyats, who work under small and marginal farmers.
         As per agricultural census of 2010-11, 96.92 percent of the state aggregate of
operational holdings were held by marginal and small farmers. By implementation of the
provisions in regard to the empowerment of the under-raiyat working 96.92 percent marginal
and small farmers are out of their pale. Area involved in operational holdings of marginal and
small farmers comes to 76 percent. By implementation, under-raiyats substituting if any, 76
percent of the operational holdings in Bihar will be deprived of the benefit given by law
especially with regard to security of land and tenure.
         Section 48 (D) of the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 provides that on payment of 24 times
of amount of rent to the land owners, under-raiyat can become a raiyat.
    Section 48 E of the Bihar Tenancy Act provides a quasi-judicial mechanism for the
resolution of disputes between the landholders and under-raiyats. The quasi-judicial
procedures involve local inquiry which may lead to the recognition of under-raiyati rights and
prevention of ejectment even though; there is no formal recording of the under-raiyat. Social
evidence is potent enough to tilt the balance in his favour. Such safeguards need to have a
place in all such state laws where concealed tenancy is rampant and where with the efflux of
time since independence, it is no longer feasible to go in for recording the aforesaid
concealed tenancy.
         Though there exists some loopholes, it has been stated under section 21 of the Bihar
Land Ceiling Act, 1961 that an under-raiyat situated in the ceiling area of the landholder will
be deemed to have acquired the status of an occupancy raiyat upon payment of compensation
to the landholder again. Section 22 provides for the acquisition of the raiyati status to an
under-raiyat upon all surplus land.
         By a recent amendment it has been provided that 50 percent of the beneficiaries of
ceiling surplus land would be women.
4.1.1.2 Customary Rights
Customary rights prevail, by and large, in tribal communities which have a long unbroken
tradition of ethnic distinction. Even within a tribal community, rights vary from clan to clan,
group to group. Prior to 2000 when present Jharkhand state formed a part of Bihar, the state
was placed in the 5th schedule of the constitution. Tribal population in post bifurcated Bihar is
meagre and geographically sparse. The non-tribal people have their customary rights
embedded in their personal laws. Hindu families are governed by the Mitakshara School
Hindu Law while the Muslim population is governed by Mohammedan Law. Land related
laws in the state are secular with a slight exception in the ceiling law, when the concept of a
raiyat is taken to the respective sources of coparcenary rights as per the Hindu or the
Mohammedan Law.
4.1.1.3 Cadastral Survey / Revisional Survey / Special Survey in Bihar
After the enactment of the Bengal Survey Act, 1875, the Cadastral Survey was taken up
district-wise in Bihar in 1885 and it was completed in 1922. Almost all the districts of the
then Bihar was cadastrally surveyed for the first time and revenue village-wise plots of land
on maps were drawn and accordingly record of rights were also prepared. It is noteworthy
that the cadastral survey was completely based on Traverse Survey.


Revisional Survey


                                               27
After vesting of zamindari, the government took up the Bujharat operation in 1950-60 for
proper verification and identification of public land including raiyati land, but that operation
miserably failed. To have an up to date land records, revisional survey operations were taken
up in 1960s. In some of the districts it was completed in a very long period, though the final
product became obsolete due to slow pace of the work. Revisional survey could not be taken
up in some districts. These surveys provide, in turn, a presumptive set of titles instead of
conclusive titles.
The following table will clarify more the progress of revisional survey operations in Bihar.
Table 4.1.1: Progress of revisional survey as on 31st March, 2013
 Revisional survey completed          Revisional survey partly         Revisional survey not
                                             completed                        taken up
Purnea, Katihar, Kishanganj, Saharsha, Supaul, Madhepura, Nalanda, Munger, Jamui,
Araria, Muzaffarpur, Vaishali, Darbhanga,               Madhubani, Lakhisarai,        Sheikhpura,
Sitamarhi, Sheohar, Bhojpur, Samastipur, Bhagalpur, Banka, Khagaria,                   Begusarai,
Buxar, Kaimur, Rohtash            Gaya, Nawada, Jehanabad, Chapra, Siwan, Gopalganj,
                                  Arwal, Aurangabad, Patna          East-Champaran,         West
                                                                    Champaran
          ( 12 districts)                   (14 districts)                  (12 districts)
Special Survey
The state government has introduced Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011,
followed by Rules, 2012 to conduct survey in whole of the state, in a time-bound manner by
using modern technology, aerial survey technique with ground verification by means of
Digital Global Positioning System (DGPS), and Electronic Total Station (ETS). The state
government proposed to complete the survey of entire state within three years. For this
survey several new initiatives like setting up of base station, creation of additional positions,
wide publication etc. have been taken up.
        The Special survey has been started in 13 out of 38 districts in 2012-13. In 2013-14,
survey works going on in thirteen districts and for 2014-15, twelve districts have been
identified for survey and re-survey. The detailed plan for special survey has been given in the
table below:
Table 4.1.2: Selected Districts for Special Survey in Bihar
Districts selected for survey Districts also have been Districts selected for survey
and resurvey in 2012-13           selected for survey and and resurvey in 2014-15
                                  resurvey in 2013-14
Nalanda, Saran, Bhagalpur, Bettiah, Gopalganj, Patna, Sitamarhi, Vaishali, Sheohar,
Munger,              Sheikhpura, Bhojpur,     Buxar,       Rohtas, Banka,             Darbhanga,
Begusarai,            Lakhisarai, Kaimur, Gaya, Jehanabad, Madhubani,                 Samastipur,
Khagaria,      Jamui,     Siwan, Arwal, Aurangabad, Nawada Saharsa, Madhepura, Supaul,
Purnea, Katihar and Motihari and Muzaffarpur                       Kishanganj and Araria

(Source: Director, Land Records and Survey)
The progress of special survey is also poor. Till November     2013 the progress of the special
survey is as under.
Aerial photography done                              -         7696 villages of 5 districts
Formation of ground control points                   -         15594 villages
Processing of data received from aerial photography -          2033 villages
Khanapuri done                                       -         237 villages
Publication of map                                   -         1 village
                                               28
        The Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011 (Rules 2012) preceded the launch
of survey and re-survey in Bihar. These surveys provide, in turn, a presumptive set of titles
instead of conclusive titles. However, record of rights certainly has relevance in the matters
of land rights recognition. But even in this limited and consistent view of things, much
remains to be desired to arrive at final figures. This act focuses on a time-bound survey with
abridged procedures inbuilt. Care has been taken to ensure quality, transparency and
grievance redressal in the special survey.
The following steps have already been taken in this regard:
    1. Aerial Photography completed in 5 districts namely Nalanda, Saran, Bhagalpur,
        Munger & Sheikhpura.
    2. Creation of Secondary Control Points at 46 locations completed in above mentioned 5
        districts.
    3. Documentation of Secondary Control Points completed in above mentioned 5
        districts.
    4. Creation of Base station work completed in above mentioned 5 districts.
    5. Wide publicity has been conducted.
    6. Data captured through Aerial Photography has been received by the Assistant
        Director-Cum-Security Officer, Bihar Survey Officer, Gulzarbagh, Patna.
    7. Digital map of Katrisarai Anchal under Nalanda district received for verification.
        Khanapuri work completed in 2 revenue villages.
4.1.1.4 Computerization of Land Records
Data entry work completed in 13 districts and Land records data of nine districts available on
website. 14672 Map sheets have been digitized. In 70 Anchal (Circle) Offices Modern
Record Rooms have been created and in 16 Anchals Installation of computer Hardware and
Modern equipments have been completed.
    Regarding the computerization of land record in Bihar, it reflects that the land records
data is being captured on website, updating of Record of Right (RoR) is in progress but it is
very much relevant to point out here that RoR which are available in the Anchal Office do
not match with the ground realities because of transfer, sale, fragmentation of the parcel of
the land. The Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011 (Rules, 2012) has come into
operation. Modern technologies are being used for demarcation of land parcel and
preparation of record of rights. After completion of this survey E-interlinkage with Registries
will be feasible and fruitful too.
4.1.1.5 Maintenance of Record and Access of Information related to Land
In Bihar there are clear and transparent processes of keeping records, which are properly
maintained in all cases of public land, assigned to eligible private individuals and institution.
The halka office keeps continuous khatiyan (Register 1B), which shows description of land
and their areas and boundaries. The Khesra Register (Plot Register) and Public Land Register
are also maintained in halkas. Circle officers maintain the records & registers of public land
in such a way that every person of the concerned area can access it.
        To access any information related to record of rights and maps related to public land,
one has to apply to the Officer-in-charge of District Record Room. The information may be
collected from any circle office if the information is available there. For getting information
related to land or have land map the applicant has to pay fees as prescribed. For maps,
Government Press at Gulzarbagh, Patna has been authorised to supply the required maps
against the stipulated payment. The record of rights / maps are not fully digitised and kept
online. Making the whole record of rights and maps online shall solve the problem of
accessibility.
                                               29
        Due to non-completion of revisional survey in various districts and poor maintenance
of records, the condition of record of rights and maps are in poor condition and a large
portion of these records and maps have already got damaged. The record of rights and maps
of some districts are nearly 90-100 years old. In absence of up to date land records the
transfer of land, on account of transfer through a sale deed, succession, inheritance and
subsequently mutations and other revenue works, are suffering. To some extent, this has also
become the reason for growing number of land related disputes in the state.
4.1.1.6 Women’s Right to Property
As far as the women’s right to property is concerned, there is an overall salutary effect of the
Hindu Succession (Amendment Act 2005), which states that any property to which a female
Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of sub section (1) of the act, shall be held by her with the
incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall be regarded, notwithstanding anything
contained in this act, or any other law for the time being in force, as property capable of being
disposed of by her under testamentary disposition.
        The daughter is allotted the same share as is allotted to a son. The Hindu Succession
(Amendment Act 2005) gives equal rights to daughters to succession. The need of the hour is
to propagate this amendment and create awareness among women.
        The record of rights prepared in Bihar, by and large, carries the name of the male
coparceners as there is an exclusive incumbent to raiyati status belonging to the female sex
who is either a widow or a spinster. Perhaps it will be voluminous to add the names of female
along with the males. Nevertheless, by implication, the female’s share right and title with
male coparceners by way of inclusion and there is no explicit exclusion.
        The state government is well advised to recognize and guarantee women’s
community rights and ownership over common property land in villages. There is also a need
to create a firm database in respect of the land ownership of the women and women held
household. All new homestead land distributed to landless families should be only in
women’s name where more than one adult woman (widows, elderly women etc.) is part of
the household. The names of all females adults should be registered.
        When regularising the homesteads of families occupying irregular and insecure
homestead, the homestead so regularized should be in the names of both spouse and single
women.
        Government should make provisions for equal availability of agricultural inputs to
women farmers.
        There should be representation for women, especially for Scheduled Caste /
Scheduled Tribes women in agencies setup to monitor land reforms.
4.1.2. ASSESSMENT OF DIMENSION
Indicator 1.1 Recognition of a continuum of rights: the law recognizes a range of rights
held by individuals (incl. Secondary rights of tenants. Sharecroppers, women etc.)
 Dimension
 1 1 1a       Individuals' rural land tenure rights are legally A        Existing legal framework recognizes rights
              recognized.                                                held by more than 90% of the rural population
 1   1   1b   Individuals' rural land tenure rights are protected in B   Existing legal framework protects rights held
              practice                                                   by 70% - 90% of the rural population
 1   1   2    Customary tenure rights are legally recognized and D       Customary rights are not legally recognized
              protected in practice.                                     and not protected in practice
 1   1   3    Indigenous rights to land and forest are legally C         Partly Recognition of indigenous rights, which
              recognized and protected in practice..                     are protected
 1   1   4    Urban land tenure rights are legally recognized and C      Existing legal framework recognizes rights
              protected in practice.                                     held by 50% -70% of the urban population
                                                   30
Analysis of Dimension: 1.1.1 (a): Legal Recognition of Individual’s Right on Rural
Land
In Bihar there are laws and acts to ensure rights, and the language of law is quite clear to
protect rights of individuals. At present, records of rights have been prepared mainly for
collection of rent on the basis of classification of lands, as such, the tenant is presumed to be
proprietor of the land unless it is proved otherwise. Section 102 of the Bihar Tenancy Act,
1885 prescribes the particulars to be recorded in the record of rights under which the name of
tenant or occupant has to be recorded. According to section 103 B (3), every entry in the
record of rights so published shall be conclusive evidence of matter referred to such entry and
shall be presumed to be correct, unless it is proved by evidence to be incorrect. However, the
record of rights has relevance in the matter of land rights recognition.
        There is no explicit difference in the informal and legal system in the rights of the
vulnerable families and community members. Rather, concerted efforts in post independence
era have been made to allot Bhoodan, Ceiling Surplus, Gairmazarhua Malik and
Gairmazarhua Aam (Where the nature of lands have changed and the gram sabha has
endorsed) lands to the eligible categories of vulnerable families. Moreover, by a recent
amendment in the Ceiling Law, 50% of the Ceiling Surplus land has to be settled with
women from eligible categories under section 27 of that Act. In a nutshell, it has been
ensured that there is no gap in principle and practice in ‘creating’ land rights for vulnerable
sections of our disadvantaged population.
Analysis of Dimension 1.1.1 (b): Protection of Rights of Individual’s Land Tenure
Individuals' rural land tenure rights are legally protected but there is gap in implementation.
There is no systematic survey of share croppers who are deprived off land rights as per law,
so there is no data and number of tenants available. Reference here is made to Section 48(C)
of the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885, whereby occupancy under-raiyati accrues to a share cropper
if he has worked for 12 years as such. A further reference is made to Section 48(D) of the
Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 whereby an occupancy under-raiyat can become an occupancy-
raiyat of the plot held by him upon payment of 24 times of annual rent as compensation to
the land holder. Here, the word ‘rent’ refers to the value of the produced share not the
revenue rent that is payable to the government.
    When all said, the fact remains that even though occupancy rights have hardly accrued to
the share croppers, section 48(E) of the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 provides for protection to
the share cropper against ejectment or threatened ejectment by the land holder. The share
cropper in such cases can approach a conciliation board. Even though sharecropper rights are
not formally recorded anywhere the board can visit the spot and collect local evidence to
reach at a conclusion. This is a silver lining, in an otherwise cloudy scenario.
    Under section 48 (C) of the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885, rights have been ensured to the
under-raiyat who holds a piece of land for 12 years or more. But, if a share cropper is in the
field of land holder holding less than 5 acres of irrigated or 10 acres of un-irrigated land, the
right of the share cropper shall not be legally recognized, whereas, in Bihar, around 90% of
the land comes between 5-10 acres. This implies that, the Bihar tenancy Act, 1885 cannot
protect right of sharecropper on around 90% of the land. There are around 25-30% of
farmers who are sharecroppers, whose rights are under stake. So it is concluded that law is
protecting right of 70-75% of share croppers. Though legal protections are there, there are
gaps in implementation.
Analysis of Dimension 1.1.2: Legal Recognition of Customary Tenure Rights
There are some indigenous practices in the district of West Champaran of Bihar, known as
“Jharta Parta” “Harsandha or Gharsandha” under which there are privileges to nearby
                                               31
villagers of the forest to procure the fallen trees or woods up to a specific size, but these
rights are not legally recognized.
        So far as the recognition of indigenous and related rights are concerned the Forest
Right Act (FRA), 2006 is a central law applicable to all the states. Basically, it is question of
carrying out survey as per the provision of the act to reach out to the target groups. Survey
proceeds enforcement of rights. The progress so far in the implementation of FRA in Bihar
leaves much to be desired.
        In the first instance, survey of the areas concerned has to take place in the right spirit,
petitions have to be collected and examined judiciously. Reasons have to be assigned for
rejection. Appellate provisions have to be explained to the applicants, for that training and
awareness drives have to be launched on a regular basis and monitoring at various levels is
ensured.
Analysis of Dimension 1.1.3: Legal Recognition and Protection of Urban Land Tenure
Rights
Though legal framework is applicable and protecting 90% of the population as discussed in
2.1, but implementation is deficient. There is lack of data in urban area, regarding deprivation
of legal rights.
    There is recognition of land rights in urban areas against lands held by individuals,
households, apartments, group housing, commercial complexes, slums and the like, and
forums for redressal of disputes and grievances exist.
Analysis of Dimension 1.1.4: Recognition of Urban Land Tenure Rights
In general, the provisions of Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 do not exclude urban areas in
application, since there is no notification of the State Government regarding such exclusion.
Apartment Act and Slum Policy of the government cover apartment and slums. Also the
latest version Bihar Khasmahal Policy lays down the underlying principles of leasing out
lands under the direct management of the government to the lessees.
Assessment of Indicator 1.2: Respect for and Enforcement of Rights
 Dimension
 1 2     1     Accessible opportunities for tenure           D    Although there is demand, the law provides no
               individualization exist.                           opportunities for those holding land under
                                                                  customary, group, or collective tenures to fully or
                                                                  partially individualize land rights.
 1   2    2    Individual land in rural areas is recorded and A   More than 90% of individual land in rural areas is
               mapped                                             formally recorded and mapped.
 1   2    3a   Individual land in urban areas is recorded. A      More than 90% of individual land in urban areas is
                                                                  formally recorded
 1   2    3b Individual land in urban areas is mapped.       B    Between 70% and 90% of individual land in urban
                                                                  areas is formally mapped.
 1   2    4    The number of illegal land sales is low.      B    The number of illegal land transactions is low and
                                                                  some are unambiguously identified on a routine
                                                                  basis.
 1   2    5    The number of illegal lease transactions is   B    Existing legal restrictions on land leases, if any, are
               low.                                               clearly identified, justified and accepted by all parts
                                                                  of society, but not fully understood by land users, so
                                                                  that compliance is partial.
 1   2    6    Women's property rights are recorded.         D    Less than 15% of land recorded to physical persons
                                                                  is recorded in the name of women either
                                                                  individually or jointly.
 1   2    7    Women's property rights to land are equal to C     Equality of women's property rights to those by
               those by men both in law and in practice.          men is established by law, but there are
                                                                  considerable limitations to exercising such rights in

                                                 32
                                                               practice.
Analysis of Dimension 1.2.1: Scope for Individualization of Land Rights
There are no customary rights and there is no concept of collective tenure in Bihar. The
panelists found this dimension inapplicable and irrelevant in the context of Bihar. This
dimension seeks to explore the scope for individualization of rights held by a raiyat as a
member of any customary group. There is no occasion of such scope for individualization of
rights held by a raiyat as a member of any customary group in Bihar. There is neither any
customary nor any group nor any collective tenures in the state of Bihar.
Analysis of Dimension 1.2.2: Recording and Mapping of Individual Land in Rural
Areas
The survey operation in Bihar was conducted in three phases. The cadastral Survey
completed in 1922-25. The Revisional Survey started in the decade of 1960s but did not
cover all the districts. It completed in 12 districts but took long time to complete. In 14
districts it started but partially covered. In 12 districts the revisional survey could not be
started. The new Special Survey has just started, and map of only one village has published
so far.
         During survey and settlement operations each and every plot of the village was
surveyed, recorded and accordingly maps on certain scale were prepared for identification
and measurement of each and every plot. But as the revisional survey could not be completed
in 14 districts the land records are not up to date and accordingly maps also do not reflect the
current ground reality. Although due to non-completion of revisional survey the land record
have became outdated, but all the individual land in rural areas had been formally recorded
and mapped.
Analysis of Dimension 1.2.3 (a): Recording of Individual Land in Urban Areas
As discussed above, during survey operations every plot was recorded. Recording of urban
land also has been done but not the superstructure / building. GIS based mapping of
individual property including apartment, group housing schemes have been completed in 17
towns of the state. GIS based mapping for purpose of collection of property tax has been
completed in 7 towns of the state.
Analysis of Dimension 1.2.3 (b): Mapping of Individual Land in Urban Areas
Though lands in urban areas are recorded, but maps for all are not available. Generally maps
on larger scale are prepared to facilitate the identification of small plots. The land in the
urban area is mapped but not the super structure. The process of GIS-based mapping of urban
area has been started; base maps of 17 towns are ready and work is in progress for
preparation of base map of other 12 towns. GIS based mapping for purposes property tax has
been completed in 7 towns of the state.
Analysis of Dimension 1.2.4: Magnitude of Illegal Land Sales
Under section 26 A (1) and (2) of Bihar Tenancy Act every occupancy right can be
transferred by way of sale, exchange , gift but some illegal land sales/leases occur as the
registration officer need not be concerned with the validity of documents presented before
him for registration. There are provisions where the aaggrieved party may approach to
appropriate court for redressal of disputes. These conditions are applicable for property
transfer in both urban and rural areas. As there is no data on this issue, it is difficult to
conclude a quantitative result for this issue, but even though illegal sales occur, there is
mechanism available to counter it and magnitude of illegal sales are not much.
Analysis of Dimension 1.2.5: Magnitude of Illegal Lease Transaction


                                              33
There are provisions under the Bihar Khasmahal Policy, 2011 for regulation of leases
including cancellation of the leases in urban areas. The Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 does not
disallow leases altogether.
    The word ‘Under raiyat’ is duly and legally recognized form of tenancy. The Bihar
Tenancy Act, 1885 highlights personal cultivation. Section 48C of the Bihar Tenancy Act,
1885 provides for accrual of occupancy rights for under raiyat, if he has cultivated the land
holder’s land for more than 12 years. Under section 48(D) of the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885,
the ‘under-raiyat’ may became a raiyat on payment of 24 times of the rent to the land holder.
Similarly, an under-raiyat can become raiyat under section 21 and 22 of the Ceiling Act also.
    Agricultural leases may be oral and no survey has been conducted to record on the raiyati
rights in the state. Any person cannot take lease land beyond the limit prescribed under the
Ceiling Act.
Analysis of Dimension 1.2.6 & 7: Women's Property Rights
In law Women’s property rights are equal to those of men’s rights but in practice the
recording of the name of women in a formal record found are very few. Though Hindu
Succession Act has been amended in 2005 in favour of women right over property, but its
application is not very prominent. Record of rights is prepared during the survey operation.
In some of the cases the name of female member as tenant is recorded only in case of death
or absence of male member of the family. It is found that in Bihar 12.8% lands are recorded
in the name of women.
4.1.3. CONCLUSION
In Bihar there are numbers of Act and Rules enacted and developed to protect rights of the
tenure holder. The language of law is quite clear to protect rights as well it is applicability to
everyone. The record of rights, so prepared, has relevance in the matter of land rights
recognition. At present, records of rights have been prepared mainly for collection of rent on
the basis of classification of lands, as such, the tenant is presumed to be proprietor of the land
unless it is proved otherwise. Since independence, concerted efforts have also been made to
create land rights for vulnerable and disadvantaged sections of the population. But it is a
matter of concern that occupancy rights have hardly accrued to the share croppers. Though
there are legal provisions for protection to the share cropper against ejectment or threatened
ejectment by the land holder, recognition of the right of the share cropper and their protection
are needs of the hour. In Bihar, due to absence of correct and updated data related to record of
rights is one of the most problematic areas, which sometimes paves the ways for conflicts and
disputes related to land. The cadastral Survey was completed in 1922-25. The Revisional
Survey started in the decade of 1960s but did not cover all the districts. It completed in 12
districts but took long time to complete. In 14 districts it was started but partially covered. In
12 districts the revisional survey could not be started. The new Special Survey has just
started, and map of only one village has been published so far. There is an initiative for GIS
based mapping for urban areas which was completed in 17 towns of the state. The status of
women right over land in Bihar is also poor. Though the amendment of Hindu Succession
Act in 2005 provides female members of the household coparcenary ownership, but there is
gap in proper implementation. The record of rights prepared in Bihar, by and large, carries
the name of the male coparceners and as there is an exclusive incumbent to raiyati status
belonging to the female sex who is either a widow or a spinster. In Bihar, only 12.8% land is
recorded in the name of women. But there are some positive initiatives by government as by
a recent amendment, in section 27 of the Bihar Land Ceiling Act, 50% of the allottees of
surplus land coming under ceiling have to be women belonging to eligible categories. The
decision of distribution of bhoodan land, ceiling land, gairmazarhua aam and gairmazarhua
                                               34
khas land to weaker section of the society is a welcome effort. But land allottee under these
distributions also suffers from dispossession encroachment. Due to weak enforcement, the
rights of land in Bihar have been distorted due to encroachment and dispossession.
Recognising right of share croppers and the constraints associated with ensuring their rights
remain a matter of concern.
4.1.4 STRENGTH
The strength of this sector is the recent legislative enactments. The enactments started below
are regarded as landmarks in the field of Land Reform measures in Bihar.
1.       Bihar Land Disputes Resolution Act, 2009 (Rules, 2010)
2.      Bihar Land Tribunal Act, 2009 (Rules, 2010)
3.      Bihar Agricultural Land (Conversion for Non-Agriculture Purposes) Act, 2010
        (Rules, 2011)
4.      Bihar Land Mutation Act, 2010 (Rules, 2012)
5.      Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011 (Rules, 2012)
   1. The Bihar Khasmahal Policy, 2011 related to land in urban areas and under the direct
        management of the Government is transparent, self explaining and, thus, has clearly
        removed the complications in terms of its renewal, transfer, assignment, subletting
        etc.
   2. The Government efforts to give land for house sites, through various land streams, to
        mahadalit families have been appreciated and address the equity concern. The table
        below highlights the number of beneficiaries to whom house sites has been allotted, as
        on December, 2013.
        Table 4.1.3: Details of house sites allotted under various schemes
                           Schemes                       Number of Beneficiaries/Families
         Basgit Parcha under BPPHT Act                                  580214
         Bhoodan land                                                   292616
         Mahadalit Vikash Mission (First Phase)                         185201
         Mahadalit Vikash Mission (Second Phase)                         27271
       (Source: Figures are based on report dated December, 2013, by the Department of Revenue
       and Land reforms, Government of Bihar)
  3.   A silver lining lies ahead in the fact that Basgit Purcha has been issued to 580214
       families in Bihar under the Bihar Privileged Person Home Stead Tenancy Act, 1947.
       This act was the very first act in post-independence era to address the equity concern.
       A privileged person was a person attached with the household of a land holder doing
       domestic and agriculture chores. The land holder allotted a portion of his home stead
       land to such person for habitation. The aforesaid act formalised this age-old system.
       Circle Officers were delegated the right to issue Basgit Purcha to such a person on
       private land. This act was lying dormant in Bihar for several years. In last 3-4 years,
       this act was operationalised, in a campaign mode, under the Mahadalit Vikas Mission.
  4.   Section 4 of the recently enacted Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009, provides
       jurisdiction and authority to the competent authority (Deputy Collector Land
       Reforms) to adjudicate land related cases. He has jurisdiction and authority to hear
       and adjudicate, on an application or complaint, or on any application referred to by a
       Prescribed Authority or officer, on any issue arising out of following types of
       disputes: -
       (a) Unauthorised and unlawful dispossession of any settlee or allottee from any land
       or part thereof, settled with or allotted to him under any Act contained in Schedule-1

                                             35
        to this Act by issuance of any settlement document / parcha by a Competent
        Authority;
        (b) Restoration of possession of settled/allotted land, in favour of legally entitled
        settlee/allottee or his successors/heirs, upon adjudication of unauthorized and
        unlawful dispossession;
        (c) Threatened dispossession of a legally entitled settlee/ allottee
4.1.5. BEST PRACTICES
   5. Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011
        The state government has introduced Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011,
        followed by Rules, 2012 to conduct survey in whole of the state, in a time-bound
        manner by using modern technology, aerial survey technique with ground verification
        by means of Digital Global Positioning System (DGPS), and Electronic Total Station
        (ETS). The state government proposed to complete the survey of entire state within
        three years. For this survey several new initiatives like setting up of base station,
        creation of additional position, wide publication etc. have been taken up. The work is
        under progress. The Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011 paves way for large
        scale recognitions of poor people’s rights over the land. The Act is comprehensive in
        nature. One major output of the ongoing special survey will be a clear cut up-to-date
        textual data of all categories of land including public land. It has huge potential for
        adoption by other states.
1.      Initiatives for Land Rights to women
        To ensure right to the women beneficiaries, the State Government of Bihar has
        amended section 27 of the Bihar Land Ceiling Act (Act 11 of 2009). According to the
        revisions, 50% of the allottees of surplus land coming under ceiling have to be women
        belonging to eligible categories. Since then the State Government is following this
        principle of allotting at least 50% of the ceiling surplus land to women in letter and
        spirit. This is a welcome decision of the state for giving land rights to the women.
        Further by a consensus decision taken in the land purchase policy for Mahadalit
        Vikash Mission, all private homestead land purchased from vendors has been
        distributed to Mahadalit female beneficiaries only.
        The purcha / pawna of the other categories of land allotted for equity purpose or
        homestead land are being issued in the joint name of wife and husband. Wife’s name
        is mentioned first, followed by husband’s name, in order to give land rights to the
        women.
4.1.6. WEAKNESS
   2. There are gaping holes in the existing record of rights, which continue to remain
        truncated over the last 100 years at a stretch. Patch-work-solutions are not at all
        effective.
   3. Revisional survey could be completed in only 12 districts. In 14 districts, revisional
        survey was started but could not be completed. In 12 districts revisional survey could
        not be started.
        1.       Revisional survey operations in Purnea, Katihar, Kishanganj and Araria were
                 carried out from 1952 to 1986; in Muzaffarpur, Sitamarhi, Sheohar and
                 Vaishali from 1959 to 1988; in Saharsa, Madhepura and Supaul from 1962 to
                 2002 and these operations are still on in Darbhanga, Madhubani and
                 Samastipur since 1965; in Bhojpur, Buxar, Rohtas and Kaimur since 1959; in


                                              36
            Gaya, Jahanabad, Arwal, Aurangabad and Nawada since 1965; Bhagalpur and
            Banka since 1965 and in Patna since 1986.
    2.      No revisional survey and settlement since cadastral survey could be carried
            out in 12 districts in Bihar, namely; Begusarai, Khagaria, Lakhisarai,
            Sheikhpura, Jamui and Munger in Munger Division; Saran, Siwan and
            Gopalganj in the Saran Division; East Champaran and West Champaran in the
            Tirhut Division and Nalanda in Patna Division;
    3.      The very purpose of a revisional survey and settlement is defeated if the time
            span on which it is undertaken is long as reflected in the foregoing facts;
    4.      That revisional survey and settlement operations, following conventional
            methods, in some parts of the State, have been long drawn out, cumbersome
            and exorbitantly expensive, as the past experience shows.
1. Continuous Khatiyan (Register-1B), Khesra Register and Register-II (Tenants’
    Ledger) supposed to be maintained in the Circle Offices in an up-to-date manner,
    have not been maintained as such, and consequently, transfers, successions,
    mutations, etc., taking place from time to time, are not reflected therein;
2. Computerization of land records, as sponsored by the Government of India some
    years ago, has not followed a uniform approach; In the event of non-synchronization
    of data put into the computer with existing ground realities, resulted in a gap between
    successive claims of title and a reflection of the same through land records;
3. There is marked deficit / shortage of working staff, against sanctioned posts at grass-
    root level in regular revenue offices headed by the circle officers. Measurement and
    demarcation of land suffers for want of ‘Amin’. Boundary disputes and disputes
    regarding right and title need measurement. Similarly, normal record keeping,
    including mutation, suffers in the absence of Halka Karamchari and Circle Inspectors.
    In the recently launched special survey operations the special survey has been started
    in limited areas due to shortage of officers and staff.
4. Technical rules to conduct special survey are yet to be formulated.
5. Training modules for all categories officers / staff in regular revenue offices and in
    survey and settlement are yet to be adopted finally, and implemented.
6. Register II (Tenant’s Ledger) entries are mostly unauthorized, unauthenticated and
    undated.
7. Rights of the individuals and the community towards CPRs and uses of the same,
    including conversion, are not clearly defined. Such blurring leads to complications
    and adhocism in this sphere.
8. Large tracts of land remain sub-judice in various revenue courts under ceiling law for
    decades together. Many records are stuck up at some stage. Either the authority is
    ignorant about the technicalities of the law or unwilling to pursue the cases to a
    logical conclusion.
9. Even though special survey has been launched, whereafter consolidation against
    updated records has been smooth. In the old Sahabad district, consolidation operation
    is concurrently going on. Necessary steps have not been taken, as yet, to conclude or
    windup consolidation operations. It may lead to duplication of efforts.
10. The policy of giving 3 decimal of land to mahadalit families has shown success.
    However, the same policy for annexure I and II, SC / ST is not a resounding success
    over the years.


                                          37
   11. In every district collectorate of all the 38 districts, much remains to be desired in the
        up keep of Record Rooms, where old maps and land records are kept in shabby
        conditions.
   12. Dispossession from Government allotted land including (ceiling surplus / Bhoodan
        land) is a chronic problem. Unfortunately, the extent of dispossession is yet to be
        surveyed, diagnosed and sorted out.
   13. A sine-quo-non for redistributive justice should have backward and forward linkage.
        This can become effective only if allotted lands are distributed and other inputs
        provided. Otherwise overall economic change will not come through. No survey of
        post settlement situation has been made with regard to public land allottees.
4.1.7. POLICY RECOMMENDATION
4.1.7.1. Short Term
   1. Comprehensive circulars/ guidelines of allotment of homestead land covering BPPHT
        Act 1947, Gairmazarua Aam land, Gairmazarua Malik land and allotment of 3
        Decimal of Rayati land along with check list should be developed and made available
        to Circle Office for ready reference.
2.      Survey/Resurvey work has been taken up in Bihar on priority basis, under the Bihar
        Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011. District collectors have been made in
        charge as settlement officers of the respective districts in the Act. Since the survey
        operation is technical in nature, it requires day to day monitoring, and disposal of
        cases in the camps by junior officials. The collector of the district has hardly any time
        to monitor the day-to-day operations of the Survey/Resurvey, organization of camps,
        disposal of cases, grievance redressal etc. It is advisable to have a full time settlement
        officer to look after all these activities.
3.      Since ‘continuous khatiyan’ is being prepared in the districts before the
        Survey/Resurvey operation, the Continuous Khatiyan, so prepared, should be verified
        and authenticated by senior revenue officials. They should be asked to put their
        signatures after verification so that the entries made in the ‘continuous khatiyan’
        match with the ground realities.
4.1.7.2. Medium Term
   4. Special survey should be completed within the prescribed time frame.
        Computerization of record of rights and digitization of maps based on special survey
        should be completed by 31st March, 2016.
   5. Formulate Land Leasing Policies to ensure land rights in favour of share croppers and
        economically weaker sections. This will facilitate availability of bank credit to them
        and motivate them in investing for long term infrastructure in farming.
   6. Around 279 land ceiling cases, involving about 26000 acres of land, are pending in
        the High Court of Bihar. The State Govt. has started reviewing the cases and chalking
        out strategy such as empanelment of competent advocates and request to Chief Justice
        to constitute separate bench to hear all the pending cases expeditiously.
   7. All the government land, such as ceiling surplus land, bhoodan land, homestead land,
        gairmazarua aam and gairmazarua khas land which is stated to have been distributed
        to the landless poor should be physically verified to see whether the assignees are in
        possession of these lands. There is a need to physically verify all the land given SCs
        and STs by involving landless poor, local youth and SHGs of Women, under the
        overall supervision of Revenue Authorities. Effective steps should be taken to give
        possession of land to such persons.

                                               38
   8.   State should prepare and maintain an inventory of all ceiling surplus land, bhoodan
        land, gairmazarua aam, gairmazarua malik and khasmahal land and make it available
        for public scrutiny.
   9. All cases of alienation or transfer or unauthorized occupation of land, in violation of
        existing laws, should be identified and necessary steps should be taken to restore the
        land back to the poor. All the restored land should be recorded in the name of women
        family member to increase women’s stake in land. The Registration Department
        should strictly be instructed not to entertain any transaction of these land allotted to
        poor by government.
   10. Exemptions to religious, educational, charitable, research and industrial organizations
        as well as plantations and aqua farms under the Land Ceiling Act should be
        discontinued. These institutions should not be allowed to use more than one unit of 15
        acres.
4.1.7.3. Long Term
   1. State should revise its ceiling limits. The proposed limit should be around 10 acres in
        the case of irrigated land and 15 acres for non-irrigated land.
   2. Recommendations on Amendment of Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling
        Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961.
The following modifications are required in some section of the above Act:
          1. Section 45B of the Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and
               Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961, empowers the state government
               (Minister in the instant case) to reopen the cases disposed off by the collector.
               Keeping in view the timely disposal of the cases, it is advisable that this power
               should be exercised by the Divisional Commissioners. There are many issues in
               land ceiling. Various issues which might have been raised and adjudicated at
               various forums. Any authority or land holders, at any point of time, may inform
               that some points have not been raised earlier and that may change the decision
               in the case. Hence, power of reopening cases may be given to Divisional
               Commissioner based on left over points/issues.
          2. In Section 21 of the Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and
               Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961, the land holders have been given
               facility to resume land cultivated by an under raiyat within the ceiling area.
               These facilities are retrograde and should be withdrawn.
          3. Under section 21 of the Act, the under raiyat, after the acquisition of raiyati
               status, should have transferrable rights. This provision is fraught with the risk of
               sale under duress rendering the under raiyat landless. This provision should be
               removed/ deleted.
          4. Section 22 of the Bihar Land Ceiling Act deals with the provision for an under-
               raiyat. To prevent benami transaction by the land holder, or to prevent entry of
               fake name in the relevant record, it would be relevant to make provisions by
               recording non-transferable rights to under-raiyat so that the actual under raiyats,
               who are the tillers of the soil, may get benefit.
          5. The State should impose ceiling not only on ‘Ownership’ of land holdings but
               also on ‘Operational’ land holdings to prevent concentration of large tracts of
               land through lease-in. A person/ institution/organization should not be allowed
               to own more land than the ceiling limit.


                                                39
1.        Enactment of Right to Homestead Land: Right to Homestead Land Act, just on the
          lines of Right to Service Act 2011, should be promulgated. Definition of homeless,
          procedure for survey to identify homeless and ways and means to provide house sites
          in the Act from various types of land, should be made clear.
     2.   Land Development: Land allotted to landless generally have problems such as
          salinity, alkalinity, water logging and soil degradation etc. Lot of opportunities are
          available for developing the land belonging to the poor by accessing various Central
          and State Government schemes existing now such as MGNREGA, Watershed
          Management Program and NABARD supported Rural Infrastructure Development
          Fund etc. The govt. should prepare an inventory of land for the poor who require
          development, and should also systematically take up land development work on those
          lands. Priority should be given to all land belonging to Scheduled Cates and
          Scheduled Tribes, first. As far as possible, land development work should also include
          provision of irrigation facility with priority to SCs and STs land. Along with land
          development, all other sustainable agriculture programmes available for increasing
          productivity of land should be linked to this land so that the poor can earn better
          income from the land.




                                                40
            4.2. FOREST AND COMMON LAND MANAGEMENT
4.2.1 INTRODUCTION
In Bihar notified forest area is 6473km2. Other estimates mention it as 6492.9km2. Out of this
forest area 692.89km2 is categorised as reserved forest and 5798.89 km2 is classified as
protected forest. Here it is to be noted that the total forest coverage does not include areas of
national park and sanctuaries, as, in Bihar these are dealt separately. The forest coverage
includes forest over raiyati land also. The statistical details of existing forest position in Bihar
are given in following table.
Table 4.2.1: General information regarding forests in Bihar
 SI.
      Particulars                         Area in Km2
 No.
  1. Total geographical area              94163 Km2
  2. Notified forest area                 6473 Km2
                                          (6492.9 Km2 as per directorate of economics and
                                          statistics)
      a. Reserved forest                  692.89 Km2 (10.67% of forest area)
      b. Protected forest                 5798.89 Km2 (89.31% of forest area)
      c. Unclassified forest              1.12 Km2
  3. Total forest area                    6845km2 (7.27%)
  4. Plantation outside forest area       2369 Km2 (2.52%)
  5. Total plantation                     9214 Km2 (9.79%)
  6. Total population                     103.80 million
  7. Forest and plantation per person 0.0088 hectare
(Source: Department of Environment and Forest, Govt. of Bihar)
4.2.1.1 Identification of Forest and Common Land
Forest and common land are clearly identified in Bihar and the same are recorded as such.
However, there is no demarcation of forest villages as such as the Department of
Environment and Forest has adopted the conventional revenue Survey and Settlement maps
and records and has not conducted any special survey for this purpose. In early 1950s, out of
the revenue survey, the forest settlement officer earmarked chunks of forest land. They
conducted Bujharat, invited and disposed of objections and even excluded some land in
favour of raiyats residing in forest land.
        The local dwellers were entitled to rights and privileges as mentioned in the Khatiyan
of land of protected forest. Khatiyans of all the villages of Bihar prepared during Cadastral
Survey, almost 100 years ago have not been updated as yet. The state Government has started
the survey but the same is very slow paced due to man power constraints, commitment and
dispute coming in claiming the land by others. In case of reserved forest there is no right but
the local dwellers are entitled to certain privileges as mentioned in the notification notifying
the area as reserved forest.
         As far as protected forests are concerned, the banned activities continued to ban while
activities not banned and are kept open to the public providing an opportunity to the raiyat to
exercise their rights to that limited extent. Users rights, too, key natural resources on land
(including fisheries) are legally recognized and put up in practice in the protected forest area.
The situation is quiet different; as there is no users’ right in 13 national parks / wildlife
sanctuaries in Bihar. These parks / wildlife sanctuaries come under the broader category of
reserve or protected forest as the case may be. They have been classified based on concept of

                                                41
management of forest. The national parks / wildlife sanctuary are governed by the Wildlife
Protection Act, 1972. In Bihar, its spread over in an area of 3339.458 sq km. The details of
which has been given in the table below:
Table 4.2.2: National park and world life sanctuary in Bihar
 SI.                                                        Date                of Area
     Name                                    District
 No.                                                        Allotment              (Km2)
 1. Valmiki National Park                    West Champaran 02.08.1989             335.6


  2.   Valmiki Wildlife Sanctuary           West Champaran       04.05.1976        545.18
  3.   Bhimbandh Sanctuary                  Munger               27.05.1976        681.99
  4.   Rajgir Wildlife Sanctuary, Rajgir    Nalanda              20.05.1978        35.84
  5.   Kaimur Sanctuary, Kaimur             Rohtas & Kaimur      25.07.1979        1486.89
  6.   Gautam Buddha Bird Sanctuary, Gaya                        14.09.1971        137.22
       Gaya
  7.   Udaipur Wildlife Sanctuary, Bettiah West Champaran        29.04.1978        8.87
  8.   Naagibandh Bird Sanctuary            Jamui                14.07.1987        1.91
  9.   Naktibandh Bird Sanctuary            Jamui                15.07.1987        3.32
 10.   Vikramshila     Gangetic    Dolphin Bhagalpur             28.08.1990        50        km
       Sanctuary                                                                   height
 11.   Kanwar Lake Bird Sanctuary           Begusarai            20.06.1989        63.11
 12.   Salim Ali Jubba Sahni BAeriala Bird Vaishali              28.01.1997        0.198
       Sanctuary
 13.   Kusheshwar Asthan Bird Sanctuary Darbhanga                05.07.1994        29.23
                                     Total:                                        3339.458
(Source: Environment and Forest Department, Govt. of Bihar)
4.2.1.2 Rights to Forest and Common Land
There are settlements inside forest area which are outside the pale of Forest Right Act.
Theoretically, the aforesaid settlees have to be evacuated. Still evacuation remains a far cry
and dwellers inside the aforesaid area are (illegally) exercising certain rights. The sordid
picture of land, recorded in the name of the Government of Bihar needs to be highlighted at
this stage. It is also found that, in many pockets multiple rights over common land and natural
resources of government land persist. People’s rights accrue by virtue of adverse possessions,
while the records are in the name of government of Bihar. In the context of forest, the
pertinent point to be noted is that despite revenue land recorded as Jungle / Jhari (bush), the
forest department has not extended its control over such land, consequently, non-forest
activities go on unabated without seeking the permission from the forest authorities. As far as
multiple rights over forest land in protected forest areas are concerned, Forest Rights Acts has
been made applicable. While ownership remains with the government, certain individual
rights accrue through the legal provisions of the Forest Rights Act. However, much remains
to be done in Bihar with regard to the application of the Forest Right Act in letter and spirit.
         Reportedly in Bihar, 20 sub divisional level committees, 13 district level committees
and 1299 Forest Right Committee (FRC) have been constituted. It is also found that out of
2930 claims filed, 585 claims are under process and 31 titled deeds disbursed upto the year

                                              42
2013. Functions of various committees at various levels are matter of further enquiry. The
effectiveness of training provided and distribution of training modules amongst Gram Sabha
members on quality output is matter of further research. The same can be true too on various
training organized at block level for FRC members in West Champaran, Kaimur and Rohtas
districts. About 350 Gram Sabhas are yet to claim individual rights. It is not evident that,
whether Gram Sabha members have visited every hamlet to interact with tribal and Other
Traditional Forest Dwellers (OTFD), collected information and oriented them about their
rights. Proper mobilization and training of tribals and OTFD would be effective to enhance
the figures of claims and acceptance. There is a hiatus between law and practice and
orienting the target groups to their rights and obligations under FRA until and unless this
schism is filled. Existence of vested interests and collusion with local bureaucracy are matter
of concern for the target groups to take advantage of their legal entitlements.
         The grievance redressal committees at various levels are still to be constituted / made
effectively functional. Much remains to be desired on documentation of rights / registration
of community claims and similar other fronts. The only silver lining through historical fluke
is that, no conversion of forest villages into revenue villages is required as no forest village
exists in Bihar. However, the state government should take ample care of conservation of
wildlife, forest and biodiversity as well as providing benefits of the FR Act to those tribal and
OTFD settlement / hamlets which have been left out altogether.
         In as much as, the boundary demarcation of communal land is concerned, there is no
communal or indigenous land as such in Bihar. Such types of land used to exist when this
state was in the fifth schedule and Jharkhand was not a separate entity.
         Nevertheless, Bihar has common land in the state. The Gairmazruha Aam common
land is basically community land, owned by the village community. These include village
pathways, village waste land, play grounds, orchards, cremation and burial places. They
further include the village water bodies and bandhs, ahar, pynes, reservoirs, tanks etc. Even if
the nature of these lands have changed over a period of time (if a tank is filled up), the
consent of the Gram Sabha will be mandatory for the Government to put that land into some
other use or settled through pattas. Common land further includes Gairmazruha Malik / Khas
land which were duly recorded as Gairabad Malik land in the cadastral survey and continued
to be owned and held by the state of Bihar. In course of the revisional survey and in day to
day operations of the lower level revenue bureaucracy, numerous Gairmazruha plots have
been recorded in private names; rent receipts issued and rent being collected. No systematic
attempt has been made to enquire into the privatization of common land, whether the
settlements made in favour of private individuals were made by competent authority or
encroachers / grabbers have illegally been recorded. These will be known only when a
thorough enquiry will be made. Field bureaucracy at various levels drawned in routine
humdrum and nobody wants to touch the hornet nest since the grabbers have powers and
influence.
         It is fact that in public interest certain schemes of non forestry have to be taken up on
forest land. Forest department in government of Bihar scrupulously adheres to the norms set
by Government of India in this regard. The state nodal officer exercises power to give
concurrence to non-forest uses upto 5 acres of forest land with regard to schools, hospitals
(illustratively) and roads falling in extremist areas. He has been empowered to permit upto 1
acre diversion of forest land for any scheme; such permission is accorded by Additional Chief
Conservation of forest, Eastern Region, Bhubhaneswar upto 40 acres of forest land. Beyond
40 acres the Government of India is alone competent to allow non-forest use. The
requisitioning body is required to make good environmental losses by depositing net asset
value of fallen trees. The net asset value is as per density of existing trees. The requisitioning
                                               43
body is also required to provide compensatory land, costs of fresh plantation as also making
over fallen trees to forest department.
        The Bihar Hariyali Mission tends to motivate farmers who are desirous to grow
species of their choices under agro-forestry scheme. The forest department provides land as
well as technical know-how free of cost. Some incentive money is also given towards plants’
care and protection. Preference is given to one or more farmers who are desirous for agro-
forestry on 2 hectares or more land. Altogether 7347 beneficiaries have taken advantage of
agro-forestry in 2013-2014, so far. The total number of plants shown is 7066986 and area
involved is 47111.59 acres.
4.2.1.3 Implementation of Forest Right Act
It is evident from a closer glance at implementation of the FRA in Bihar, that the
beneficiaries at various levels want an appreciation for the spirit of the FRA. The introduction
of the FRA represents a seminal moment in India’s highly contested forest politics,
recognising for the first time the ‘historical injustice’ perpetrated by the state on a significant
segment of its population. The Act states: “the forest rights on ancestral land and their habitat
were not adequately recognized in the consolidation of state forests during the colonial period
as well as in independent India resulting in historical injustice to the forest dwelling,
Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers” (FRA 2006) which calls for initiative
to recognize right of the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest
dwellers.
        The Act, which inherently recognises that a healthy ecosystem is compatible with
social justice technically, holds precedence over all other forest and wildlife-related laws.
Although its provisions for restoring the rights of forest-dependent households may not cover
all rights deprivations they hold the promise of improving the lives and livelihoods of more
than 100 million of India’s poorest citizens.
        However, it is important to remember that the FRA is only an enabling legislation and
the ‘prize’ – the actual allocation of user rights at the local level – crucially depends on its
implementation. This is where it faces serious challenges, as do several other recent
legislative reforms that await full implementation. All, this needs a thorough change in the
mindset of bureaucracy in Bihar.
        Schedule Caste / Schedule Tribe Welfare Department have issued a checklist of
community rights and specified therein that Halka Karamchari of each village should prepare
a list of claims for the village, based on revenue and forest records. This list is to be made
available to the Gram Sabha to enable claims to the user rights to be stick at the community
level. In addition, since many community rights may not have been documented earlier but
fall within the ambit of the FRA, the government specified that the revenue official or forest
conservator should inform the Gram Panchayat or Gram Sabha about these community rights
and assist the community in filling applications and presenting claim documents to avail of
these rights.
        In Madhya Pradesh, to ensure compliance, necessary instructions signed by the sub-
divisional officers, have been sent to all the concerned and the process and progress is
reviewed every month. The word ‘primarily’ has been classified by Ministry of Tribal
Affairs. Whether this clarification has percolated in Bihar in village levels is yet to be seen.
The following community rights may be ascertained and maintained at the earliest.
        3. Usage of approach road to places of worship;
        4. Usage of cremation grounds or burial places;
        5. Right to conduct meetings and / or choupals (community gatherings);
        6. Access to areas with medicinal plants, mahua flowers;

                                                44
         7. Access to rivers and / or canals in forest areas to bathe, wash clothes, allow cattle
             and other domestic animals to drink water, etc.
       Almost no action has been taken under section 3 (1) (B to M) of FRA, which pertains to
community rights. It is highly possible that several deserving claimants could not file their
claims on time under erroneous impression that the last date was over. Due to hasty inquiry
and inadequate vetting by senior officials there have been erroneous rejections also. It is also
evident that, claimants have not been given reasonable opportunity to prove their claims as
provided in rule 4 (C). No cross checks were done at the village level by the revenue and
forest officials. No outside agency has been engaged to conduct an independent assessment.
Applicants also faced problems in filling the form. Cases of claims even in national parks
have to be dealt with as per law. Consequently, the blank rejection in such cases would be
illegal. Applicants were not informed in writing when their claims were rejected so they
could not exercise their rights to appeal. The vigilance committee of elected officials is either
not setup or is inactive.
         In view of the above, it is to be expected that the SC / ST welfare department has to
be made nodal department in the real sense of the term as there are gaps in providing
leadership to the programme. The constraints result in low profile implementation campaign
and low level of awareness regarding the Act. The department’s role is to develop qualitative
indicators, call public meetings, hold public consultations, put pressure on the revenue and
forest departments at the district level to do justice to the forest dwellers, and improve
communication between officials and the people. These activities need to be performed with
care.
4.2.2. ASSESSMENT OF DIMENSIONS
Assessment of Indicator 2.1: Rights to Forest and Common Lands
 Dimension
            Forests and common lands are clearly B            Forests and common land are clearly identified,
  2   1   1 identified in law and responsibility for use is   responsibility for land use is clearly identified but
            clearly assigned.                                 implementation is ambiguous.
            Rural group rights are formally recognized A      The tenure of most groups in rural areas is
                                                              formally recognized and clear regulations
  2   1   2 and can be enforced.                              regarding groups’ internal organization and legal
                                                              representation exist and can be enforced.
            Users’ rights to key natural resources on B       Users’ rights to key natural resources are legally
                                                              recognized but only some are effectively protected
  2   1   3 land (incl. fisheries) are legally recognized     in practice or enforcement is difficult and takes a
            and protected in practice.
                                                              long time.
            Multiple rights over common land and C            Co-existence is possible by law but rarely
  2   1   4 natural resources on these lands can legally      respected in practice.
            coexist.
            Multiple rights over the same plot of land C      Co-existence is legally possible but rarely
  2   1   5 and its resources (e.g. trees) can legally        respected in practice.
            coexist.
            Multiple rights over land and mining/ other D     Co-existence is not possible by law; mining rights
  2   1   6 sub-soil resources located on the same plot       override land rights.
            can legally coexist.
            Accessible opportunities exist for mapping D      Although there is demand, the law provides no
                                                              opportunities for that holding group land under
  2   1   7 and recording of group rights.                    customary, group, or collective tenures to record
                                                              and map land rights.
              Boundary demarcation of communal land.     D    Less than 10% of the area under communal and/or
  2   1   8                                                   indigenous land has boundaries demarcated and
                                                              surveyed and associated claims recorded.

                                                 45
Analysis of Dimension 2.1.1: Identification of Forest and Common Land and
Assignment of responsibility related to Use
In Bihar, forest and common lands are clearly identified and responsibilities for use are
clearly assigned. However, the sad tales of common lands lie in the fact that, ever since the
Cadastral Survey, common lands have been privatized in connivance with revenue
functionaries and revisional survey authorities. So much so that, Khas mahal lands which are
not assigned permanently, rather are leased out on periodic lease, have been privatized in
revisional survey.
        Forest lands are clearly identified and demarcated on the ground but evidence shows
that claims as per the FRA are not coming forth in most of the cases for want of proper
education and awareness amongst the stakeholders. This leads to inequitable disposal of the
claims whatever are put forth and many a time the claims are not supported by any evidence,
which creates a problem before the authorities as to how to take a decision thereon. In all
such cases it should be incumbent on the adjudicating authority to hold local enquiries before
coming to any conclusion.
Analysis of Dimension 2.1.2: Recognition of Rural Group Rights
In Bihar group rights are mostly recognized under the statute or the customary laws having
the same force as enacted law and especially in the context of forest land the group and
individual right are recorded and enforceable. There are a number of laws which protect and
enforce the group rights on the common lands as well.
Analysis of Dimension 2.1.3: Users’ Rights to key Natural Resources
The users’ usufructuary right on the natural resources are recognized. For example, in the
state of Bihar, after reorganization the right of collection and marketing of minor forest
produce (kendu leaves etc.) have been passed on to Gram Panchayat. Along with the
management and development of forest in partnership with the local communities/
JFMC/EDCs the usufructuary rights /stakes are also being managed in the forest areas. As
the FRA is yet to be implemented in letter and spirit, the enforcement of users’ right becomes
difficult and takes a long time.
Analysis of Dimension 2.1.4: Co-existence of Multiple Rights
The common lands having natural resources on them or not are most of the cases recorded as
jungle/jhari/jhar jhankar etc in the revenue records and hence come under the teeth of the
Supreme Court judgment declaring all such areas as forest lands thus attracting the provision
of the Forest Conservation Act, 1980. In all such cases non-forest use of common lands even
is not permissible.
    As far as the user rights on common land is concerned, that too with regard to pastures,
cremation, burial place, village ponds, village pathways and the like, an area of concern is the
steady erosion of village commons/Common Property Resources. Either such lands are
encroached or no rejuvenation plan exists after change in nature. Paradoxically, as soon as
there is a change of nature like a village pond is filled up some or the other, government
structure comes over instead of rejuvenating the pond.
Analysis of Dimension 2.1.5: Multiple Rights over the same plot
Multiple rights over the government owned plots like Gairmazruha Khas plots do not exist.
Gairmazruha Aam plots are with the village community, and even the government has to pay
compensation if an acquisition of such land is necessitated. In the case of a change of nature
of the village commons the government has to take NOC from the Gram Sabha before
changing land use.
                                              46
        In so far as coexistence of multiple rights on forest resources is concerned, there is no
dichotomy in theory and practice. The government owned common lands which have been
brought under the plantation and growth of tree resources, have now been put under a novel
scheme of Tree-Patta Scheme according individual rights on community resources. However,
the tree resources on notified forest lands are also brought under community ownership
through Joint Forest Management (JFM) mechanism.
Analysis of Dimension 2.1.6: Multiple Rights over Land and Mining/ other sub-soil
resources
Co-existence of multiple rights over land and mining and other sub-soil resource is not
possible by law. Mining rights override land rights. Mining rights are vested with the
government exclusively.
      Multiple rights over the protected forest may exist to the extent they are sanctioned but
subject to condition that they do not involve non-forestry use.
Analysis of Dimension 2.1.7: Existence of Group Rights
After separation of Jharkhand from Bihar, there is no concept of group rights. Similarly, no
communal or indigenous land rights exist in Bihar. Mapping and recording of rights are
conducted universally for whole of the state.
Analysis of Dimension 2.1.8 Boundary demarcation of communal land
In Bihar there is hardly any instance of demarcation of boundaries of communal and/or
indigenous land. Updated land records of these lands with boundary demarcation are not
available.
Assessment of Indicator 2.2: Effectiveness and equity of rural land use regulations
 Dimension
                Restrictions regarding rural land use are      B    Regulations regarding restrictions on
 2 2      1     justified and enforced                              rural land use effectively serve public
                                                                    purpose but enforcement is weak.
                Restrictions on rural land transferability     B    There are a series of regulations that are
 2 2      2     effectively serve public policy objectives.         for the most part serve pubic purpose
                                                                    but that are not enforced.
                Rural land use plans are elaborated/ changed C      Public input is required and sought in
                via public process and resulting burdens are        preparing and amending land use plans
 2 2      3                                                         but comments are not reflected in the
                shared.                                             finalization of land use plans.
                Rural lands, the use of which is changed, are D     Less than 30% of the land that has had a
                swiftly transferred to the destined use.            change in land use assignment in the
 2 2      4                                                         past 3 years has changed to the destined
                                                                    use (e.g. forest, pastures, wetland,
                                                                    national parks etc.)
                Rezoning of rural land use follows a public    D    Rezoning processes are not public
                process that safeguards existing rights.            process and rights are ignored or not
 2 2      5                                                         properly or promptly compensated in
                                                                    the majority of cases.
                For protected rural land use (forest, pastures, A   The share of land set aside for specific
                wetlands, national parks etc.) plans                use that is used for a non-specified
 2 2      6                                                         purpose in contravention of existing
                correspond to actual use.                           regulations is less than 10%.
Analysis of Dimension 2.2.1: Restrictions regarding Rural Land Use are justified and
enforced.
In Bihar there are restrictions over rural land use. Section 23 of the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885
prohibits the use of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes with certain exceptions.
Manufacture of bricks and tiles, excavation of wells and tanks for domestic, agricultural and
charitable purposes are not banned.

                                               47
    Though a rule was made with regard to the conversion of agricultural land for non-
agricultural purposes, however, it was declared void by the Patna High Court. Subsequently
the government enacted the Bihar Agricultural Land (Conversion for Non-Agricultural
Purposes) Act, 2010 to regulate land use conversions. Nevertheless certain modifications are
called for in this Act to address environmental and ecological concerns, especially in the light
of specific provisions under the Environmental Protection Act 1986 and orders and circulars
issued there under. Regulations regarding restrictions on rural land use effectively serve
public purpose but enforcement is weak.
Analysis of Dimension 2.2.2: Restrictions on Rural Land Transferability
In the Bihar Ceiling Law, para 16(3) prohibits the sale of a given piece of land to a person
other than a neighbour of the plot, so long as the neighbour is willing to buy. This is with a
view to ensure consolidation of land as mostly the neighbours are coparceners and remote
buyers may not have any direct proximity with the lands earlier held by them.
Analysis of Dimension 2.2.3: Public Consultation and Rural Land Use Plan
In Bihar there is no Land Use Board for rural areas to prepare land use plan. There is no
specific Land Use Plan with special reference to agricultural land/ holdings in Bihar.
However, law has been enacted with provision of zoning of land in the urban areas and urban
land use board is in place.
    The Bihar Urban Planning and Development Act, 2012 makes provision for promotion of
planned growth and development of urban areas and such rural areas having potential of
urbanization and regulation thereof, including land use. This Act extends to the whole state of
Bihar or part thereof as may be notified by the government. The government may declare
Planning Area and may constitute Planning Authority. Land Use Map and Land Use Register
are to be prepared. After the declaration of a Planning Area, the Planning Authority within
two years of such declaration or time limit specified by the government required to submit a
Plan for the planning area or part of the planning area. The Plan should be of 20 years or so
extended period specified by the government and the Plan should be submitted through a
Planning Board.
        Urban land Use Planning Board has been constituted under the chairmanship of
Development Commissioner under Bihar Urban Planning and Development Act, 2012. It
may take some time to reflect on the efficacy and effectiveness of the implementation aspect
of the Bihar Urban and Development Planning Act, 2012, which encompasses rural area also.
Analysis of Dimension 2.2.4: Transfer of Lands for destined use
After the promulgation of the Bihar Agricultural Land (Conversion for Non Agricultural
purposes) Act, 2010 raiyats approach the competent authority (SDO) for obtaining
permission for land use change under the provisions of the Act. The data on transfer of lands
for destined use after changing of its use pattern is neither maintained nor readily available.
The transfer of lands for destined use after changing of its use pattern is very limited.
Analysis of Dimension 2.2.5: Rezoning of Rural Land Use
The processes of zoning/re-zoning of land use are not prevalent in rural areas of Bihar.
Analysis of Dimension 2.2.6: Protected Rural Land Use
In so far as forest wetlands and national parks etc. under the provision of Forest and Wildlife
laws are concerned, there are specific forest working plans and wildlife management plans
which correspond to actual use. However, there is no specific law corresponding to pasture
lands and their management. The share of land set aside for specific use that is used for a
non-specified purpose in contravention of existing regulations is less than even 4%.
4.2.3 CONCLUSION
In Bihar coverage for notified forest area is 6473km2, and the total forest area is divided into
different categories like reserved forest, protected forest, national park, sanctuary etc.
                                              48
Regarding the common land, in Bihar, the common lands are categorised into Gairmazarhua
Aam, Gairmazarhua Khas, Khas Mahal etc. The forest and common land are clearly
identified in Bihar and the same are recorded as such. However, as there has not been any
survey conducted by the Department of Environment and Forest the demarcation of forest
villages is difficult. The Environment and Forest Department adopted the there is hardly any
instance of demarcation of boundaries of communal and/or indigenous land. One of the
matters for concern is that common lands have been privatized in connivance with revenue
functionaries and other related officials. In the context of rural group rights over forest and
common land there are laws to protect the right. The usufructuary rights of users on natural
resources and forest produce also recognized in Bihar. The Joint Forest Management
Committees also instrumental for ensuring these rights. However, the proper implementation
of FRA in Bihar is much behind the expected level, causing constraint for ensuring rights to
forest and other traditional forest dwellers. Effective implementation and monitoring of FRA
is important to protect, conserve and manage forest resources and ensuring rights. An
effective awareness programme is need of the hour now. Another area of concern is the
steady erosion of village commons/Common Property Resources. These lands are encroached
or no rejuvenation plan exists after change in nature. One praiseworthy effort in this context
is that, the Gairmazahua Aam land can be transferred and settled only if its nature has
changed and gram sabha consented for it. Consorted effort may be made to free the common
land from encroachment and in this regard the Gram Panchayat also may be empowered to
alleviate encroachment. The multiple rights over common resources hardly exist in Bihar and
the right to the sub-soil resources is vested with the government. As there is no Land Use
Board in Bihar, there is no such typical Land Use Planning held in Bihar for rural areas. An
efficient Land Use Board may be effective to develop long-term perspective on land through
developing Land Use Plans.
4.2.4 STRENGTH
   8. Special care and inbuilt mechanism for safeguarding common land is in vogue.
        Powers, responsibilities and the role of the Gram Sabha has clearly been laid down.
   9. Common land, along with other public land, is transferred to the Forest Department
        for compensatory aforestation.
   10. In major urban areas, common land has been identified through concerted efforts and
        funds provided to construct boundary walls around isolated patches of common land
        to prevent encroachment.
   11. Following the recent legal enactment have put safety of common land on a much
        better footing than ever before, as stated below.
        1. Law of Mutation: Section 9 of the Act empowers the Additional Collector to
             adjudicate cases relating to open jamabandi. This adjudication stands to illegal
             jamabandi and opens against common land also. Earlier, Collectors used to send
             the records for annulment of illegal jamabandi against public land, including
             common land, to the government under section 4 (h) of the Bihar Land Reform
             Act, 1950. The present arrangement enables faster action.
        2. Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009: This Act too enables the Deputy
             Collector, land reforms, to hear and adjudicate disputes of various sorts, including
             dispossession or threatened dispossession of public land assignees including
             allottees of other common land.
        3. The Bihar Consolidation Act also provides for earmarking of the village
             pasturage and similar type of common land while finalising the Chak Scheme of
             the village.

                                               49
       4.   The Settlement Manual, 1959: Rule 467 empowers the Settlement Officer to
            cancel illegal khata of common/public land even after final publication of Record
            of Right.
       5. Bihar Khas Mahal Policy: This policy provides punitive measures against
            violation of lease deed conditions. For evicting a trespasser or violator, the
            government need not go to Civil Court. After this policy, the Collector can file
            eviction suit in the Court of Divisional Commissioner.
       6. The Bihar Char-Diara Temporary Settlement Policy 2013: This policy deals with
            alluvial and delluvial land and makes certain provisions for temporary settlement
            of such land which constitute public/common land.
4.2.5 BEST PRACTICES
   12. Tree Protection Day:
       Bihar Government has started celebrating Tree Protection Day on the eve of
       Rakshabandhan every year since 2011. People take pledge/oath to protect a tree like
       sister/brother on Tree Protection Day. This has created awareness amongst the forest
       dwellers and common people for protection of forest trees. Tree Protection Day
       celebration is having great replicability in the entire country without any additional
       cost. This will be a step forward for other states in the direction of protecting our
       forest wealth.
   13. Women Vigilance Squad in Banka Forest Division:
       Banka district of Bihar has 14% of geographical area under forest. The Forest of the
       district has depleted due to illegal cutting/falling of trees and cutting of shrubs for
       firewood purpose, mostly by women. Joint Forest Management Committees were not
       effective in protecting the forest and checking forest encroachment. In 2010, a forest
       guard interacted with women engaged in cutting shrubs/forest trees and narrated the
       adverse effects of such depletion. He started forming women squad by identifying
       women involved in cutting and felling of forest plants, for checking illegal felling and
       conservation of forests under four JFM Committees, viz. Leela Gora, Mohanpur,
       Pirota and Kusha JFMC, where the forest area is 2675 acres. At present, four women
       squads with 100 women are engaged in protecting and preserving forest. These four
       women squad members are looking after the forest area and keeping vigil. Even when
       they have slight doubt, they move to the forest and take measures to stop
       cutting/illegal felling, in all the seasons. Women now act as an extended wing of
       Forest Protection Force. Due to these four squads of women, the forest areas of 2675
       acres are now completely protected. Regeneration of sal and other trees in the area are
       testimony to their work. As a token of appreciation, the women participants have been
       provided Saree, blouse, footwear, umbrella and cap from Forest Division, Banka.
       Since most of the members of the women squad are poor and from SC/ST/OBC
       categories, Forest Department is trying to relate them with various state/central
       government schemes such as IAY, Health Card, BPL Card etc with the help of district
       administration. This has created a sense of belongingness/ownership and has proved a
       novel idea in protecting forest, which deserves replication.
   14. Involvement of Gram Sabha in allotment of common land
       Gairmazruha Aam Land is one of the most prominent under the category of common
       land. Settlement or transfer for even one decimal of Gairmazruha Aam land, to a
       needy family/person department needs to have the prior approval of the government.
       The power of settlement and transfer of such land is being exercised only if the nature
       and use of the said land has changed over a period of time with the prior approval of
       the Gram Sabha.
                                              50
1.     Rejuvenation of water bodies
       About 3-4 years ago the government, through Revenue and Land Reforms
       Department, has issued a circular which made it obligatory for the collector to set up a
       committee, which will include an Executive Engineer to hold a spot enquiry of such
       common land viz. ahar/water channels, tanks, pynes etc. The enquiry looks into the
       question whether rejuvenation is possible or not. If potential exists for rejuvenation,
       transfer/settlement of such land is not allowed.

4.2.6 WEAKNESS
   2. Despite provisions made in different laws, much remains to be done with regard to
        protection of public and common land in Bihar. Common land related cases are not
        diligently pursued. Hardly any case is filed against illegal jamabandi of common land.
   3. Implementation of FRA in the state is poor.
   4. Depletion of forest cover has been observed due to illegal felling of trees.
4.2.7 POLICY RECOMMENDATION
4.2.7.1 Short Term
5.      Building Public Awareness regarding Common Property Resources (CPR), FRA,
        forest and environment.
6.      The implementation of Forest Right Act should be geared up. The following actions
        should be initiated with regards to Forest Right Act:
1.      Primary importance is to be given to Community Forest Resource Rights (Sec.3(1) i)
        of FRA. All villages/hamlets should claim and obtain Community Forest Resource
        (CFR) Rights and in case there are villages/hamlets which don’t claim or obtain CFR
        rights, it should be incumbent on the District Level Committee to record, in writing,
        the reasons thereof (see iv. Community Forest Resource Right’s ‘Guidelines on the
        implementation of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
        (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act 2006; No.23011/32/2010-FRA (Vol. ii(pt.) ),
        Ministry of Tribal Affairs dated 12 Jul 2012. Further, the Gram Sabha should
        constitute a Forest Management Committee, as envisaged under Rule 4(e), to protect,
        conserve and manage the CFR area, including its resource use.
2.      State Level Monitoring Committee should also monitor effectively the process of
        determining and approval of all the rights under Sec. 3(1) and (2) category wise
        ranging from:
        1. Individual rights
        2. Community rights
        3. Rights of ownership, use and disposal of Minor Forest Produce
        4. Rights to community tenures and habitat rights particularly to vulnerable tribal
                 groups
        5. Rights in and over disputed land
        6. Rights of conversion of pattas or leases or grants
        7. Rights of settlement and conversion of all forest villages, unsurveyed villages and
                 other villages in forest, whether recorded, notified or not, in to revenue
                 villages
        8. Traditional rights
        9. Right to in-situ rehabilitation including alternate land for displaced persons
        10. Development rights under Section 3(2)
3.      Patta Distribution in the name of women, as specified under the FRA, should be
        implemented, in letter and sprit, with greater vigour and efficiency.

                                              51
4.      Vulnerable Tribal Groups should be given exemptions with regard to filing of claims.
        A definite time frame should also be specified for settling their claims. Furthermore,
        there should be a provision for withdrawal of cases against PVTGs for minor forest
        offences filed by the State.
5.      The state level committee should review and ensure that all cases of large scale
        rejection of claims (and modifications to what is claimed) are referred back to the
        DLC for their reconsideration and/ or rectification, following due process. Further, the
        process of acceptance of claims and implementation of FRA should not be subjected
        to arbitrary deadlines. The Gram Sabha is empowered to continue the process till the
        complete implementation of FRA. The committees at the higher level should not
        insist on any specific evidences for approval of rights decided upon by the Gram
        Sabha. Further, all safeguards under Section 4 of the Act, in respect of recognition of
        rights and resettlement, should be adhered to in case of critical wild life habitats,
        national parks and sanctuaries.
   6. The Ministry of Social Welfare should ensure that the State Level Monitoring
        Committee send their reports on a monthly basis and take cognizance of the
        recommendations. The Ministry should follow up and take proactive steps at the State
        level through issue of advisories and / or directives under Para 5 of Fifth Schedule
        applicable not only for Scheduled Area but also to all Scheduled Tribes. Wherever
        necessary, the Ministry should not desist from taking legal and other appropriate
        action against offenders.
4.2.7.2 Medium Term
7.      Enumerating Common Property Resources (CPR) in every National Sample Survey
        (NSS) should be made mandatory.
8.      Minimum area of Common Property Resources (CPR) in a village should be
        determined, keeping in view the growing trend in population / live stock.
9.      Joint Forest Management (JFM) model could be followed as the development model
        for Common Property Resources (CPR).
   1. Developing fresh land records (update the existing one) using modern Information
        Technology support.
   2. State government, through its State Level Monitoring Committee constituted under
        FRA, should review all diversion of forests for non-forestry purpose since January 1st,
        2008 and particularly from 30 July 2009. Whether consent for diversion is obtained
        from the concerned Gram Sabhas. Further, the committee should monitor and ensure
        that this guideline is complied with, in all future proposals of the State, for such
        diversion to ensure that the rights of forest dwellers are protected.
   3. Ban should be imposed on diversion of Common Property Resources (CPR) for other
        purposes.
   4. Steps should be initiated for removal of encroachment on common land / public land /
        forest land. The Gram Sabha should have the power to evict all encroachers from
        public land.
   5. Rights of management of common land should be vested in the Gram Sabha of the
        Gram Panchayat, which will include the village wasteland, common land, land under
        public utility, government land, community land, dedicated land, etc. The right of
        settlement of land should rest with the Gram Sabha of the Panchayat. No settlement of
        Gram Sabha land should be made on a permanent basis.
   6. The State government should ensure allocation of funds to the concerned Gram
        Sabhas for (a) protection and conservation of forests within the CFRs of the villages

                                              52
        and (b) follow up counselling and guidance sessions post-FRA rights recognition to
        achieve the intended objects of FRA.
   1. The processes of identification, of hamlets or settlements, for the purpose of the
        Forest Right Act (FRA), 2006 have been specified under Rule 2A of the FRA. The
        State should complete the identification process within a period of one year and
        ensure that the Gram Sabha of these hamlets constitute the Forest Right Committee.
   1. In the Bihar Land Ceiling Act, section 27 deals with the allotment of surplus land to
        eligible categories. It also deals with earmarking a portion of surplus land for public
        purposes. In the consolidation law, community land also has to be set apart in the
        scheme.
   2. Initiating fast track, time bound, process for resolving disputes on Common Property
        Resources (CPR).
4.2.7.3 Long Term
   1. Institutional arrangements to govern Common Property Resources (CPR) with
        increased role for user groups, community based organizations, should be delineated
        with regard to ownership access, rights and other benefits.
   2. There should be a Standing Committee at state level to deal with land issues,
        including the management of waste land, common land etc.




                                              53
        4.3. URBAN LAND USE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
4.3.1 INTRODUCTION
Urban development is of immense importance in view of the significant contribution it makes
towards the overall growth and development of the economy of states. According to the
Census, 2011 the total population of Bihar is 103.80 million, of which 11.72 million (11.29
per cent) constitute the urban population. The percentage of urban population has increased
from 10.47% in 2001 to 11.29% in 2011. The density of population in urban area has
increased from 4809 in 2001 to 6495 in 2011. Though Bihar is less urbanized compared to
the major states in the country, the pace of urbanisation in the state has accelerated rapidly in
the recent years. Apart from Patna, the other promising cities in Bihar are Gaya, Nalanda,
Bhagalpur, Muzaffarpur, Darbhanga, Begusarai and Purnea. The general profile of Bihar is
given in the annexure 4.3.1.
        Bihar is one of the least urbanized states in India with only 2% of its total
geographical area being urban (1804.60 km2). Skewed urbanization pattern, high migration,
high share of unemployed youth in population, lack of adequate technical education and job
opportunities and poor business climate have contributed to the lowest urbanization. The
employment rate in the state is only 42 per cent as compared to 52 per cent at the national
level and the female employment rate is abysmally low at 6.9 per cent as compared to 25.7
per cent at the national level.
        Urban planning (urban, city, and town planning or Patna metropolitan planning
region) is a technical and political process concerned with the use of land and design of the
urban environment, including transportation networks, to guide and ensure the orderly
development of settlements and communities. It concerns itself with research and analysis,
strategic thinking, architecture, urban design, public consultation, policy recommendations,
implementation and management. The urban development plan can take a variety of forms
including strategic plans, comprehensive plans, neighbourhood, regulatory and incentive
strategies, or historic and heritage building preservation plans. Planners are often also
responsible for enforcing the policies. But implementing agencies are exclusively responsible
for enforcing the policies and statutory plans.
        The Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation, Government of India,
allocates resources to the state governments through various Centrally-Sponsored Schemes,
provides finances through national financial institutions and supports various external
assistance programmes for housing and urban development in the country as a whole.
Policies and programme contents are decided at the time of formulation of Five Year Plans.
The indirect effect of the fiscal, economic and industrial location decisions of the
Government of India exercise a far more dominant influence on the pattern of urbanization
and real estate investment in the country. The state government also allocates fund for urban
development in various form i.e. for sewerage, drainage channel, water supply, transportation
network, electricity, solid waste management, cleanness etc.
        A recent family survey carried out in 122 urban local bodies (ULBs) by the
Department of Urban Development and Housing, Government of Bihar, has estimated that
Bihar has an urban poverty of 41.2 percent. It is estimated that, an average, 13 percent of the
urban population are either extremely vulnerable or extremely dependent. Approximately 10
percent of the total urban populations are schedule caste and 0.1 percent of the urban
populations are schedule tribe.
4.3.1.1 The Dawn of Planned Urban Development in Bihar
4.3.1.2 Inception Stage

                                               54
Town planning office under erstwhile L.S.G. Department (now nomenclature as Urban
Development & Housing Department), was set up in December 1946 and was headed by an
Architect Planner.
4.3.1.3 Formalization Stage of Urban Development
After this inception stage, a formalization stage of town planning activities started with a
number of enactments assured to be in place:
   3. The first enactment, The Bihar Restriction of Uses of Land Act, 1948
   4. Then, the Bihar Town Planning and Improvement Trust Act, 1951
   5. The third enactment was The Bihar Town Planning and Improvement Trust Act,
        1951.
        These enactments laid the foundation for setting up of the Improvement Trust and
Town Planning Authority for various types of urban areas in the State.
After this enactment, namely; The Bihar Town Planning and Improvement Trust Act, 1951
the following Improvement Trust and Town Planning Authority were set up:
4.3.1.4 Consolidation Stage
   6. Patna Improvement Trust in June, 1951
   7. Gaya Improvement Trust in May, 1957
   8. Ranchi Improvement Trust in November, 1959*
   9. Muzaffarpur Improvement Trust in September, 1960
   10. Rajgir Town Planning Authority in February, 1964
   11. Bodh Gaya Town Planning Authority in March, 1966
        and
   12. Bokaro-Chas Town Planning Authority in March, 1966*
Thus, in the light of above statutory setups, Draft Mater Plans for the Patna, Ranchi, Gaya,
Muzaffarpur, Bodh Gaya, Rajgir, Bhagalpur, Hazaribagh, Patratu and Netarhat were prepared
and in some cases published either directly by the Town Planning office or through the
agency of the Improvement Trusts / Town Planning Authorities:
      The planning activities in the State got a real impetus only during the Third Five-Year
Plan (1961-66) when the Government of India introduced a programme for the preparation of
Comprehensive Development Plans for the rapidly growing and industrially important towns
in the country. With this increased workload, the man-power in the State Town Planning
Organization under L.S.G. Department was inadequate also to be augmented, but in a much
smaller ratio than it was needed.
4.3.1.5 Maturation Stage
During this golden period of town planning in the State of Bihar the Ford Foundation placed
the services of a Regional Planner at the disposal of the Bihar State Town Planning
Organization in December, 1965.
        The Chief Town Planner, Bihar, had prepared a brief account of the activities and
achievements in the field of Town Planning in Bihar during the past two decades for the
“Exhibition Bihar Through Plans, 1966.”
        After the retirement of the last Chief Town Planner, the period of no-importance was
set in and the Town Planning organization became more-or less a defunct. Naturally,
Department of Urban Development and Housing, Government of Bihar had to take the
services of private consulting firms for the preparation of Master Plan for Patna.
        Somehow or the other, the Master Plan and City Development Plan (CDP)
respectively could not become statutory documents. Under the circumstances, most recently,
the Government of Bihar, Urban Development & Housing Department, has commissioned
CEPT University, Ahmedabad for the preparation of a Comprehensive Development for
Patna. Quite recently this consultant, namely, Centre for Environmental Planning and
                                             55
Technology (CEPT) University is likely to undergo some major structural changes. Urban
Development & Housing Department has advised the consultants at CEPTU to exclude the
areas north of the river Ganga in the final plan, as the area is flood prone. As the changes
suggested by the Government happen to be of a fundamental nature it might take some
months to re-draft the alternative development strategy.
Presently in Bihar, urban development is the responsibility of Urban Development
Department at the state level. In Bihar there are 11 Nagar Nigams with 545 Wards, 42 Nagar
Parishads with 1276 Wards, 86 Nagar Panchayats with 1351 wards. The ULBs are governed
by Bihar and Orissa Municipal Act, 1922. The details of ULBs are given in the annexure
4.3.2.
4.3.1.6 Constitutional Amendment Act
The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act (74th CAA) empowering Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs) in the fields of administration, legislation, town planning, environment and
architecture, etc as embodied in schedule 12th with some 19 fields, call upon 11 Municipal
Corporations, 44 Nagar Parishads and 86 Nagar Panchayats, now confronted with shortage of
technical personnel, particularly, town planning and architectural fields. Even, the Urban
Development & Housing Department, once thriving with bee-like activities, known as Town
Planning Organization under L.S.G. Department now has been reduced to the town planning
section is manned by one Assistant Architect and that too on deputation from PWD. Similarly
in Patna Municipal Corporation has a sanctioned post of the “Municipal Architect and Town
Planner, but it is vacant. In the light of such situations, what the picture would be of other
ULBs or the remaining 10 Municipal Corporations, 44 Nagar Parishads and 86 Nagar
Panchayats is left to the imagination of the readers. Besides, empowering the ULBs by
bringing about the 74th CAA, does not auger well in the field of orderly physico-spatial
development at the grass root level. Why at the grass-root level; at the upper crust also, it is
not very encouraging picture.
        Thus, Urban Land Use, Planning, and Development suffers from want of statutory
Master Plan or City Development Plan (CDP) in which urban land uses are generally shown
and notified. It could have been far better that efforts were directed for the revival of Town
Planning Organization under Urban Development & Housing Department instead of
depending solely on private consultants.
4.3.1.7 The Bihar Planning and Development Act, 2012 (Bihar Act 20, 2012)
“To make provision for promotion of planned growth and development of urban areas and
such rural areas having potential of urbanization and regulation thereof including land use in
these areas of State of Bihar. Be it enacted by the legislature of the State of Bihar in the sixty-
third year of the Republic of India as follows:”
Now, to begin with, it deals with various definitions such as, to name a few of them, ‘Area’,
“Area Development Scheme”, “Land use”, “Layout”, “Local Authority”, “Zonal Plan or
Zonal Development Plan”, “Zoning Regulations”, etc., have been clarified from legal point of
view.
        Under one of such provisions, registered private architects have been short listed and
given power for vetting of all the buildings plans, etc submitted by private individuals to
fetch approval of the Patna Municipal Corporation (Directorate of Urban Planning) for
constructing their houses, buildings, etc. This seems to be a stop gap provision. Some of the
registered private architects due to their lapses have been asked to submit a detailed report in
cases.
4.3.1.8 The Bihar Municipal Act, 2007
Earlier the municipalities in Bihar were governed by the Bihar and Orissa Municipal Act,
1922. This was an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to municipalities in the
                                                56
[States of Bihar and Orissa], the previous sanction of the Governor- General under sub-
section (3) of Section 80A of the Government of India Act has been obtained to the passing
of the Act. Number of amendments has been made in this Act. Finally after incorporating all
the clauses and all required amendments Bihar Municipal Act, 2007 was enacted this is the
exclusive Act in Bihar for guiding municipalities. Municipal Act 2007 was again amended in
2011 to make it more effective and people’s friendly.
Municipalities are created when the State Government is satisfied that three-fourths of the
adult population of any town is engaged in pursuits other than agricultural, and that such
town contains not less than forty thousand inhabitants and an average number of not less than
four hundred inhabitants to the per square kilometre of the area, or such town the State
Government may declare its intention to constitute such town together with or exclusive of
any railway station, village, land or building in the vicinity of such town as Municipal
Council and to extend to it all or any of the provisions of the Act.
        Further, the State Government is satisfied that three- fourths of the adult population of
any town is engaged on pursuits other than agricultural and that such town contains not less
than twelve thousand inhabitants and an average number of not less than four hundred
inhabitants to the per square kilometre of such town, the State Government may declare its
intention to constitute such town together with or exclusive of any railway station, land or
building in the vicinity of such town as Nagar Panchayat and to extend to it all or any of the
provisions of the Act. Every declaration under this section shall be published in the [Official
Gazette] and in such other manner as the State Government may direct.
If any part of a town or local area affected by any declaration under this section is a
cantonment or part of a cantonment, no declaration under this section shall be made.
4.3.1.9 The Bihar Apartment Ownership Act, 2006 (Act No. 28 of 2006)
An Act to provide for the ownership of an individual Apartment in a multi-storeyed building
and of an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities appurtenant to such
Apartment and to make such payment and interest heritable and transferable and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
        It is expedient to provide for giving ownership of an individual Apartment in a
building and to make such Apartment heritable and transferable property and to provide for
the matters connected with the aforesaid purposes. The provisions of this Act shall apply to
every Apartment in a multi- storied building which was constructed for residential or
commercial or such other purposes such as office, practice of any profession, occupation,
trade or business for any other type of independent uses before or after the commencement of
this Act and on a free hold land, or lease hold and, if the lease for such land is for a period of
thirty years or more. The sole owner or all the owners of the land may submit such land to the
provisions of this Act with the condition that he or they shall grant a lease of such land to the
Apartment owners, terms and conditions of the lease being disclosed in the declaration to be
made in this regard either by annexing a copy of the instrument of lease to be executed to the
declaration or otherwise.
4.3.1.10 Slum Policy
Bihar Slum Policy has been developed within the framework of the National Slum Policy and
is to guide the state and local governments in addressing slum specific issues. The key
objectives of this policy are:
   13. To integrate slum settlements and the communities residing within them,
   14. To strengthen the legal and policy framework for sustainable development
   15. To establish a framework for involving all stakeholders
The policy indicates the way to tackle the problem of slums, identification and listing of
slums in systematic and regular basis to take care for future need for land and resources,
                                               57
mainstreaming of urban poor, provide livelihood security, justice and equity, gender equality,
community participation in the planning, design and implementation etc. as per policy a
continuous area of at least 20 ‘slum like households ‘satisfying the set criteria exist in
unhygienic environment usually with inadequate infrastructure and lacking proper sanitation
and drinking water facilities. The slum policy of the state is very clear and transparent.
1838 slums have been identified in 28 cities / towns. The slum identified in Patna, Bhagalpur,
Darbhanga, Muzaffarpur and Gaya is given in annexure 4.3.3.
        Under this scheme, integrated development of slum pockets / sites numbering 60 in
Patna and 7 in Bodh Gaya has been taken up and Rs. 149 crore has been sanctioned for
constructing 22,372 dwelling units for the urban poor. One of the most important,
revolutionary and foresighted provisions so far which other previous slum policies have not
been able to see, is embodied in the State Slum Policy of (2010) and i.e the “Tenure
Security” for slum dwellers and highly marginalized EWSs of the society who are living in
slum pockets. And the provision of basic services to such shelterless slum dwellers. National
Slum Policy mandates states to allocate clear land ownership or long term lease to slum
dwellers wherever possible. Slums eligible for in-situ up-gradation will have to participate in
sharing costs to be incurred for this up-gradation. The ULBs in Bihar endeavour to facilitate
transfer of government or municipal land through negotiated settlement with the slum
dwellers at a price not exceeding 33 percent of the market value; as may be ascertained from
the stamp duty records. Representative of all the stakeholders will be invited to participate in
the negotiations to promote transparency. Slum dwellers will be required to pay the amount
up front and could take loan from micro-finance institutions for this purpose. The slum
dwellers, which have paid the cost of leasing the land, shall have a right to sell their dwelling
unit with the lease on the land to any other low-income group person anytime with prior
approval of association or society.
4.3.1.11 Problems in Urban Development
The Urban Local bodies look after the urban development programme in their respective
areas of operation. There is no planned development of urban area in the state. Urban
Development in State is suffering from the following facts:
   16. Unplanned development of township in absence of statutory Master Plan. An attempt
        has been made to finalise the Master Plan for Patna but, the draft Master Plan could
        not be placed on the website for public opinion due to declaration of general election.
        Since there was no Master Plan/Development Plan in the past, the question of its
        periodical revision of master Plan/Development Plan is not structured.
   17. Systematic land use planning was missing to some extent in the urban areas for quite
        long time until the Bihar Planning and Development Act passed in 2012.
   18. Lack of adequate width of road resulting into frequently congestion and traffic Jam
        for hours together.
   19. Encroachment of land of housing board by individual co-operative societies / builders
        due to poor implementation of the encroachment act.
   20. Encroachment of road by the owner of building on both sides of road / footpath
        vendors / petty footpath trades, godmen, muscle power, etc. Encroachments by so
        called religious men, land mafia, petty footpath sellers, traffic police,
        telecommunication agency, Sudha Milk Projects, hawker and handcartwalla, private
        dealers in construction materials (sand, concrete, bricks, and bamboos) are common.
   21. Lack of proper drainage facilities resulting water logging even after scanty rain due to
        absence of proper land use planning
   22. Lack of adequate and proper sewerage plant resulting drainage of polluted water in
        river and thereby polluting water in river.
                                               58
   23. Lack of adequate solid waste management resulting heap of dirt at various places and
       affecting cleanness
   24. Lack of adequate and assured power supply resulting large scale use of generators,
       creating environmental pollution,
   25. Virtual disappearance of Development Control resulting into development precedes,
       unchecked planning
   26. Lack of supply of treated piped water in urban area which is 8 per cent only as per
       2011 census
   27. Construction of Jhuggi / Jhophari in different localities through encroachment
   28. Location of hazardous industries / dairy activities etc. in residential colony.
   29. Rampant violation of building bye-laws due to poor monitoring of provision of
       various acts. About 55 per cent of multi-storied building in Patna is facing vigilance
       cases for violation of FAR, height, map and approved building plans. About 60 per
       cent people are living in house without obtaining completion certificate. And about 70
       to 80 per cent people are living in houses / flats without obtaining occupancy
       certificate. Adequate manpower is being planned to look after the cases of building
       bye-laws violation. In January, 2014 the State Government has constituted two
       Municipal Building Tribunals at Patna. Separate Directorate of Municipal
       Administration has been set up in Urban Development Department in January, 2014.
   30. Although the state falls under seismic zone number four Earth quake proof houses are
       not given due importance in the state.
   31. A number of Apartments is not equipped or even partly equipped with provisions of
       fire fighting apparatus.
4.3.1.12 Reform Agenda
The Bihar Government has commenced on a fast track implementation of the reform agenda.
Following are the achievements so far:
   32. Effective implementation of decentralization initiatives as envisaged in 74th CAA.
   33. Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act has been repealed in August 2006.
   34. The Apartment Ownership Act, which had severe shortcomings, restricting
       investment in the sector, has been amended in August 2006.
   35. Reform of Rent Control / Municipal Law has been finalized. To be placed before the
       Assembly in the winter session.
   36. Rationalization of stamp duty - brought down from the existing 18 per cent to 6
       percent plus + 2 percent ULBs charges in May 2006, with a target to reach 5 per cent.
   37. Building bye-laws, 1993, revised in May 2006 to streamline the approval process for
       construction of buildings. Again the attempt has been made to revise building bye-
       laws to make it more clear and transparent and to check violation of building bye-
       laws. The proposed building bye-laws 2013 have been floated on the website of urban
       department for public opinion.
   38. In order to attract investment in multiplexes and malls, building bye-laws, 1993
       cinema rules have been amended in the year 2006.
   39. Building bye-laws, 1993 have been amended in April 2006 to incorporate structural
       safety norms, rainwater harvesting and provision for disabled persons, etc.
   40. State Government has computerized registration of land and property, and property
       title certification.
   41. In many ULBs, Public Private Participation has been experimented starting with
       garbage disposal, street lighting, construction of bus stands, etc.
   42. Introduction of a system of e-governance using IT application for various urban
       services and reform of property tax.
                                             59
   43. The Master Plan for Patna Metropolitan Region 2032 is under preparation and will be
       ready within two to three months.
   44. Master Plan for Gaya, Bhagalplur, Muzaffarpur, Darbhanga, Biharsharif, Arrah,
       Rajgir and Chapra are under process and will be ready within 6 month.
   45. City Development Plans (CDPs) for 28 cities under JNNURM have already been
       prepared and approved by the Municipal Board. In City Development Plans land use
       planning effectively guides urban spatial expansion. In the major cities urban
       development is guided effectively by a hierarchy of regional/detailed land use plans
       that are regularly updated, with land use intensity being matched with carrying
       capacity of infrastructure.
   46. The process of GIS-based mapping of urban area has been started. Base maps of 17
       towns are ready. Work is in progress for preparation of base map of other towns.
   47. One of the most important, revolutionary and foresighted provisions so far other
       previous slum policies have not been able to see, is embodied in the State Slum Policy
       of (2010) and i.e the “Tenure Security” for slum dwellers and highly marginalized
       EWSs of the society who are living in slum pockets and the provision of basic
       services to such shelterless slum dwellers.
   48. 1838 slums have been identified in 28 cities / towns. The slum identified in Patna,
       Bhagalpur, Darbhanga, Muzaffarpur and Gaya has already been given annexure 4.3.3.
   49. Policy to ensure delivery of low cost building does exist and is in place. Bihar
       Housing Board (BHB) and Housing and Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO),
       Government of India, have been constructing and providing for housing for EWS,
       LIG, MIG and HIG in majority of housing units are meant for EWS and LIG groups.
   50. Several agencies now working in urban areas, especially for low cost EWS housing,
       slum improvement and provision of services. The Urban Development Department is
       coordinating amongst them to prevent any overlaps and gaps.
   51. A 15 per cent reservation has been proposed in Draft Building bye-laws (2013) for
       EWS (Economically Weaker Sections) of the population.
   52. Under Rajiv Aawas Yojana, the state has started a modest beginning by approving the
       projects of construction of 40,746 houses for EWS under 27 ULBs of the states with a
       cost of 16.66 crores. The in principal approval has been given by the state level
       sanctioning and monitoring committee. Now the proposal will be send to Government
       of India for approval.
   53. Training of women councillors is going on through the RCUES, Lucknow. About 25
       per cent women councillors in the State have already been trained.
   54. Emphasis has been given on creating and augmenting basic infrastructure facilities in
       water supply, sewerage, storm water drainage, solid waste management, roads and
       bridges in all the 139 ULBs in the State.
   55. Municipal Corporation Act 2007 was amended in 2011 to make it more effective and
       peoples friendly.
   56. Communication tower and related structure rule 2012 were formulated and approved.
   57. Details guidelines for sitting of sanitary landfill were issued in 2012.
   58. Details guidelines for generic environment management plan were issued in 2012.
   59. Details guidelines for sewerage treatment plan were issued in 2012.
   60. Citizen charter for municipality in Bihar has been formulated and widely published
       for the use of urban citizens.
   61. Centralized grievance and redressal cell (CGRC) and MIS cell have been installed in
       Patna for all the municipalities of Bihar.
4.3.1.13 Agencies Involved in Urban Planning and Development
                                             60
   62. Urban Development & Housing Department, Government of Bihar
   63. Nagar Nigam, Nagar Parishad and Nagar Panchayat
   64. Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) (operationalised in
        Patna and Gaya)
   65. Samvardhan
   66. Bihar Urban Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (BUIDCO)
   67. Bihar State Housing Board (BSHB)
   68. Supporting department like Bihar State Electricity Board, PWD (Road), PHED, Bihar
        State Pollution Board, Health Department, Education Department etc.
   69. Funding agencies like HUIDCO, Banks, Private Investments by contractors
   70. Private agencies like Builders, Contractors etc.
   71. Civil Societies
4.3.1.14 Support Programme for Urban Reform in Bihar
Support Programme for Urban Reforms (SPUR) is a partnership programme between the
Government of Bihar and the UK Department for International Development (DFID),
SPUR’s goal is “economic growth and poverty reduction significantly accelerated in Bihar by
2014”. Its purpose is “identified Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)’ ability to provide urban
services and attract private investment significantly enhanced”. The project has covered 28
urban centres, expected to become economic hubs, benefiting the wider state. It has directly
improved the quality of services received by 6.36 million urban citizens, of which nearly half
are poor. It has also benefited large numbers of people from nearby rural areas who depend
on urban centres for services and economic opportunity.
SPUR has achieved its purpose by delivering five mutually reinforcing outputs: (i) Effective
policies and stronger institutions to promote and manage urban development in place; (ii)
State and ULBs mobilize significantly increased resources for urban development and
manage them more effectively; (iii) Identified ULBs plan, implement and manage urban
infrastructure and services more effectively; (iv) Increased municipal capacity to attract
private investment in urban areas; (v) Empowered poor communities and socially excluded
groups access increased urban resources and livelihood opportunities.
4.3.1.15 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM)
 JNNURM is a huge mission which relates primarily to development in the context of urban
conglomerates focusing to the Indian cities. JNNURM aims at creating ‘economically
productive, efficient, equitable and responsive Cities’ by a strategy of upgrading the social
and economic infrastructure in cities, provision of Basic Services to Urban Poor (BSUP) and
wide-ranging urban sector reforms to strengthen municipal governance in accordance with
the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992.
        National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA), Urban Infrastructure Development
Scheme for Small and Medium Town (UIDSSMT), Urban Infrastructure and Governance
(UIG), Integrated Housing for Slum Development Programme (IHSDP), Progress of Basic
Services for Urban Poor (BSUP), and Basic Services for Urban Poor (BSUP Scheme) are the
schemes being implemented in the state from the fund received under JNNURM.
4.3.1.15.1 National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA)
Under this programme sewerage plants are being constructed at Begusarai, Hajipur, Buxar
and Munger by BUIDCO with a total project cost of 441.86 crore. The expenditure till 30 th
November, 2013 was 72.656 crores. The details regarding this project are given in the
annexure 4.3.4. The progress of implementation of the project is poor.
4.3.1.15.2 Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Town
(UIDSSMT)

                                             61
The expenditure of the Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium
Town (UIDSSMT) scheme as on 30th November, 2013 is 95.56 crores against the total
project outlay of 261.14 crores. The details of the progress of the Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Town (UIDSSMT) scheme as on 30th
November, 2013 is enclosed in annexure 4.3.5.
4.3.1.15.3 Urban Infrastructure and Governance (UIG)
The expenditure under the Urban Infrastructure and Governance (UIG) scheme as on 30 th
November, 2013 is 177.72 crores against the sanctioned project outlay of Rs. 758.47 crores in
the various towns of Bihar. The detailed progress of the Urban Infrastructure and Governance
(UIG) scheme as on 30th November, 2013 in the various towns in the state of Bihar has been
enclosed as annexure 4.3.6.
4.3.1.15.4 Basic Service for Urban Poor
HUDCO is implementing the programme to provide basic services to the urban poor. The
progress achieved as on 31st November, 2013 has been given below in the table:
Table 4.3.1: Progress achieved as on 31st November, 2013
                                                                                 Financial achievement
                   Total Project cost No. of Dwelling Units   Completed No. of
   Particulars                                                                       / Expenditure
                     (Rs. in lakh)         Sanctioned          Dwelling Units
                                                                                      (Rs. in lakh)
  Scheme where
   there is some        7788.79               3328                  432                1321.09
     progress
 Scheme with nil
                       63209.65              19044                   0                  414.35
     progress
       Total           70998.44              22372                  432                1735.44

The detailed progress of the basic services for urban poor as on 30th November, 2013 has
been given in annexure 4.3.7.The rate of completion of projects is poor and needs to be
accelerated.
4.3.1.15.5 Housing Development Programme for Slum Development / Economically
Weaker Section of Society
Policy to ensure delivery of low cost building does exist and is in place. Bihar Housing Board
(BHB) and Housing and Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO), Government of India,
have been constructing and providing for housing for EWS, LIG, MIG and HIG in majority
of housing units are meant for EWS and LIG groups. A 15 per cent reservation has been
proposed in Draft Building bye-laws (2013) for EWS (Economically Weaker Sections) of the
population. Besides, currently HUDCO is allocating its loan disbursement in the following
proportions, which is given in table below.
Table 4.3.2: Allocation of loan by HUDCO
(a) Economically Weaker Section                 30 per cent
(b) Low Income Group                            25 per cent
(c) Middle Income Group                         25 per cent
(d) High Income Group                           20 per cent
(Source: HUDCO Office, Patna)
The Implementing Agency for integrated house for slum development programme is
BUIDCO and Hindustan Prefab Ltd. (HPL). The progress achieved so far is as under.
Table 4.3.3: Progress under integrated house for slum development programme as on
30th November, 2013
                                                        No. of Dwelling Financial
Total     Project No. of Dwelling Completed No. of
                                                        Units           in Achievement       /
cost              Units Sanctioned Dwelling Units
                                                        Progress           Expenditure
                                                  62
75788.09         28255             2835               5144          8362.08
The detailed progress under the integrated house for slum development programme is given
in annexure 4.3.8.

4.3.1.16 Samvardhan
Samvardhan is a six-year partnership programme (2010-2016) between the Government of
Bihar and the United Kingdom's Department for International Development (DFID). The
programme envisages that effective urban centers in Bihar would play a significant role in
economic growth and poverty reduction. They would serve as nuclei for greater economic
activity and services to enable contribution to pro-poor development. The programme goal is
to promote economic growth and significantly accelerate poverty reduction in Bihar by 2016.
In spite of an increasing awareness among local functionaries for improved urban services, a
number of institutional and management aspects impede urban economic growth and quality
of life. The felt-need to strengthen institutional and technical capacities of the State for urban
development, guides the design of the Samvardhan.
         The programme aims at catalyzing identified Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to
significantly enhance their capability to provide urban services and attract private investment
thereby breaking the cycle of low urban revenues, weak capacity and inadequate services.
Samvardhan will provide financial, technical and managerial support to enhance efficacy of
ULBs and related departments of the State.
         Samvardhan aims or enabling the increased private investments in urban areas, better
services on a sustainable basis to all urban citizens and create positive development impacts
on urban poor.
Key programme deliverables of Samvardhan these are:
   72. Development of effective policies and stronger institutions to promote and manage
         urban development
   73. State and ULBs mobilize significantly increased resources for urban development and
         manage them more effectively
   74. Identified ULBs plan, implement and manage urban infrastructure and services more
         effectively.
   75. Increased municipal capacity to attract private investment in urban areas for inclusive
         growth
   76. Empowered poor communities and socially-excluded groups access urban resources
         and livelihood
4.3.1.17 Bihar Urban Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (BUIDCO)
   77. Government of Bihar established BUIDCO on 16th of June, 2009 with a view to
         accelerating infrastructure development activities across all cities. Government of
         Bihar is 100 per cent shareholder in BUIDCO, which makes it a flagship company to
         execute infrastructure projects in the State.
   78. The vision of BUIDCO is to become an organization of excellence resembling the
         revolutionary development of Bihar in such a manner the urban landscape of Bihar
         can become a role model for generation to come.
   79. BUIDCO is mandated to work on assignments pertaining to all departments of
         Government of Bihar or any other department, agency, organization or body through
         Urban Development & Housing Department or directly. These activities of BUIDCO
         include but not limited to: All types of buildings, Roads, Parks, Highways, Express
         Ways, Paths, Streets, Bridges, Sideways, Tunnels, Infrastructure for transport,
         Drinking water, Sanitation, Sewage system, Electricity, Gas distribution, Education,

                                               63
        Health services, Environmental regulation and other infrastructure, Temporary
        dwelling huts in case of calamity or any emergency.
   80. As on March, 2013, BUIDCO had been implementing 26 projects of construction of
        park, water supply projects, waste management, drainage, Sewerage etc. in various
        towns of the state with a project cost of Rs. 1549.9 Crores. Out of this fund 451.18
        crores has been released to BUIDCO. BUDICO has incurred an expenditure of Rs.
        264.37 crores as on 31st March, 2013. Out of these 26 projects, 5 have already been
        completed.
4.3.1.18 Bihar State Housing Board (BSHB)
Bihar State Housing Board has been established under Bihar State Housing Board Act, 1982
to cater to the need of the people of Bihar State in terms of better housing facilities and
amenities relating thereto. In lieu of the housing services provided through different schemes
as illustrated above, the BSHB charges subsidized value for the allotment of housing units
and plots. Construction of 1,00,000 housing units with world-class sustainable facilities in the
State by 2015 is the goal of BSHB. Recently BUIDCO is implementing 26 projects of
construction of park, water supply projects, waste management, drainage, Sewerage etc. in
various towns of the state with a project cost of Rs. 1549.9 Crores. Out of this fund 451.18
crores has been released to BUIDCO. BUDICO has incurred an expenditure of Rs. 264.37
crores as on 31st March, 2013. Out of these 26 projects, 5 have already been completed.
Bihar State Housing Board is governed by Bihar State Housing Board Act, 1982, Bihar
Township Policy, State Slum Policy, National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy, 2007 and
Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISHUP) Guidelines.
        Modus Operandi of BSHB is to develop projects in PPP mode. Projects will be
developed on Cross Subsidization Theory. Private Developer(s) will deploy capital,
manpower and resources to develop the EWS/LIG/MIG townships and will get some
commercial space to develop and sell to recover the cost of township with profit.
The project completed by the BSHB as on 31st October, 2013 has been given in the Annexure
4.3.9.
4.3.1.19 Housing and Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO) Limited
 HUDCO is a unique institution with its motto of "Profitability with Social Justice". A Public
Sector Company, under the Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation,
HUDCO has been a key partner with the Government in building assets for the Nation. In its
operations, HUDCO lays a considerable emphasis on the housing need of the 'deprived' i.e
Economically Weaker            Sections     (EWS)     and    Low-Income       Groups      (LIG).
In times of crisis like Earthquakes, Cyclone, Floods, tsunami, etc. HUDCO has extensively
contributed in the rehabilitation of the calamity affected households, through its technical and
financial help for housing reconstruction.
Various schemes of HUDCO are (1) rent to own (2) HUDCO Nav Nagar Yojana (3) micro-
finance for housing, (4) targeted implementation of community toilets and sanitation
programme.
4.3.1.20 Building Bye-Laws
Modified building bye-laws 1993 (effective since 15th November, 1993) guides the building
construction and land use in urban areas.
Rampant violation of building norms especially in respect of FAR, road, height, setback etc.
were observed in the state. Status of implementation and enforcement of the provision under
the Building Bye laws is far from satisfactory. Enforcement of the provision is not done
during the construction stage resulting in many vigilance cases of violation of provision of
bye-laws on the houses/flats/apartments. Considering these violations, the government has
amended some provision of municipal act that empowered empanelled architects the rights to
                                              64
approve building plan. The amended provision envisages that building plan would be
approved by the competent authority. The department has also mulled formation of regional
authorities at the divisional headquarters levels, which will be vested with the responsibility
of approving the building plan as per the revised bye laws. The amendments are waiting for
gubernatorial nod.
         The urban development department has also drafted new building bylaws which came
into force since 1st January, 2014 after approval. The important provisions of new building
bye-laws are being given in annexure 4.3.10 to 4.3.17.
4.3.1.21 Land Use Classification and Permissible Uses
Provision regarding uses in land use zones has been made in modified building bye-laws
1993. According to this, there are 7 zones namely; residential, commercial (retail),
commercial (wholesale), industrial, public and semi public uses and agricultural. In each zone
use permitted and uses permissible if allowed by the authority after special appeal has been
mentioned in detailed, which is given in annexure 4.3.18
Various types of land use permitted and restricted in different zones are further clearly
demarcated in 13 zones on the draft building bye-laws 2013. Activities generally permitted
activities permissible on approval of authority and activities prohibited in various land use
zone is given in annexure 4.3.19. All the restrictions in the bye-laws serve public purposes
and save people from disaster.
4.3.2 ASSESSMENT OF DIMENSIONS
Assessment of Indicator 3.1: Restrictions on rights: land rights are not conditional on
adherence to unrealistic standards
 Dimension
                  Restrictions on urban land ownership/ B There is a series of regulations that are for
 3 1       1      transfer effectively serve public policy          the most part serve public purpose but
                                                                    enforcement is deficient.
                  objectives
                  Restrictions on urban land ownership/ B There are a series of regulations that are for
 3 1       2      transfer effectively serve public policy          the most part serve public purpose but that
                                                                    are not enforced.
                  objectives. .
Analysis of Dimension 3.1.1: Restrictions on Urban Land Ownership/ Transfer
In Bihar after introduction of The Bihar Municipal Act, 2007 all activities of urban
development are guided by this Act and the unified draft bye-law developed in 2013.
However, there is lack of Master Plan for municipalities to guide urban development.
Another important act in this regard is Bihar Planning and Development Act 2012. Most part
of restrictions on urban land ownership / transfer mentioned in Bihar Planning and
Development Act 2012 effectively serves public purpose. Tenable land restrictions for
constructing house in airport zones, national parks, near electrical lines and hazardous
dumping yards exist in the modified building bye-laws 1993 (effective since 15th November,
1993) and proposed building bye-laws 2013. These restrictions have been imposed to protect
public from any disaster and serve the public purpose. The slum dwellers, which have paid
the cost of leasing the land, have a right to sell their dwelling unit, not the land to any other
low-income group person anytime with prior approval of association or society. Due to non-
existence of development control, enforcement agency at the tail-end of implementation and
poor monitoring, these restrictions are not being enforced. Thus, the enforcement of
restrictions is deficient.
Analysis of Dimension 3.1.2: Restrictions on Urban Land Use (Disaster Risk)
There is clear restriction on urban land use. Provisions regarding uses of land in land use
zones have been made in modified building bye-laws, 1993. According to this, there are 7
zones namely; residential, commercial (retail), commercial (wholesale), industrial, public and
                                                 65
semi public uses and agricultural. Various type of land use permitted and restricted in
different zones is further clearly demarcated in the draft building bye-laws 2013. Most parts
of restrictions serve public purpose and avoid disaster.
    Land use permitted or prohibited in different use zone has been clearly mentioned in the
modified building bye-laws, 1993. In modified building bye-laws, activity permitted and
activity permissible on approval by authority has been clearly mentioned.
    In the proposed building bye-laws, 2013, zoning of urban land has been done and in each
zone, activity permitted and activity permissible on approval by authority and activity
prohibited has been clearly mentioned. Master plan is under process of finalization. However,
28 City Development Plans have been prepared wherein plan provision for public/semi public
open spaces, parks, plays grounds, and roads have been clearly demarcated. Height
restrictions in the airport zone, distance from electric pole, distance from dumping yard and
stipulation regarding width of road has been made in modified building bye-laws 1993 and
proposed building bye-laws, 2013, for disaster preventions which serves public purposes.
Minimum distance of building from electric lines and minimum distance from hazardous
storage sheds are given below in table.
Table 4.3.4: Minimum Distance from Electric Line
                                           Vertical distance in                 Horizontal
                                                   Meters                  distance in meters
Low and medium voltage lines                         2.5                           1.2
and service lines
High voltage lines up to and                         3.7                           1.2
including 11, 000 Volt
High voltage lines above 11,000                      3.7                           2.0
volt and up to and including
33,000 Volt
Extra high voltage line beyond 3.7 (Plus 0.3 meters for every 2.0 (Plus 0.3 meters for
33,000 Volt                                  additional 33,000                    every
                                           volts or part thereof)           additional 33,000
                                                                          volts or part thereof)
Source: Draft Building Bye-laws, 2013
Table 4.3.5: Minimum Distances Required for Storage Shed of Liquefied Petroleum Gas
Cylinders
Quantity of Compressed Gas in Cylinders                              Minimum Clear
(Kg.)                                                               Distance to be Kept
                                                                         (metres.)
0-100                                                                         1
101-1000                                                                      3
1001-4000                                                                     5
4001-8000                                                                     7
8001-12000                                                                    9
12001-30,000                                                                 12
Over 30,000                                                                  15
(Source: Draft Building Bye-laws, 2013)
These restrictions are deficient in meaningful implementation. Effective monitoring on
violation of restrictions is virtually absent. In Bihar there is no SEZ Act in the state.



                                              66
Assessment of Indicator 3.2: Transparency of land use restrictions: changes in land use
and management regulations are made in a transparent fashion and provide significant
benefits for society in general rather than just for specific groups
 Dimension
                Process of urban expansion/ infrastructure D        Information on planned urban expansion
 3 2      1     development process is transparent and              and infrastructure development is not
                                                                    publicly available.
                respects existing rights.
                                                                    Public input is sought while preparing and
                Changes in urban land use plans are based on C      amending land use plans but the public
 3 2      2     a clear public process and input by all             comments are largely ignored in the
                stakeholders                                        finalization of land use plans.
                                                               D    Less than 30% of the land that has had a
 3 2      3     Changes in assigned urban land use are              change in land use assignment in the past 3
                swiftly followed by actual land use change          years has changed to the destined use.

Analysis of Dimension 3.2.1: Process of Urban Expansion/Infrastructure Development
The processes for urban expansion are clear and transparent. Municipalities are created as and
when the State Government is satisfied regarding the fulfillment of criteria for forming Nagar
Palika/Nagar Parishad/Municipalities.
        Municipalities are created as and when the State Government is satisfied that three-
fourth of the adult population of any town is engaged in pursuits other than agricultural and
that such town contains not less than forty thousand inhabitants and an average number not
less than four hundred inhabitants per square kilometre of the area or such town, the State
Government may declare its intention to constitute such town together with or exclusive of
any railway station, village, land or building in the vicinity within a municipal are and to
extend to it all or any of the provisions of the Act.
        Further, if the State Government is satisfied that three- fourths of the adult population
of any town is engaged on pursuits other than agricultural and that such town contains not
less than twelve thousand inhabitants and an average number of not less than four hundred
inhabitants per square kilometre of such town, the State Government may declare its intention
to constitute such town together with or exclusive of any railway station, land or building in
the vicinity a Nagar Panchayat and to extend to it all or any of the provisions of the Act.
Every declaration under this section shall be published in the [Official Gazette] and in such
other manner as the State Government may deem fit. The same is also uploaded on the
website of the Urban Development and Housing Department / Municipal Corporation and
opinions are invited. Such declaration made under Bihar Municipal Act 2007 shall not be
applicable to any part of a town or local area constituting cantonment or its part.
        60 new census towns (non-statutory) have developed during the last ten years as per
2011 Census, but they have not been given the statutory status of Nagar Palika/Nagar
Parishad.
        Development precedes planning and as such provisions of roads, sewerage and
drainage, maintenance of right-of-ways or building lines are made much later. As a result of
such lapses, water logging even in case of scanty rainfall is common. Garbages are allowed to
remain for weeks and weeks together. It is not quite common sight in outgrowth (OG) or
Urban Agglomeration (AG) areas, but on the main arteries and sub-arteries, where herds of
stray dogs, cows and pigs are often seen fighting over a morsel of left over foods on the one
hand, and rag-pickers on the other. Sufficient notification for large project has been given on
the website of the department and public opinion is sought.
        Infrastructure plan has also been prepared in the 28 city development plan.
Information related to urban expansion is not publicly available.The process respects the
                                               67
existing right. The existing right continues under Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885, under section 3
(b). In section 3 (b) it is mentioned that BT Act shall extend to the whole of the state of Bihar.
Therefore, unless the whole or portion of an area comprised within a municipality is notified
to have been exempted from the operation of the Act, the provision of the Act will apply to
lands within a municipality also. The municipality has not yet notified the exemption of the
BT Act in municipal area in Bihar.
Analysis of Dimension 3.2.2: Public inputs in Urban Land Use Plan
Public inputs are sought rarely in the process of urban land use plan preparation. More or less
it has became as planning rituals, while finalizing or amending land uses in which creative
suggestions by public at large are seldom incorporated.
         Quite recently, the proposed building bye-laws (2013) and Draft Master Plan for
Patna were placed on website and opinion / suggestions have been invited. But, this method
of inviting public opinions or suggestions is not a perfect substitute and infallible procedure
wherein face-to-face discussions are seldom allowed to be held.
         A clear policy is in place for bringing about changes in urban land use plan. The
proposed conversion of land is being notified and the objections / public opinion are invited
regarding the conversion of land use.
Analysis of Dimension 3.2.3: Changes in Assigned Urban Land Use
A very few changes in land use assignment in the past 3 years have been brought about in
desired or destined uses. Getting permission for changes in assigned urban land use area is a
very cumbersome process lace with a time – consuming process and that too can be given
only for activity permissible on approval. Moreover, changes in assigned urban land use are
not followed by actual land use change. Example is the agriculture land of Digha allotted to
housing board. The housing board delayed the implementation. In the mean time, the land
owner registered the land to various society and thousands of houses were constructed. The
cases went upto Supreme Court but still it is unresolved.
Assessment of Indicator 3.3: Efficiency in the urban land use planning process: land use
plans and regulations are justified, effectively implemented, do not drive large parts of
the population into informality, and are able to cope with population growth.
 Dimension
                                                              There is a policy for low cost housing and
               Policy to ensure delivery of low-cost C        services but implementation has major gaps so
  3   3      1 housing and services exists and is             that the number of those with inadequate
               progressively implemented                      shelter actually increases.
                                                      C       In the largest city, while a hierarchy of
                                                              regional/detailed land use plans is specified by
  3   3      2 Land use planning effectively guides           law, in practice urban spatial expansion occurs
               urban spatial expansion in the largest         in an ad hoc manner with infrastructure
               city.                                          provided some time after urbanization.
                                                      C       In the four major cities in the country, while a
                                                              hierarchy of regional/detailed land use plans is
                                                              specified by law, in practice urban
  3   3      3 Land use planning effectively guides           development occurs in an ad hoc manner with
               urban development in the four next             infrastructure provided some time after
               largest cities.                                urbanization.
                                                          C   In the largest city, the urban planning
                                                              process/authority is struggling to cope with the
  3   3      4                                                increasing demand for serviced units/land as
              Planning processes are able to cope             evidenced by the fact that most new dwellings
              with urban growth.                              are informal.
Analysis of Dimension 3.3.1: Policy to Ensure Low Cost Housing and Services


                                               68
There is huge shortage of urban dwellings in India as well as in Bihar. The shortages of urban
housing at the end of 31st March 2009 were 24.71 million dwelling units in India, in Bihar the
shortage was 0.59 million dwelling units.
    In the context of Bihar, policy to ensure delivery of low cost building does exist and is in
place. Bihar Housing Board (BHB) and Housing and Urban Development Corporation
(HUDCO), Government of India, have been constructing and providing for houses for EWS,
LIG, and MIG. Majority of housing units are meant for EWS and LIG groups. A 15 per cent
reservation has been proposed in Draft Building bye-laws (2013) for EWS (Economically
Weaker Sections) of the population.
    Under Rajiv Aawas Yojana, the state has started a modest beginning by approving the
projects of construction of 40,746 houses for EWS under 27 ULBs of the states with a cost of
16.66 crores. The principal approval has been given by the state level sanctioning and
monitoring committee. Now the proposal will be send to Government of India for approval.
Besides, currently HUDCO has been allocating its loan disbursement in the following
proportions:
Table 4.3.6: Allocation of loan by HUDCO
(a) Economically Weaker Section                                               30 per cent
(b) Low Income Group                                                          25 per cent
(c) Middle Income Group                                                       25 per cent
(d) High Income Group                                                         20 per cent
(Source: HUDCO Office, Patna)
In Bihar 1838 slums have been identified in 28 cities / towns for their development. The slum
identified in Patna, Bhagalpur, Darbhanga, Muzaffarpur and Gaya is as under.
Table 4.3.7: Slums identified in five big cities
                  City / Town                                       Number
Patna                                                                 110
Bhagalpur                                                             165
Darbhanga                                                             138
Muzaffarpur                                                           105
Gaya                                                                   40
(Source: Urban Development & Housing Department, Govt. of Bihar)
Under this scheme, integrated development of slum pockets / sites numbering 60 in Patna and
7 in Bodh Gaya has been taken up and Rs. 149 crore has been sanctioned for constructing
22,372 dwelling units for the urban poor.
        In Bihar, there is another scheme called affordable housing is also in operation for
Economically Weaker Section (EWS), Low Income Group (LIG) / middle income group with
atleast 25 percent for EWS.
        An interest subsidy scheme for housing the urban poor has also been launched for
providing interest subsidy on housing urban poor to make the housing affordable and within
repaying capacity of economically weaker sections / low income group. This scheme
encourages poor sections to avail loan facilities through commercial banks / housing financial
companies for the purpose of construction / acquisition of houses and avail 5 percent subsidy
in interest payment for loan upto Rs. 1 lakh.
Analysis of Dimension 3.3.2: Guidance of Urban Spatial Expansion in the Largest City
by Land Use Planning
In Bihar Patna is the largest city. No discussion on land use plan has been made in the
existing City Development Plan. As the concept was introduced in 2002 and the City
Development Plan approved before that, the land use plan was not included. However, the

                                              69
Master Plan for Patna Metropolitan Region 2031is under preparation and now the draft
Master Plan is ready for presentation.
    City Development Plan under JNNURM for Patna has already been prepared and
approved by the Municipal Board. In city development plan, land use planning effectively
guides urban spatial expansion. The Patna City urban development is guided effectively by a
hierarchy of regional/detailed land use plans that are regularly updated, with land use
intensity being matched with carrying capacity of infrastructure. Office of Town Planner has
become redundant which should be made functional to have proper planning, monitoring, co-
ordination and control.
Analysis of Dimension 3.3.3: Guidance of Urban Spatial Expansion in the four next
Largest City by Land Use Planning
Master Plan for Gaya, Bhagalplur, Muzaffarpur, Darbhanga, Biharsharif, Arrah, Rajgir and
Chapra are under process and will be ready within 6 months. These are the next large cities
after Patna. City Development Plans (CDPs) under JNNURM for 28 cities have already been
prepared and approved by the Municipal Board.
    In the major cities urban development is guided effectively by a hierarchy of
regional/detailed land use plans that are regularly updated, with land use intensity being
matched with carrying capacity of infrastructure.
Analysis of Dimension 3.3.4: Planning Processes and Urban Growth
In Bihar the Urban Planning Authority is struggling to cope up with the increasing demand
for service units / plots as evident by the fact that large numbers of new dwellings are
informal. It has been observed that the planning process or development control in urban
areas is almost absent and the urban growth has been left on the whims and fancies of people
at large and builders and contractors. This has resulted in rampant violation of building bye-
laws and approved maps.
        The coverage ratio of assessment of property tax in Bihar is poor, which is evident
from the coverage ratio of one municipal corporation i.e. Patna Municipal Corporation as on
30th October, 2012.
Patna Municipal Corporation estimates of total number of holdings in Patna       - 5 lacs
Electric connection in Patna Municipal Area                                      - 4 lacs
Number of registered holdings in Patna Municipal Corporation                     - 2.5 lacs
Coverage ratio                                                                   - 50.0%
        More or less, similar is the situation in other municipal bodies. Hence there is a need
to bring unregistered holdings into tax fold to increase the revenue for providing better
services.
        So far as the collection of this tax is concerned, the collection of tax has improved
gradually which can be observed from the following tables of one municipality i.e. Patna
Municipal Corporation.
Table 4.3.8: Property tax collected by Patna Municipal Corporation
          Year                         Receipt from Property Tax (Rs. in Crores)
        2004-05                                           13.87
        2005-06                                           21.12
        2006-07                                           15.38
        2010-11                                           17.00
        2011-12                                           28.00
        2012-13                                           22.00
(Source: Website of Municipality)
The average holding tax per person per year in Bihar worked out to Rs. 126 against the
national average of Rs. 486 per person per year, in 2012. This gives clear indications to
                                              70
restructure the holding tax structure. The ULBs have already revised the tax structure few
months ago. On wider protest, the implementation of revised structure has been stayed by the
Government. There is an urgent need to revise the tax structure in order to provide better
civic amenities in the urban area.
        The process of GIS-based mapping of urban area has been started. Base maps of 17
towns are ready. Work is in progress for preparation of base map on the basis of GIS
mapping of other towns. GIS Mapping for property tax purpose has been completed in 7
towns.
        It is shocking that about 55 per cent of multi-storied buildings in Patna are facing
vigilance cases for violation of FAR, height, map and approved building plans.
Assessment of Indicator 3.4: Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land
uses: development permits are granted promptly and predictably
Dimension
                                                                  C   Requirements to obtain a building
                                                                      permit are technically justified but
3 4       1                                                           not affordable for (and not
                Provisions for residential building permits are       complied by) the majority of those
                appropriate, affordable and complied with             affected.
                                                                 C    All applications for building
3 4       2       A building permit for a residential dwelling        permits receive a decision within
                  can be obtained quickly and at a low cost.          12 months.
Analysis of Dimension 3.4.1: Provisions for Residential Building Permits
It has been found that, in Bihar requirement to obtain building permit is technically justified,
affordable but only partly complied with. There is invariably delay in issuing the permit
observed. There is no online mechanism for building plan approval.
         Generally the provisions of permits are not being complied with by individuals and
builders. No proper and foolproof system has been evolved for monitoring of violation of
approved building plans. Monitoring of violation is poor and inadequate.
Analysis of Dimension 3.4.2: Timeliness of obtaining a Building Permit for a Residential
Dwelling
It is found that in Bihar, obtaining building permit for a residential dwelling is a cumbersome
and time-taking process. About 60 per cent people are living in house without obtaining
completion certificate. About 70 to 80 per cent people are living in houses / flats without
obtaining occupancy certificate.
Assessment of Indicator 3.5: Tenure regularization schemes in urban area
Dimension
                Formalization of urban residential      C    The requirements for formalizing housing in urban
                housing is feasible and affordable.          areas are neither clear, straight-forward, or
3 5       1                                                  affordable but many applicants from informal areas
                                                             are managing to satisfy the requirements.
                In cities with informal tenure, a viable C   Strategies to deal with urban informality exist but
3 5       2     strategy exists for tenure security,         focus only on either land or services but not both.
                infrastructure, and housing.
                A condominium regime allows              D   Common property under condominiums is
                effective management and recording of        recognized and the law has clear provisions for
3 5       3                                                  management and publicity of relevant records that
                urban property.                              are followed in practice.
Analysis of Dimension 3.5.1 Formalization of Urban Residential Housing
The requirement for formalising housing in urban areas is clear and affordable but is seldom
implemented consistently and effectively. In the context of urban Bihar, formalization of


                                              71
urban residential housing is feasible. Cost of urban housing varies from locality to locality
and people can choose housing as per their affordability.
         There are some informal colonies like Rajiv Nagar, Jayprakash Nagar, Ashiana
Colony etc. in Patna. However basic services like road, electricity, water are being provided
there also. A large number of buildings, especially in Patna, are being constructed without
maintaining minimum standard.
Analysis of Dimension 3.5.2: Strategy for Tenure Security, Infrastructure and Housing
Strategy exists to regularise land rights and provide services to existing informal occupants.
Formalisation of land right to informal occupants is lengthy process and is seldom
implemented. Many cases of Jhugi and Jhoparpatti shelters in Digha area of Patna is an
example where land rights were not formalised as yet. Slum dwellers have not been provided
right over their land.
         One of the most important, revolutionary and foresighted provisions so far other
previous slum policies have not been able to see, is embodied in the State Slum Policy of
(2010) and i.e the “Tenure Security” for slum dwellers and highly marginalized EWSs of
the society who are living in slum pockets and the provision of basic services to such
shelterless slum dwellers. Even in Rajiv Awas Yojana, no one has been provided tenure
security. It is just a lease of dwelling unit. There is no database with the government
regarding slum areas in Bihar. However, the government has identified 1838 slums in 28
cities for development.
Analysis of Dimension 3.5.3: Management and Recording of urban property under
Condominium Regime
In Bihar for apartment complex there is a legislation known as Bihar Apartment Ownership
Act, 2006. The apartment construction and management is guided by this Act. There is
provision for FAR for various types of building to keep some open space. These open spaces
are managed by the Apartment owners’ society. Common property under condominiums has
been recognized and recorded. Plot / houses/holdings are being established by ULBs
effectively to facilitate the collection of holding taxes.
4.3.3 CONCLUSION
Urban development is of immense importance in view of the significant contribution it makes
towards the overall growth and development of the economy of states. Though there has been
a significant increase in urban population in last 10 years in Bihar, yet Bihar is one of the
least urbanized states in India with only 2% of its total geographical area. There is incidence
of urban poverty in Bihar. Regarding the planning process related to Urban Development,
though initiative started years ago, but is one of the most neglected areas. Even today there is
no approved Master Plan available for Patna Municipal Corporation to guide development.
However, Master Plan for Gaya, Bhagalplur, Muzaffarpur, Darbhanga, Biharsharif, Arrah,
Rajgir and Chapra are under process and will be ready shortly. However, there are City
Development Plans under JNNURM for 28 cities. The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act
(74th CAA) empowering Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in the fields of administration,
legislation, town planning, environment and architecture, etc as embodied in schedule 12th
with some 19 fields, call upon 11 Municipal Corporations, 44 Nagar Parishads and 86 Nagar
Panchayats, now confronted with shortage of technical personnel, particularly, town planning
and architectural fields. After introduction of The Bihar Municipal Act, 2007 all activities of
urban development are guided by this Act and the unified draft bye-law developed in 2013.
Other Acts and Rules to guide urban governance in Bihar are ‘The Bihar Planning and
Development Act, 2012’, ‘The Bihar Apartment Ownership Act, 2006’and ‘Bihar Slum
Policy’. For effective use of urban land there are 7 zones namely; residential, commercial
(retail), commercial (wholesale), industrial, public and semi public uses and agricultural.
                                              72
Various type of land use permitted and restricted in different zones is further clearly
demarcated and these restrictions serve public purpose and safeguard people from disaster.
Though the process of urban expansion and creation of municipalities are clearly mentioned
but the information related to urban expansion hardly available publicly. Though it is argued
that public inputs are sought rarely, more or less as planning rituals, while finalizing or
amending land uses in which creative suggestions by public at large are seldom incorporated
however, the new draft Building Bye-Law and Draft Master Plan for Patna posted in the
website for people’s opinion. There are certain limitations also in the context of urban
housing in the context of Bihar. The shortage of urban dwelling as on 2009 is 0.59 million,
yet the draft Housing Policy in Bihar, 2009 has not yet finalized and implementation of Rajiv
Awas Yojana has not yet started. But the silver lining in this regard is that there are policies
to ensure delivery of low cost building and Bihar Housing Board (BHB) and Housing and
Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO), Government of India, have been constructing
and providing for houses for EWS, LIG, and MIG. Majority of housing units are meant for
EWS and LIG groups. Another positive thing is that the Slum Policy provides tenure security
to slum dwellers. Though the requirement for formalising housing in urban areas is clear and
affordable but is seldom implemented consistently and effectively. One area of concern is
that the planning process or development control in urban areas is almost absent and the
urban growth has been left on the whims and fancies of people at large and builders and
contractors. The coverage ratio and collection of property tax is also less, which calls for a
revision of tax structure in order to provide better civic amenities in the urban area.
4.3.4 STRENGTH
   81. Giving permission for self registration of flats, on satisfactory payment of entire
        amount, as per agreement. Flat owner can apply to municipality with a copy of the
        agreement and a copy of the receipt showing full payment for ex-parte registration.
   82. Holding is created expeditiously by municipality and regularly updated in order to
        collect holding tax.
   83. Adoption of service standards for each activity by setting time – line, authority,
        appellate authority and reviewing authority, is a land mark achievement in the field of
        getting services in time.
   84. Promulgation of Urban Land Planning Act, 2012 is a step forward for better planning
        of urban land.
   85. Identification of public land within municipal area is done by conducting special
        Survey. Initiatives have already been taken to remove encroachment of public land in
        municipal area. Public land is being protected by constructing boundary wall in
        district headquarters after removal of encroachment.
   86. City Development Plans (CDPs) for 28 cities under JNNURM have already been
        prepared and approved by the Municipal Board. Land use planning effectively guides
        urban spatial expansion in City Development Plans. Urban development is guided, in
        the major cities, effectively by a hierarchy of regional/detailed land use plans. These
        are regularly updated and land use intensity is matched with carrying capacity of
        infrastructure.
   87. The process of GIS-based mapping of urban area has started. Base maps of 17 towns
        are ready. Work is in progress for preparation of base maps of other towns. GIS-
        based mapping for property purpose has been completed in 7 towns. GIS-based
        mapping has already been completed for Patna, Bhagalpur, Darbhanga, Muzaffarpur,
        Purnea, Katihar and Munger for property tax purpose.
   88. Comprehensive draft building bye-laws 2013 are prepared and uploaded on the
        website for public opinion.
                                              73
   89. Draft Master Plan for Patna has been prepared and uploaded for public opinion
4.3.5BEST PRACTICES
   90. One of the most important, revolutionary and foresighted, provisions so far compared
       to previous slum policies is embodied in the State Slum Policy of 2010 is the “Tenure
       Security” for slum dwellers and highly marginalized economically weaker sections of
       the society who are living in slum pockets. This Policy has created provision of basic
       services to such shelterless slum dwellers. 1838 slums have been identified in 28
       cities / towns in Bihar for implementation of the policy. The slums identified in Patna,
       Bhagalpur, Darbhaga, Muzaffarpur and Gaya is as under.
       Table 4.3.9: Slums identified in five cities
       City / Town                                  Number
       Patna                                        110
       Bhagalpur                                    165
       Darbhanga                                    138
       Muzaffarpur                                  105
       Gaya                                         40
       (Source: Urban Development & Housing Department, Govt. of Bihar)
Under this scheme, integrated development of slum pockets / sites, numbering 60 in Patna
and 7 in Bodh Gaya has been taken up and Rs. 149 crore has been sanctioned for constructing
22,372 dwelling units for the urban poor.
   91. Adoption of service standards for each activity by setting time – line, authority,
        appellate authority and reviewing authority is revolutionary step in providing quick
        service to the people within a definite time frame.
4.3.6 WEAKNESS
   92. Lack of Master Plan for development of urban areas with statutory backing
   93. Office of Town Planner has almost become dysfunctional
   94. No plan to guide spatial expansion of urban area except some provision in City
        Development Plan
   95. Encroachment of road, public places, drainage, urban land etc. has been observed. Out
        of total Public Urban Land measuring 29902.38 acres, 1065.79 acres of land has been
        encroached. The government has removed encroachment from 153.86 acres only.
   96. Poor civic amenities in the cities
   97. Frequent traffic jam due to encroachment of road on both the sides, non availability of
        separate parking space etc.
   98. Water logging in the town due to poor drainage / clogging of sewerage
   99. Dearth of trained manpower in the Urban Development Department, ULBs and other
        related departments.
   100.About 55 per cent of multi-storyed building in Patna are facing vigilance cases for
        violation of FAR, height, map and approved building plans.
   101.About 60 per cent people are living in houses without obtaining completion
        certificate.
   102.About 70 to 80 per cent people are living in houses / flats without obtaining
        occupancy certificates.
4.3.7 POLICY RECOMMENDATION
4.3.7.1 Short Term
   1. Municipal survey (Urban Cadastral) of urban land should be started on priority basis.
   2. Strict enforcement of anti-encroachment law, to remove encroachment on priority
        basis, particularly from road side vendors should be initiated to save people from
        traffic jam.
                                              74
4.3.7.2 Medium Term
   3. The office of the town planner is of vital importance and, hence, should be made
        functional by appointing Chief Town Planner and provide sufficient staff and
        infrastructure.
   4. The sanctioned posts for Urban Development & Housing Department of urban local
        bodies should be filled with qualified and trained staff by launching special
        recruitment drive.
   5. Municipal Services Guarantee Act, along the lines of the Right to Public Service Act,
        2011 to be put in place.
   6. Construction / provision of parking space at different places for vehicles in urban
        areas should be given topmost priority.
   7. Strict enforcement of building completion certificate / occupancy certificate to be
        done.
   8. Development of proper drainage system and solid waste management system in the
        cities should be ensured. A time bond action plan may be drawn for each city.
   9. Green area and children parks should be demarcated in each town. An action plan
        with definite timeframe work should be chalked out for every city.
4.3.7.3 Long Term
   10. Formulation of master plans for development of urban areas, with statutory backup on
        urgent basis, should be ensured. Its proper implementation will solve the problems of
        water logging, traffic jam and poor civic amenities.
   11. Settlement policy of street vendors should be developed for each ULB.
   12. Inclusion of Modernisation Plan of old areas of the city in Master Plan of each ULB.




                                             75
                       4.4. PUBLIC LAND MANAGEMENT
4.4.1 INTRODUCTION
In Bihar the public lands have been categorised as (i) Gairmazruha-Khas/Malik, (ii)
Gairmazruha Aam, (iii) Khas Mahal, (iv)Kaisera-hind (Central Govt. Land), along with (v)
Ceiling Surplus land and (vi) Bhoodan Land. Since the age of Cadastral Survey, conducted
during 1892 to 1922, the public lands were clearly identified as the mentioned categories. The
record of rights prepared by Cadastral Survey during above mentioned period clearly
indicates raiyati, Govt. Land and Public Land by publishing final Khatiyan, which is an
abstract of land records of private and public land.
         The public land such as Anabad Bihar Sarkar, Anabad Surva-Sadharan, Roads,
Railway lines, irrigational channels, embankment, grave-yards etc. have been recorded in
Khatiyan and they are kept under direct ownership of the Government. In Bihar, after
abolition of Zamindari System through the introduction of Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, all
the public land and previous estates came under the direct control of State Government. The
previous estates which were kept in the town areas were brought directly under Khas Mahal
Management; whereas the rural estates were brought under the direct control of Collectors of
the concerned districts. The primary administrative unit in the districts is Anchal or Circle
where Circle Officers are responsible to look after the Public Land such as Gairmazruha
Khas, Gairmazuha Aam, general public roads in rural areas, grave yards, grazing grounds etc.
Khas Mahal lands in urban areas are managed by Khas Mahal section of the concerned
District Collector, who maintains the record of Khas Mahal land. Their management is
clearly indicated in Bihar Government Estates (Khas Mahal) Manual, 1953.
4.4.1.1 Status of Public Land in Bihar
In Bihar, the Gairmazruha Aam land is regarded as village common. Playground, pond,
grazing land, graveyard etc comes under this category of land. Government can distribute and
settle this type of land to landless people only when the nature of the land changed and gram
sabha consented for that. In Bihar a total 9,07,809.99 acres of land have been identified as
Gairmazruha Aam. Out of the total, 8,29,306.79 acres, which is 91.3% of the total
Gairmazruha Aam land is unsuitable for distribution. Out of total Gairmazruha Aam land
only 3.4% of the Gairmazruha Aam land has been distributed to the landless and eligible
beneficiaries. Still 5.2% of the suitable lands are available for distribution. The reasons for
unsuitability have not yet been assessed in details. The strategy to identify the reasons of the
unsuitable Gairmazruha Aam land may be developed.
         The Gairmazruha Khas/Malik lands are under direct control of State Government and
regarded as government lands. Government can distribute and settle these lands in favour of
landless/housesiteless eligible beneficiaries. In Bihar, a total 17,96,229.59 acres of land have
been identified as Gairmazruha Khas/Malik land. 9,21,909.40 acres of land, which is more
than half (51%) of the Gairmazruha Malik land, found unsuitable for distribution. Though
43.6% of the GairmazruhaMalik land has already been distributed to the landless
beneficiaries, still 5% of the suitable lands are available for distributions. The strategy to
identify the reasons of the unsuitable Gairmazruha Malik land, which is 51.3% of the total
and amounting to 9,21,909.40 acres, should be developed.
         In Bihar the Khas Mahal lands are mainly located in urban areas. A total 5036.03
acres of land identified as Khas Mahal land, out of this 1437.78 acres have been leased out to
6308 beneficiaries. This implies only 28.5% land has been leased out to leasehold in the state.
3598 acres, which is 71.5% of the total khas mahal land is lying under the control of the
government. Due to poor management, some of these lands have been encroached.

                                              76
        Government has vested private land under Bihar Land reforms (Fixation of Ceiling
Area), Act 1956. These lands are regarded as public lands and also get distributed or settled
in favour of landless farmers and housesiteless eligible families. A total 3,63,415.71 acres of
land has been acquired under the Ceiling Law and regarded as ceiling surplus land. 48564.77
acres of ceiling surplus land, which is 13.3% of total ceiling surplus land, are still available
for distribution.
        Bhoodan Movement was started by Vinova Bhabe after independence by persuading
larger land owners to donate at least one sixth of their land for distribution among the
landless. Various donors have donated their land under Bhoodan Yagna in the state. The
donated land required to be confirmed by a formal process. But in Bihar it is found that out of
total 6,48,593.14 acres of Bhoodan Land, only 3,45,349.02 acres of land, which is 53.2% of
total Bhoodan Land has been confirmed as yet. It is also found that 59.5% Bhoodan land is
unsuitable for distribution.
        The situation of public land demands that the government should launch special
survey for assessing reasons of unsuitability of each category of land and develop the strategy
for making them suitable for distribution. These large chunks of land when distributed to
landless beneficiaries will serve as livelihood for the poor besides self dignity and prestige of
the landless.
The summary of balance available public land in the state as on 31st March, 2013 is given
below in table.
Table 4.4.1: Summary of Balance Available Public Land in Bihar as on 31 st March,
2013
Particulars                                             Area in acre
Water Area                                             875164.5
Permanent pasture and Grazing land                     38665.9
Balance Gairmazruha Khas /Malik                        10,12,638.35
Balance Gairmazruha Aam                                8,76,841.06
Balance of Khas Mahal Land                             3598
Balance of Undistributed Land Received from
                                            48654.77
Ceiling
Balance Bhoodan Land Available (Confirmed + 392500.5
Unconfirmed)
(Source: Computed from data collected from District Statistical Hand Book, Department of
Revenue and Land Reform, Govt. of Bihar)
        Out of these public lands, 29902.38 acres of land is located in various towns of Bihar.
The Agriculture Department has 243 farms with 2890 hectares of land. Out of these lands of
Agriculture Department, 2100 hectares are cultivable land.
4.4.1.2 Land under Dams, River and Common Land
There are 28 dams in the state viz. Kharagpur Lake, Nagi, Kohira, Amrity, Badua, Srikhandi,
Kolmahadeo, Chandan, Jalkund, Morway, Satgharwa (N.F.), Job, Kailash Ghati, Nakti,
Tarakol (N.F.), Baskund, Upper Badua (N.F.) Belharna, Phulwaria, Anjan, Batane, Orhani,
Bilasi, Barnar, Durgawati, North Koel, Sindhwarni, Upper Kiul which are also regarded as
common property resources under water bodies.
The length and catchment of various rivers in Bihar is as under.


                                               77
There are many perennial and seasonal rivers in the state. Perennial rivers are Ganga (Length
- 445 km in Bihar, catchment area 19322 sq. km.), Ghaghara (length - 83 km, catchment area
2995 sq km), Kosi (Length-260 km, catchment area-11410 sq km.), Gandak (Length-260
km., catchment area-4188 sq km.), Mahananda (Length-376 km, catchment area -6150 sq
km.), Burhigandak (Length-320 km, catchment area-9601 sq km.), Punpun (Length-235 km,
catchment area-9026 sq km.), Bagmati (Length-394 km, catchment area -6500 sq km.) and
Sone (Length-202 km, catchment area-15820 sq km.). The seasonal rivers in the state are
Badua (Length 130 km, catchment area 2215 sq km), Chandan (Length 118 km, catchment
area 4093 sq km), Kiul Harohar (Catchment area 17225 sq km), Kamla Balan (120 km,
catchment area 4488 sq km) etc.
        Besides there is huge chunk of land of Railways, Defence, National Highway,
Tourism Department, Agriculture Department, Irrigation Department, Panchayati Raj, PWD,
PHED, Industry Department, Minerals & Mining Department etc., which are managed by the
respective department. The detailed statistics in this regard is not available. There is no
unified system to have statistics of the land of these various departments, their status and
encroachment of land. There is an urgent need to develop a unified system under Department
of Revenue and Land Reforms to collect the statistics from each department and update the
same on regular basis.
4.4.1.3 Institutional Structure for Management of Public Land
All public lands are being managed through Bihar Government Estates (Khas Mahal)
Manual, 1953, and Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act, 1950. Circulars are issued from
State Government; time to time for proper use of government land. These are the safeguards
of public land.
        In Bihar, there are competent authorities, with clearly assigned roles and
responsibilities to manage public land. The record keepers of public land are halka
karmchari in halka (sub-circle) level, which is the primary unit of land revenue
administration, at the grass root level. Above the halka karmchari, there is supervisory officer
called Circle Inspector on anchal/circle level. The Circle Inspectors monitor and supervise
halka offices by visiting at least once in a fortnight. Anchal offices are headed by Circle
Officers. In Bihar, under each Circle/Anchal office there are around 10-12 halkas. Under each
halka there are nearly 6-10 villages. One Revenue Karmchari is posted in each halka. In
Bihar there are 8463 halkas, among these, 4463 halka karmchari positions are vacant. It
means that 52% post of halka karmchari is vacant. There are 534 Circles in Bihar to run
revenue works. There is also a huge shortage of Circle Inspectors in these circles, as 65
positions are vacant. The circles come under the control of office of Deputy Collector Land
Reforms (DCLR) which is located at sub-division level. ADM Land Reform/DM is the
controlling authority of Deputy Collector Land Reforms (DCLR) at the district level. District
Collector, as per requirement, can make a mini survey regarding Government land in its
jurisdiction. The Major Operational Survey can only be conducted by government
notification.
        Major problems associated with the institutional structure are shortage of staff and
office building for halka karmcharis in Bihar. The halka karmcharis have to run their office
in private building, due to which, they have to compromise the safety of the records,
khatiayan and other registers. For better management, staff and infrastructure like office etc
should be provided at halka level. Government has taken decisions to construct one
additional room in each Gram Panchayat for the use of halka karmchari.
4.4.1.4 Transfer and Settlement of Public Land
There is provision for transfer of public land and settlement of public land to the weaker
sections and homeless persons of the state. The state Govt. has power to settle Public Land
                                              78
such as Khas Mahal, Gairmazruha Khas/Malik, Gairmazruha Aam to the weaker sections of
society like SC, ST, Backward, ex military persons etc. The Gram Sabha has been
empowered for recommending and providing no objection in regards to the settlement of that
land in its Jurisdiction. Gairmazruha Aam land can only be settled by Government on the
recommendation of the concerned Gram-Panchayats. Thus Gairmazruha Aam is settled only
by     the     State     Government       on     recommendation       of    concerned       Circle
Officer/DCLR/SDO/DM/Divisional Commissioner, with the consent of Gram Sabha,
whereas, the Gairmazruha Khas land is transferred and settled by SDO through
recommendation of concerned Circle Officer.
        In this regard, it is to be noted that, Common property resources cannot be settled or
transferred unless there is a change in the nature / uses of land and a formal assent by the
gram sabha. The State Government has also taken a decision of not to settle public land
within 8 kms radius of the urban area.
4.4.1.5 Distribution of Public Land to Landless
The public land and land acquired under various schemes have been distributed to landless
people of the state for meeting their livelihood and shelter requirement. The allotment of land
to landless people has given them a sense of belonging and dignity as well as a source for
livelihood. The land allotted to landless people as on 31st march, 2013 from various schemes
are given in table.
Table 4.4.2: Public land distributed to landless beneficiaries till 31st March, 2013
Type of land                           No. of Beneficiaries             % of beneficiaries
Bhoodan                                       2,92,616
Ceiling surplus                               3,50,374
Gairmazruha Aam                                43,710
Gairmazruha Khas/Malik                       10,45,030
Basigat Parcha                                5,80,214
Total no. of beneficiaries                   23,11,944
Possession given                             20,94,439                         90.6
Mutation done                                18,68,304                         80.8
Rent fixation done                           13,71,196                         59.3
Enter in Jamabandi                           19,13,561                         82.8
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reforms, Govt. of Bihar)
        It appears from the above table that possession of the land has been given to 90.6% of
the allottees. Mutation has been done in case of 80.8% of the total allottees, similarly rent
fixation has been done only in case of 59.3% of the total allottees. Since the allotment of land
is being made from the public land (government land), the allotment/ issue of parcha and
mutation should go simultaneously. At the time of issue of parcha a copy should be sent to
the Circle Officer/Karmchari concern for automatic mutation of the land. Similarly, steps
should be initiated to give possession of the land to rest of the more than 2 lacs allottees.
        Out of these allotments of land the Department of Revenue and Land reforms, transfer
and settle land to build houses to homeless families. Till December, 2013 505808 numbers of
homeless families have been provided land to build their house. Detail is given below in
table.
Table 4.4.3: Transfer of Public Land for Homestead till December, 2013
                    Schemes                            Number of Beneficiaries/Families
Bhoodan land                                                         292616
Mahadalit Vikash Mission (First Phase)                               185201
Mahadalit Vikash Mission (Second Phase)                               27271

                                               79
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reform, Government of Bihar)
        Although the land is allotted to landless people of the state, the major problem is
giving them the possession and legal entitlement. Dispossession has been reported in number
of cases. Nearly 1 lakh dispossession is reported in case of Bhoodan land. Tackling the issue
of giving possession and restoring disposed land to the actual beneficiaries should be tackled
through effective implementation of policy.
4.4.1.6 Encroachment of Public Land
One of the very common problems of public land is that it gets encroached. It was observed
that, the encroachers are locally influential and strong persons. To remove encroachment
from the public land, Circle Officer issue notices to the concerned encroachers under Bihar
Land Encroachment Act, 1956. A proceeding is initiated by the Circle Officer under the
provision of Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act. After hearing, order is passed to remove
the encroachment within stipulated time. In case of disobedience of order the encroachment is
forcibly removed and cost of removal is charged and recovered from the encroacher. It is to
be mentioned here that the Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act, 1956, has empowered
Circle Officer and Collector to deal with these types of situations.
        In Bihar, initiative has already been taken to identify public land in urban areas and
remove encroachment. The status of encroachment of public land in the state is given below
in table.
Table 4.4.4: Status of Encroachment of Public Land in the state as on 31st March, 2013
                                                                                 Area in Acres
                                    Urban Area                 Rural Area
Total Encroached Land               1065                       1398
Encroachment Removed                  251.7                    497.46
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reforms)
To safeguard the public land proper vigil and co-ordination at the level of halka karmchari
and local police station is required.
4.4.1.7 Acquisition of Private Land for Public Purpose
The Bihar Government acquires land mainly for public purposes and establishment of
industries. The private land after acquisition vested under government and is treated as public
land. The Revenue and Land Reforms Department, Government of Bihar acquired 2683.62
acres of land in 2012-13 only for public purpose. In 2010-11 and 2011-12 also the acquisition
of land has been made for public purposes. The acquired land for any public purpose gets
transferred to the concerned agency for its use in a timely manner. After delivery of
possession under the Land Acquisition Act, requisitioning bodies put the same in destined
use. The Director of land acquisition, Bihar maintains information regarding the process of
land acquisition. Under section 4 / 6 and 7 / 17 of the Land Acquisition Act, it has been
advised to keep track district wise and requisitioning body wise, whether acquired land was
put to destined use or not with a given time limit.
4.4.2 ASSESSMENT OF DIMENSIONS
Assessment of Indicator 4.1: Identification of public land and clear management: public
land ownership is clearly defined, effectively serves the public purpose, is inventoried,
under clear management responsibilities, and relevant information is publicly accessible
Dimension
              Criteria for public land ownership are           Public land ownership is justified by provision
                                                               of public goods and effectively and
  4   1     1 clearly defined and assigned to the right    A   transparently managed at the appropriate level
              level of government.                             of government.
                                              80
              There is a complete recording of public          Between 30% and 60% of public land is
  4   1     2                                              C clearly identified on the ground and on maps.
              land.
               Information on public land is publicly          All the information in the public land inventory
                                                               is only available for a limited set of public
  4   1     3 accessible.                                  C   property and there is little or no justification
                                                               why records are not accessible.
              The management responsibility for                The management responsibility for different
              different types of public land is                types of public land is unambiguously assigned
                                                               but this is not always consistent with objectives
  4   1     4 unambiguously assigned.                      B   of equity and efficiency or institutions are not
                                                               always properly equipped so that sometimes
                                                               these are not achieved.
              Responsible public institutions have             There are significant constraints in the
              sufficient resources for their land              financial and/or human resource capacity but
  4   1     5 management responsibilities.                 C   the system makes effective use of limited
                                                               available resources, with limited impact on
                                                               managing public land.
              All essential information on public land         Key information for public land allocations
              allocations to private interests is publicly     (the locality and area of the land allocations,
  4   1     6 accessible.                                  C   the parties involved and the financial terms of
                                                               the allocation) is recorded or partially recorded
                                                               but is not publicly accessible.
Analysis of Dimension 4.1.1: Assignment of Responsibility of Public Land Management
In Bihar, the criteria for public land ownership are clearly defined and assigned to right level
of Government. There is no scope for discretionary management. For example, Gairmazruha
Aam land cannot be transferred to a Government department or settled with a private person
or institution unless the nature of the land has changed (for example, the filling up of tank or
a water channel in course of time) and unless the Gram Sabha records its concurrence to the
aforesaid transfer. Approval is given by the Government itself except in the case of Mahadalit
families to whom the power of allotting house-sites has been delegated to Divisional
Commissioner. For the intradepartmental transfer of public lands including Gairmazruha
Malik or Gairmazruha Khas lands the concurrence of the competent authority is a condition
precedent. For the settlement of Gairmazruha Malik/Khas lands for residential purposes with
eligible categories of raiyats, the Sub-Divisional Officer (SDO) is the competent authority.
Public lands falling in the direct management of the Government, are governed as per the
government policy of Khas Mahal land.
    The state government has not yet came up with any policy related to Gairmazruha Aam
land in urban areas. For Gairmazruha Aam lands, falling in urban areas the government may
identify a competent authority for issuing no objection, parallel to the gram sabha, that too
where the nature of land has changed.
Analysis of Dimension 4.1.2: Recording of Public Land
There is complete recording of public land and demarcation on the spot, but due to absence of
Revisional Survey and non-computerization of records, many records are in dilapidated
condition. The complete record is based on Cadastral Survey, which is about 100 years old,
and the Revisional Survey could not complete in all districts.
 Analysis of Dimension 4.1.3: Accessibility of Information on Public Land
In Bihar information of public land is to some extent publicly accessible. The Director of
Land Records and Survey, Government of Bihar has already placed land information
pertaining to 9 districts in the website. It is already on the job to cover whole state in next
couple of years. Data centers have been setup at a number of anchal levels where raiyats can
access land information. Even otherwise, where data has not been placed on websites,


                                              81
computerization of existing un-updated land records has been made with a wide ranging
information base.
        All the anchal offices have got revenue record of villages falling in their respective
jurisdiction. The same is maintained by halka karamachari. People can have access to land
information through the halka karamchari in anchal offices. Due to lack of proper storage
and record keeping facilities many records are in poor condition.


Analysis of Dimension 4.1.4: Assignment of Responsibility of Public Land management
In Bihar, there is no ambiguity in the management responsibility in different types of public
lands. The primary unit of state revenue land management comes under circle office. The
Circle Officer is mainly responsible for public land management in his jurisdiction, whereas,
the Khas Mahal lands management comes under direct management of Collector. In this
regard, it is to be noted that, Common property resources cannot be settled or transferred
unless there is a change in the nature / uses of land and a formal assent by the gram sabha.
The State Government has also taken a decision of not to settle public lands within 8 kms
radius of the urban area.
        There is provision for transfer of public land and settlement of public land to the
weaker sections and homeless persons of the state. Gairmazruha Aam is settled only by the
State        Government         on       recommendation           of     concerned      Circle
Officer/DCLR/SDO/DM/Divisional Commissioner, with the consent of Gram Sabha;
whereas, the Gairmazruha khas lands are transferred and settled by SDO through
recommendation of concerned Circle Officer. Bhoodan land is transferred through allotment
of parcha by Bhoodan Yagna Committee.
        Though management responsibilities are unambiguously assigned, the institutes are
suffering from huge manpower crunch, poor infrastructure and capacity gap.
Analysis of Dimension 4.1.5: Resources for Management of Public Land
In Bihar, though the responsibilities of management of public land are unambiguously
assigned to the right level of government, but there are gaps in infrastructure, manpower and
skill. Public offices at various levels are not suffering from financial resources. However,
various public offices are suffering from shortage of manpower, infrastructure and capacity
gap. Most of the departments are running at 50-60% of sanctioned strength.
    There is also data gap related to public land. Most of the Departments are not having the
details of the land they possess and its condition, particularly encroachment. The need of the
hour is for every department having public lands, to have a well staffed estate section with
estate officer and an inventory of public lands owned and possessed by it. The estate officer
shall be responsible for safeguarding property, prevent and remove encroachment, if any, as
per law.
Analysis of Dimension 4.1.6: Availability of Information related to Allocation of Public
land
Records are properly maintained in all cases of public lands assigned to eligible private
individuals and institutions. The whole process is transparent. However, whole information
of transfer of public land assigned to eligible private individual has not been placed on
website.
Assessment of Indicator 4.2: Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition processes:
the state expropriates land only for overall public interest and this is done efficiently
Dimension
               There is minimal transfer of acquired land to A    Less than 10% of land acquired in
4 2       1                                                       the past 3 years is used for private
               private interests.
                                             82
                                                                    purposes.
                Acquired land is transferred to destined use B      Between 50% and 70% of the land
                in a timely manner.                                 that has been acquired in the past 3
 4 2      2                                                         years has been transferred to its
                                                                    destined use.
                The threat of land acquisition does not lead    B   Some cases.
 4 2      3
                to pre-emptive action by private parties.



Analysis of Dimension 4.2.1: Transfer of acquired land to Investor
In Bihar, the lands are acquired mainly for public purposes. The lands are acquired mainly
through Department of Revenue and Land Reforms and by Land Acquisition Officer and
District Collector.
         The Revenue and Land Reforms Department, Government of Bihar acquired 2683.62
acres of land in 2012-13 only for public purposes. In 2010-11 and 2011-12 also the
acquisition of land has been made for public purposes only. Land to private investors is
being allotted by BIADA based on the clear and transparent criteria and process evolved by
BIADA. The Industry Department transfer the acquired land to BIADA for construction of
Industrial estates/Industrial Park. The percentage of land acquired for this purpose during last
three years is less than 10% of the total land acquired. Under new land acquisition policy of
Government of Bihar, the investors would have a reference pool of chunk of land to acquire
them for ventures.
Analysis of Dimension 4.2.2: Timeliness of Transferring Acquired Land for Destined
Use
After delivery of possession under the land acquisition act, requisitioning bodies put the same
in destined use. The Director of land acquisition Bihar maintains information regarding the
process of land acquisition. He is well advised to keep track of post delivery of possession,
position of acquired lands vis-a-vis requisitioning bodies’ district wise. For instance, approval
under section 4 / 6 and 7 / 17 of the Land Acquisition Act, they are well advised to keep track
of acquired land district wise and requisitioning body wise.
Analysis of Dimension 4.2.3: Pre-emptive action by private parties before Land
Acquisition
There is no denying the fact that manipulated sale deed tends to hike land price on the eve of
land acquisition process. The sole safe guard is that the governing rate should be what
prevails on the date of notification under section 4 of the Act. In cases where a project is
executed phase wise and land is required at different point of time, the compensation paid in
the first phase is lesser than the amount to be paid in subsequent phases. Consequently, there
might be resentment from the people whose land was acquired in the first phase. They may
resist execution and demand comparable compensation.
    The government has decided to pay the same value for the same class of land in the same
project irrespective of number of villages and differences in the MVRs. The highest rate will
be given to the same class of land in another village which has lesser rate in that class of land.
A high level committee at the district level is empowered to determine class / rate of land as
per actual situation on the ground or the potential use in future. This has facilitated land
acquisition process.
Assessment of Indicator 4.3: Transparency and fairness of expropriation procedures:
expropriation procedures are clear and transparent and fair compensation is paid
expeditiously
 Dimension
                                               83
          Compensation is provided for the acquisition D        No compensation is paid to those with
4 3     1 of all rights regardless of their recording           unrecorded rights of use, occupancy or
                                                                otherwise.
          status.
                                                                Where people lose rights as a result of land
          Land use change resulting in selective loss of D
4 3     2                                                       use change outside the acquisition process,
          rights there is compensated for.                      compensation is not paid.
                                                         C      Between 50% and 70% of acquired land
4 3     3 Acquired owners are compensated promptly.             owners receive compensation within one
                                                                year.
                                                            B   Independent avenues to lodge a complaint
          There are independent and accessible                  against acquisition exist but there are access
4 3     4                                                       restrictions (i.e. only accessible by mid-
          avenues for appeal against acquisition.
                                                                income and wealthy).
                                                            B   A first instance decision has been reached
          Timely decisions are made             regarding       for between 50% and 80% of the complaints
4 3     5                                                       about acquisition lodged during the last 3
          complaints about acquisition.
                                                                years.
Analysis of Dimension 4.3.1: Providing Compensation to Land Losers
At the time of land acquisition, compensation is provided as per the recorded status of the
raiyat only. So the people who have recorded ownership get compensated, not the people
whose livelihood depend upon the land.
          Hopefully unrecorded interests of the persons whose livelihood is affected in the
acquired area will be taken care of in the new legislation on land acquisition.
          It is a fact that the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 provided for compensation only to the
actual land losers. Affected people outside the land acquisition process were not
compensated.
          The Bihar Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy, 2007 makes provision for
displaced agricultural labourers. All such labourers who earn livelihood on acquired land for
1 to 3 years and have been rendered unemployed, will be given lumpsum minimum wages for
200 days and also be given job cards under prevalent national / state rural employment
guarantee scheme.
Analysis of Dimensions 4.3.2 & 4.3.3: Timeliness of Providing Compensation
It is a fact that most of the land acquisitions for public purposes were made under the urgency
clause, where not only the land acquisition process is shortened, and the payment of
compensation is also expedited. Soon after the notification in section 7 / 17 of the Land
Acquisition Act, 80 percent of the compensation is paid to the land losers. There is some
bureaucratic dormancy that delays the balance payment of rest 20 percent. The same is paid
only when entire estimate including structures, trees etc., is sanctioned by the competent
authority. District Collector is competent to sanction estimates upto Rs. 50 lakhs, Divisional
Commissioner upto Rs. 1.50 Crores and beyond that amount the Government comes into the
picture.
     Although the actual data of delay in payment is not available, a sample survey with some
authorities, it reveals that 50-70% of the land owners receive compensation within one year.
Delay also incurs in interest payment. Hence speedy disposal from the point of cost
effectiveness has been emphasized in various government circulars issued to District
Collectors.
The Revenue and Land Reforms Department circular no. 423 dated 21/02/2007 laid down
time limit for various stages of land acquisition which are given below in table.
Table 4.4.5: Time limit for various stages of land acquisition
      SI.          Stage                                                                 Period
      No.
                                              84
    1.      Collection of data with regard to checking of proposal with map / RoR         45 days
            etc.
    2.      Publication of notification / award                                           15 days
    3.      Invitation of objections after publication of notification / award            30 days
    4.      Collection of objections                                                      10 days
    5.      Disposal of objection                                                         60 days
    6.      Preparation / approval and publication of award                               15 days
    7.      Notice under section 9                                                        15 days
    8.      Collection of objection and its disposal                                      30 days
    9.      Preparation of estimate / determination of value after local inspection       30 days
            under section 11
    10.     Approval of estimate                                                           15 days
    11.     Preparation and publication of award                                           15 days
    Total                                                                                  280
                                                                                           days
        The above mentioned instructions have been reiterated and web based monitoring has
recently been started. District Land Acquisition Officer’s performances are reviewed every
month and delays are accounted for. Further fine tuning has been done in circular no. 64
dated 14/01/2011 and 2025 dated 20/08/2013.
The reasons for delay in payment of compensation lie in the following facts.
          1. Reference to Civil Courts in multiple title cases under section 30 of the Land
               Acquisition Act
          2. Existence of multiple jamabandis against the same plot number.
          3. Absentee landholders who do not turn up.
          4. Resistance to land acquisition
Analysis of Dimension 4.3.4: Availability of accessible avenues for appeal against
acquisition
In Bihar there are independent and accessible avenues for appeal against land acquisition
exist. References can be made by the Collector to a Civil Court under section 18 of the Act
whenever amount of compensation is disputed. References can also be made to the Civil
Court under section 30 in case of multiplicity of title. Similarly, the land loser can also appeal
against the acquisition and compensation. But involvement of cost and time in the process of
appeal affects the accessibility.
Analysis of Dimension 4.3.5: Timeliness of decisions regarding complaints about
acquisition
In connection with the land acquisition in Bihar decisions are taken promptly regarding
claims and objections etc. received with regard to land acquisition at the ground level itself,
i.e, District Land Acquisition Officer. But no data is available in this regard to evaluate the
situation exactly.
4.4.3 CONCLUSION
Ever since the Cadastral Survey the public land has been identified and recorded. The records
of rights prepared by Cadastral Survey clearly indicated raiyati, Govt. Land and Public Land
by publishing final Khatiyan. In Bihar public lands have been categorised as (i)
Gairmazruha-Khas/Malik, (ii) Gairmazruha Aam, (iii) Khas Mahal, (iv)Kaisera-hind
(Central Govt. Land) along with (v) Ceiling Surplus land and (vi) Bhoodan Land. But one of
the basic problems in Bihar is gap in implementation of revisional survey which could be
completed fully in 12 districts, partially in 14 districts and could not be started in 12 districts
resulting non updation of record. A significant portion of available records are quite old and
                                                85
does not reflect ground reality. The basic uses for public land is providing basic amenities,
used as village commons, leasing out for eligible families in the urban areas and transfer and
settlement in favour of landless and housesiteless families for enhancement of livelihood
opportunities and residential purpose. Though there is huge chunk of public land, under each
category available in Bihar for these purposes, but it is found that a significant portion of
these lands are not suitable for distribution. The reason behind the unsuitability and their
scope for making them suitable are unknown as no specific survey in this regard is available.
It is noteworthy that a large amount of public land has been transferred and settled by the
state government in favour of weaker sections of society like SC, ST, Backward, ex military
persons, etc. But this novel effort got hindered due to several problems like dispossession or
threatened dispossession of the allottees. In addition to this a huge chunk of public land got
encroached. Though there is state authority with clearly assigned responsibilities related to
recording and management of public land, but all the layer of the administration suffer from
lack of adequate infrastructure, manpower and skill gap. The government acquires land for
public purposes. Though it has clear cut mechanism and machinery for land acquisition and
transfer for its destined use as well as grievance redressal mechanism related to land
acquisition and compensation, there are grievances that the government provides
compensation to recorded raiyat only. The affected people, whose livelihood gets affected
due to the acquisition process, remain outside the compensation process.
4.4.4 STRENGTHS
    13. With the promulgation of the Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act 2011, a legal
        platform has been created to conduct abridged survey and settlement, adopting
        modern technology. Government has adopted the policy to conduct aerial survey of
        land with modern technology to update land records in the state. One major output of
        the ongoing special survey will be a clear cut up-to-date textual data on public land.
    14. Consolidation operation will be taken up afresh soon after the conclusion of the
        Special Survey in a given district as per the consolidation law itself. CPR is to be
        clearly delineated to which general public will have clear access for utilizing the same
        as per convention and for other purposes such as irrigation.
    15. Bihar Khas Mahal Policy 2011 provides for stringent punitive measures against
        violators of lease deed conditions. It substitutes civil court by Divisional
        Commissioner for eviction of aforesaid violators, encroachers and other illegal
        occupant of violable public land in direct management of the Government.
    16. 71.55% maps have already been digitized and maps of five districts have been placed
        on website for public use.
    17. Government has recently decided to build Gram Panchayat Bhawan which will have
        the office of Halka Karamcharis also.
4.4.5 BEST PRACTICES
    18. Khas Mahal Policy
        Khas Mahal land is a special category of public land located mainly in urban areas
        under the direct control of government. The government can lease out these lands for
        a period upto 30 years for residential, business and other purposes. Comprehensive
        Khas Mahal Policy and Manual have been developed for the administration of Khas
        Mahal Land in the state. The Bihar Khas Mahal Policy, 2011 provides for stringent
        punitive measures against violator of lease deed conditions. It also substitutes civil
        court by Divisional Commissioner for eviction of aforesaid violators, encroachers and
        other illegal occupant of violable public land in direct management of the
        Government. This has helped in initiating immediate punitive measures against the

                                              86
      violators and has ensured compliance of lease condition and controlled the
      encroachment.
  19. Distribution of Homestead Land to Housesiteless
      To ensure equity in the society by provision of homestead land, about 5.05 lakh (Dec,
      13) house-sites have been allotted to Mahadalit families from the land taken from
      Gairmazruha Aam, Gairmazruha Khas, and land purchased from raiyat to enable
      them to construct houses. Most of these lands are public land. Here also to empower
      the women and give them land rights majority of beneficiaries are women.
  20. Restriction in Transfer of Common Property Resources
      The State is having a policy/ rules under which Common property resources cannot be
      settled or transferred unless there is a change in the nature / uses of land and a formal
      assent from the gram sabha. This policy has helped in protecting the common
      property resources.
  21. Simplification in correcting RoR
      Earlier any wrong entry in survey records was challengeable only in Civil Court. This
      used to be long drawn process. With the passing of Bihar Land Dispute Resolution
      Act, 2009, a revenue functionary, ‘Deputy Collector Land Reforms’ can adjudicate
      cases pertaining to record of rights. Similarly, section 9 of the Mutation Act
      empowers the additional collector of a district to cancel illegal zamabandi. Thus, the
      BLDR Act and Mutation Act together have helped the raiyat/under-raiyat in getting
      land record corrected in cost effective and time effective manner.
  22. Survey of Public Land in Urban Areas
      Public lands falling in municipal areas in district headquarters are extensively
      surveyed through a drive. Budgetary provision has been made to erect boundary walls
      to save these public lands from encroachment.
4.4.6 WEAKNESS
  23. Public land security has been ignored at the grass root level. The public lands, falling
      in urban areas, have recently got a protective code, but in rural areas, there is steady
      depreciation of the CPR since independence. Public lands have been privatized in
      connivance with local bureaucracy. Cases are not filed despite legal provisions to that
      effect. Recourse is made hardly to section 9 of the Bihar Mutation Act for the
      cancellation of illegal Jamabandi. No recourse is made under rule 467 of the Bihar
      Settlement Manual 1959 for the cancellation of Khata fraudulently. There is no
      material on record to suggest how many cases of public land privatization have been
      filed in the Deputy Collector Land Reforms Court, as per the Bihar Land Dispute
      Resolution Act, 2009.
  24. In the post- independence era, there is no denying the fact that a large quantum of
      public land were siphoned off by vested interests in collusion with the revisional
      survey authorities. No systematic probe was made into such privatization. Hardly any
      reports to revenue officer court under the Bihar Tenancy Act or Civil Courts in
      suitable cases was made by the authority to rectify the Act detrimental to public
      interest. Even Khasmahal land (land under the direct management of the government),
      especially in urban areas, were privatized during revisional surveys.
  25. Though Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011, have come into operation, there is
      no provision to safeguard the interest of under-raiyat for making entry, as such, in the
      record of rights.
  26. Survey records / anchal records are not up to date, affecting the quality of
      Computerized Land Record (CLR) and Land Information System (LIS).

                                              87
     27. The records available with the Circle Officers are not in consonance with the field
         realities
     28. It is very interesting to note that even pucca buildings have been constructed on public
         land on the river Falgu in Gaya.
     29. Circle Officers are bound to safeguard / protect the public land, but in most of the
         cases, they do not take interest. It has been observed that, during survey operations or
         consolidation proceedings, they do not protest the claim made by claimants on the
         public land on frivolous or concocted grounds.
     30. There is no office building for halka karmcharis in Bihar. The halka karmcharis have
         to run their office in private buildings, due to which, they have to compromise on
         safety of the record, khatiayan and other registers.
     31. Large chunk of the Gairmazruha Malik, Gairmazruha Aam and Bhoodan Land is
         found unsuitable for distribution.
     32. Large number of cases related to land ceiling are pending at various levels.

4.4.7. POLICY PRESCRIPTION
4.4.7.1 Short Term
    1. Steps should be initiated to give possession of the land to more than 0.2 million
        beneficiaries who have already been allotted land under housesite policy for mahadalit
        family and other schemes.
    2. All the public land, which has been distributed to the landless poor, should be
        physically verified to see whether the assignees are in possession of this land. If not,
        steps should be taken to give possession of those lands to the real assignees.
    3. Evict encroachers from public land and bring the land back for public use by
        following due process of law. Resettlement / rehabilitation for genuine persons viz.
        Economically Weaker Section of the Society (EWS) may also be taken up
        simultaneously.
    4. Get an inventory of all public land prepared and make it available for public scrutiny.
        There should be a unified system, under revenue department, to collect data from each
        department / district regarding the land under the concerned department and update
        the same on regular basis for its effective management. The need of the hour for
        every department having public land is to have an estate section with sufficient staff,
        estate officer and an inventory of public lands owned and possessed by it. The estate
        officer shall be responsible for safeguarding property, prevent and remove
        encroachment, if any, as per law.
    5. Gairmazarhua Aam land should be used for public purpose only except for group
        housing purpose for EWS/Mahadalit.
4.4.7.2 Medium Term
1.      Complete the ongoing special survey in all parts of the State by 31st March, 2016. Digitise
         record of rights and maps prepared on the basis of special survey.
2.       Efforts should be made to bridge the gap between allotment of land and mutation.
         Since the allotment of land is made from the public land (government land), the
         allotment/ issue of ‘parcha’ and mutation should happen simultaneously. At the time
         of issue of ‘parcha’, its copy should be sent to the Circle Officer/Karmchari concern
         for automatic mutation of the land, creation of Jamabandi, and fixation of rent. After
         creation of jamabandi, the settlee should be informed.
3.       There is a need to ascertain the reasons regarding the unsuitability of ceiling surplus
         land, Gairmazruha Malik, Gairmazruha Aam and bhoodan land, by launching special


                                                   88
        survey. Strategy for developing these lands for making them suitable for distribution,
        wherever applicable, should also be planned.
4.      New Khasmahal Policy has already been promulgated with respect to land in direct
        possession of government. Same is to be enforced in letter and spirit.
5.      Process of confirmation of Bhoodan land should be expedited. ‘Dan Patra’ must be
        confirmed without any further delay.
6.      Dan Patra (Gift letter) of some Boodan land is not available with LRDC or even in
        Bhoodan office. Records of 13 districts for Bhoodan land have been digitized.
        Digitization of records of the rest 25 districts should be taken up expeditiously.
7.      In the course of the ongoing special survey, lower level revenue functionaries should
        be instructed to ensure recording of public land in the records of rights. As soon as the
        textual data on public land is generated, all out efforts should be made to trace public
        land which is privatized officially, prior to special survey. Following due process of
        law, public land settled, unauthorizedly, must come back to the public domain. It is
        noteworthy to point out that even during special survey operation the state has to be
        impleaded as a party in cases pertaining to public land.
4.4.7.3 Long Term
1.      The state government has not yet come up with any policy related to Gairmazruha
        Aam land in urban areas. For Gairmazruha Aam land, falling in urban areas the
        government may identify a competent authority for issuing no objection, parallel to
        the gram sabha, that too wherever the nature of land has changed.
2.      Enumerating public land in every National Sample Survey (NSS) should be made
        mandatory.




                                               89
    4.5. TRANSFER OF LARGE TRACTS OF LAND TO INVESTORS
4.5.1 INTRODUCTION
The post-liberalisation era has ushered in new investment challenges and opportunities for
various Indian states. The Government of Bihar has promulgated a series of regulations and
policies to attract investment and invite more long-term, capital-intensive, high-tech projects
in more sectors of the economy and hence reap the maximum benefit from pullovers of skills
and expertise from corporate presence.
4.5.1.1 Changes in Policy Paradigm
Every five year after the State Government adopts a new industrial policy, which is based
upon the survey conducted in this regard as well as the consultations made with the different
organizations and Industry Associations of Bihar. In view of the rapid changes in the Global
Industrial Scenario, Bihar Industrial Incentive Policy, 2006 has been reviewed with an
objective to attract domestic and foreign investment as well as revival and expansion of
business operations of the existing industrial units by providing the right industrial ambience.
Review of the policy and current scenario found that it is imperative that a new industrial
incentive policy be prepared so as to promote balanced industrial development and enable
industries to contribute towards the social and economic development of the State. The State
Government has launched Bihar Industrial Incentive Policy in the year 2011 to accelerate the
industrial development. The new Industrial Incentive Policy, 2011 has been prepared based
on the suggestions and consultations with the main Industry Associations such as Bihar
Industries Association, Bihar Chamber of Commerce, Confederation of Indian Industry,
Bihar, Laghu Udyog Bharti, Hajipur Udyog Sangh etc. and other related organizations and
concerned Government Departments. The industrial policies of different neighbouring States
have also been considered in formulation of this policy. Under this policy, there are
provisions for granting incentives such as 100% Exemption from Stamp Duty and
Registration Fees during the pre-production phase, Capital Subsidy for industrial units,
inclusion of Entry- Tax in the re-imbursement of 80% of VAT, incentive also to existing
units for Captive Power Generation, Diesel Generating sets and subsidy on non-conventional
sources of energy production, re-imbursement of expenses incurred on project reports,
technical know-how fees, quality certification, electricity duty etc.
4.5.1.2 Land Acquisition in Bihar
Land plays extremely critical role in the industrial development of a state. Government needs
to acquire land and transfer it to public or private requisitioning body for industrial
development. Land acquired by government for various Central / State Government’s
Projects since the year 2005-2006 has been given in annexure 4.5.1
        In regard to land acquisition and transfer to investor in the context of Bihar, the
situation is typical because its land is arable, and land holdings of farmers are small. Given
the ground situation, acquisition of land in Bihar is very difficult. The State Government
devised a new method under the 'Aao Bihar' (Come to Bihar) call for investors. Under this
policy, farmers either individually or in group, willing to sell their individual or collective
chunk of land would have to submit the details to the District Magistrate (DM) concerned,
who, in turn, would check the legal papers to ascertain that they are not disputed. The DM, ,
would then forward the verified details of the chunk of land to Bihar Industrial Area
Development Authority (BIADA), which would put the details on its website showing the
price quoted by the farmers concerned. The investors would then have a reference pool of
chunks of land to acquire for their ventures.



                                              90
4.5.1.3 Land Acquisition: Policy, Process and Compensation
Compulsory land acquisition by the State for developmental purposes used to be conducted
under the Land Acquisition Act of 1894. There were two types of land acquisition processes,
namely ordinary process and emergent process.
         The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 has been replaced by the centre’s Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 with effect from 1st January, 2014. The Bihar
government has adopted this new land acquisition policy to prevent any confrontation with
landowners and agriculturists in the state. The change in the land acquisition policy assumes
significance in the wake of wide protest by landowners over acquisition of land in different
parts of the country in general and Bihar in particular. Now the Government will not directly
acquire land, instead will work as a facilitator between investors and landowners. This policy
seeks to provide fair compensation to farmers around four times more than the market price,
to be precise - while ensuring that no land can be acquired forcibly, has given a fillip to the
Bihar’s farmers demand for uniform and better compensation for plots of land acquired by
the government.
         Government’s view is that "one project one-rate" policy could not be implemented
every time because government has to acquire land for the project sometimes at different
times, by different notifications, over a period of time. Compensation was paid to the farmers
on the basis of the location of their plots of land. Problems arise when compensation of land
acquired in 2005 being paid as per the prices prevailing in 2013.
         The strategy of the State Government is to create a Land Bank which will play a vital
role in the establishment of industry. Actions have been taken for establishment of Land
Bank in view of the requirement of land for industries and for other development projects.
As per the requirements of different industries and development scheme, land would be made
available from the land bank in order to establish industries in the state, development of
international level of basic infrastructure is necessary so as to attract more and more
domestic and foreign investment.
4.5.1.4 Transfer of Land to Investors and Bihar Industrial Area Development Authority
(BIADA)
BIADA was constituted under the statutory provision of the Bihar Industrial Area
Development Act 1974 to promote balanced industrial growth and ensure fruitful
contribution of industry in social and economic development of the State. BIADA plays
crucial role in transferring land to investor. As land after acquisition is transferred to BIADA,
then BIADA allots land to eligible investors based on several criteria like economic, socio-
cultural and environmental impacts. BIADA earmarks plots for various types of investments.
The details of Land Allotted / Land Rates & Position of Vacant Land Details in Industrial
Area as on 30.11.2013 have been given in the annexure 4.5.2. Details of Industrial Plots
allotted to private investor till 31.03.2014 is given in annexure 4.5.3. Number of industrial
plot allotted during last three years in Bihar is given in annexure 4.5.4. Application Status for
allotment of land on 31.10.2013 with Bihar Industrial Area Development Authority is given
in annexure 4.5.5.
         There is clear system of transferring land by the Bihar Industrial Area Development
Authority (BIADA) to the private investors and the process is clearly identified. The process
of land allotment is available on the Government website as well as in BIADA office. The
institutions involved in this have the powers to allot the land in prescribed manner and they
have capacity, including resources, for field verification and strong incentives in ensuring
socially beneficial outcome but processes are complex and exhaustive for the investors.

                                               91
        The State Government is now planning to survey the barren and uncultivable land,
waste land, undulating land, land not fit for agriculture through GIS mapping for acquisition
purpose. This will help in increasing the productive use of waste land and give gain to land
losers. State Government is hopeful that by this process, the public protests will be minimal
and the land losers will be happy as well.
4.5.2 ASSESSMENT OF DIMENSION
Assessment of Indicator 5.1: Transfer of public land to private use follows a clear,
transparent, and competitive process and payments are collected and audited (with the
exception of transfers to improve equity such as land distribution and land for social housing).
 Dimension
                Public land transactions are conducted in     The share of public land disposed of in the past 3
                an open  transparent manner                   years through sale or lease through public auction or
  5    1     1                                              B     open tender process is between 70% and 90%.
                                                                  (Except for equity transfers).
                 Payments for public leases are collected         More than 90% of the total agreed payments are
  5    1     2                                                A   collected from private parties on the lease of public
                                                                  land.
                 Public land is transacted at market prices       All types of public land are generally divested at
  5    1     3   unless guided by equity objectives           A   market prices in a transparent process irrespective of
                                                                  the investor’s status (e.g. domestic or foreign).
                 The public captures benefits arising from        Mechanisms to allow the public to capture
  5    1     4   changes in permitted land use.               D   significant share of the gains from changing land use
                                                                  are not used.
                 Policy to improve equity in asset access         No policy in place to improve access to and
  5    1     5   and use by the poor exists, is implemented D     productive use of assets by poor and marginalized
                 effectively and monitored                        groups.
Analysis of Dimension 5.1.1: Transaction of Public Land
The public land is mainly transferred for equity considerations. Except for equity transfers,
no public lands have been transferred during the past three years by lease or through public
auctions. Only renewal of leases of khas mahal land has been made for limited private use
during last three years.
    BIADA transfers the industrial plot (which can be considered as public land) for private
use, and is transacted at market price, i.e the cost of land acquired, plus 10% administrative
charges and land development cost, irrespective of investor’s status. The transfer is done in a
transparent process irrespective of investor’s status.
    There is provision for transfer of public land and settlement of public land to the weaker
sections and homeless persons of the state. The state Govt. has power to settle public lands
such as Gairmazruha Khas/Malik, Gairmazruha Aam to the weaker sections of society like
SC, ST, Backward, ex military persons etc. The Gram Sabha has been empowered for
recommending and providing no objection with regard to the settlement of that land in its
jurisdiction. Gairmazruha Aam land can only be settled by Government on the
recommendation of the concerned Gram-Panchayats, provided its nature has changed. The
lone exception in this regard is the power of the Divisional Commissioner concerned to settle
Gairmazruha Aam lands with house-siteless mahadalit families. This power has recently
been delegated to the Divisional Commissioners by the State Government. Thus
Gairmazruha Aam lands are settled only by the State Government on recommendation of
concerned Circle Officers/DCLR/SDO/DM/Divisional Commissioner, with the consent of
Gram Sabha. The Gairmazruha khas lands are transferred and settled by SDO for residential
purposes for weaker sections through recommendation of concerned Circle Officer. The
State Government has also taken a decision not to settle public lands within 8 kms radius of
the urban area.

                                                  92
     Private land is acquired by government, for transferring them to various government
departments/requisitioning authorities for public purposes including for industrial
estates/industrial areas. BIADA transfers the land to private investors for private use/public
purpose. The details of land acquisition is publicised in local newspapers and the information
about the land sought by competent authority. Process and procedure for transfer of land to
private investors, by BIADA has been uploaded in the website of BIADA. The process and
procedure of transfer of land by BIADA is fair, clear and transparent. All lands are
transferred by BIADA in an open process. But the transfer of khas mahal land is
cumbersome.
Analysis of Dimension 5.1.2: Collection of Payment from Public Land Leases
There is a system of advance payment in all Government transactions and is implemented
strictly. In case of transfer of industrial plot by BIADA, if the allottee desires, it can pay the
cost of land in one instalment or in 8 instalments. The initial payment (1st instalment) shall
be 30% of the total cost + maintenance charges + one time service charges + demarcation
charge of Rs. 1000/- within 15 days of issuance of the allotment letter along with bond.
Balance instalments with 5% interest are to be paid in seven (7) equal annual instalments.
Balance instalments will be due on the same date in subsequent years. In case of default,
penal interest, at the rate of 2% is also charged. Threat of cancellation of lease exists in case
of non-payment / undue delay in payment. Due to this, the lease payment collected is more
than 90% of the estimated amount. Schedule of activity and time framework for payment of
money is given in annexure 4.5.6.
Analysis of Dimension 5.1.3: Equity objectives and Transaction of Public Land at
Market Prices
In Bihar the public land is mainly transferred for equity considerations. BIADA, based on
application, transfers the industrial plot (which can be considered as public land) for private
use, and is transacted at market price, i.e the cost of land acquired, plus 10% administrative
charges and land development cost, irrespective of investor’s status.
The transfer is done in a transparent process irrespective of investor’s status.
Analysis of Dimension 5.1.4: Capturing benefits arising from changes in permitted land
use by people
In Bihar there is no system of sharing benefits arising from changes in permitted land use
with the people. However, the people around derive benefits by way of labour employment
due to increase in demand of labour by the industries. The value of the land in and around the
industrial set up also increases. Demand for more houses as shelter for the employees and
other workers has increased. Development in business activities particularly in non-farm
sector and improvement of civil amenities like road, transport, electricity and water supply
were also observed due to change in land use which benefitted the local people. There is lack
of third party monitoring in this regard.
Analysis of Dimension 5.1.5: Policy to improve equity in asset access and use by the
poor
There is no provision in the policy to improve equity in asset in Bihar, though they are being
taken care of by other means. There is no such provision in policy to improve equity in asset
access and use by the poor in industrial area. However, Project Clearance Committee (PCC)
of BIADA takes care of the interest of marginalised community and small size plots are being
allotted to them. For equity purpose, the government has different types of schemes viz.
Provision of homestead land, slum policy, distribution of ceiling surplus land, distribution of
bhoodan land, Gaurmazarhua Aam and Gairmazarhua Khas land to the economically weaker
sections of society for equity purpose.

                                               93
       The State Government is planning to earmark 10% of the industrial plot to the weaker
sections of the society.
Assessment of Indicator 5.2: Private investment strategy
Dimension
            Land to be made available to investors is B          A policy to identify land that can be made available to
            identified transparently and publicly, in            investors exists, based on ad hoc assessment of land
  5   2   1 agreement with right holders available to            potential but with community consultation and
            investors, in agreement with land rights             agreement, and is applied in more than 90% of
                                                                 identified cases.
            holders.
            Investments are selected based on              B     Process is in place that considers only national
  5   2   2 economic, socio-cultural and environmental           benefits, but that is adhered to. No local benefit
            impacts in an open process                           sharing in place
                                                           B     Institutions to make decisions are clearly identified
            Public institutions transferring land to             and have the necessary capacity (incl. resources for
  5   2   3 investors are clearly identified and regularly       field verification) and strong incentives in ensuring
            audited                                              socially beneficial outcomes but processes may be
                                                                 complex and difficult for investors.
              Public bodies transferring land to investors   A   A policy is in place for effective inter-ministerial and
              share information and coordinate to                coordination to ensure that decisions on land use and
  5   2   4                                                      land rights are well coordinated across sectors, and is
              minimize and resolve overlaps (including
              sub-soil).                                         applied effectively.
              Compliance with contractual obligations is     C   Monitoring of compliance is limited or only part of
  5   2   5   regularly monitored and remedial action            the results accessible to the public
              taken if needed.
              Safeguards effectively reduce the risk of      B   Substantive application of safeguards (EIA, SIA, etc.)
  5   2   6   negative effects from large scale land-            is in line with global best practice but only part of the
              related investments..                              information is disclosed.
              The scope for resettlement is clearly          C   Resettlement policy exists, but is only in part of the
  5   2   7   circumscribed and procedures exist to deal         cases applied.
              with it in line with best practice.
Analysis of Dimension 5.2.1: Transparent Process of Identification and Transfer of
Land to Investor
Land for Industrial Area / Estate has been identified transparently and publicly in agreement
with right holders. At the time of acquisition of land, the state government issues public
notice mentioning details of land through local newspaper. Objections are also invited from
the land owners and affected people under Land Acquisition Act and there is clear and
transparent system of hearing objections. As per new policy in the state, the government is
working as facilitator between the land owners and investors.
    The details of land and price quoted by willing owners are uploaded on website of the
district after due verification which acts as resource pool for investors to choose. There is a
new initiative by the government named as “Ayo Bihar” to promote new industries, where
state government works as facilitator for industrialisation.
Analysis of Dimension 5.2.2: Criteria for Selecting Investment
In Bihar the system of selection of investments is based on economic, socio-cultural and
environmental impact of the industry but it is but not conducted in open process. However,
BIADA earmarks plots for various types of investments. The process considers mainly
national benefits. No local benefit sharing system is available. This system requires further
strengthening and regular monitoring.
         The total plots available to BIADA in an industrial area are demarcated in various
categories, which are as under:
                 Size upto 0.25 Acres

                                                   94
                Size larger than 0.25 acres upto 0.50 acres
                Size larger than 0.50 acres upto 1.00 acre
                Size larger than 1.00 acres upto 2.00 acres
                Size larger than 2.00 acres upto 5.00 acres
                Size larger than 5.00 acres
        The plots are demarcated so that at least,
1.      20% of the available land will be divided in plots measuring an area of 0.25 acre of
        less than that, and
2.      20% of the available land would be divided in plots having area of more than 2 acres.
3.      Balance 60% of the available land may be divided in different sizes of plots as per
        demand / requirement of the entrepreneurs as may be decided by the Board of
        Directors from time to time.
    But the plots are earmarked for various types of investments in an open process. At
present the following activities are eligible for allotment of industrial plot:
                     1. Manufacturing / Processing (including data processing)
                     2. IT Park including ITES / Industrial Park
                     3. Common Logistical Facility
                     4. Industry related training centers, viz. ITI/ ITC / Skill development
                         centers.
Analysis of Dimension 5.2.3: Institute for Transferring Land to Investor
In Bihar, BIADA is the main authority for transferring land to private investors. Other
government departments do not transfer land to private investors. Industry Department
acquires land through department of Revenue and land Reforms and then transfer to BIADA.
Again, transfer of khas mahal lands are being done through District Collector. So BIADA, as
the institution to make decisions regarding transfer of land, is clearly identified and has the
necessary capacity (incl. resources for field verification). The institution has strong incentives
to ensure socially beneficial outcomes. The processes of measurement of socially beneficial
outcomes may be complex and difficult. There is an effective system of transferring land to
investors by BIADA and it is clearly identified. In BIADA, audit is conducted on regular
basis.
Analysis of Dimension 5.2.4: Sharing of Information related to Land Transfer
In Bihar there is a policy in place for effective inter-departmental coordination to ensure that
decisions on land use and related issues are well coordinated across sectors. The State
Investment Promotion Board has been constituted under the chairmanship of Development
Commissioner to ensure such coordination.
Analysis of Dimension 5.2.5: Monitoring of Contractual Obligations
BIADA, as the nodal agency, monitors the clauses mentioned in the agreement and collect
the rent, monitor the status of functioning of the industry. If the firm becomes sick and does
not revive after repeated follow ups then BIADA cancels the contract and auctions the plot.
    Though the system of compliance with the contractual obligations exists, no third party
monitoring has been conducted as yet and only part of the results are accessible to the public.
Remedial actions are not being taken in timely manner.
Analysis of Dimension 5.2.6: Safeguards related to large scale land-related investments
Safeguards, such as Environmental Impact Assessment and Social Impact Assessment, are in
place related to large scale land related investment to rule out negative effects of the industry.
Environmental Impact Assessment is mandatory for an industry after reaching certain stage
of development. But it is to be noted that the implementation of social impact assessment is
deficient.

                                               95
    Under new Land Acquisition Act, 2013, the State Government has set up social Impact
Assessment Unit in which professional institutions have been made the team members.
Safeguard to investors, in order to reduce the risk of negative effects from large scale land-
related investments, is difficult to implement due to varieties of problems like court
cases/public protest etc. However there is an incentive policy for the investors under
industrial promotion schemes to attract investors in the state.

Analysis of Dimension 5.2.7: Scope for Resettlement
The scope for resettlement is clearly circumscribed and procedures exist to deal with it in line
with best practice but it is not implemented in pious manner. In other words, it can be said
that the process of resettlement is lengthy and exhaustive. Undue delay in resettlement was
also observed in this regard.
Assessment of Indicator 5.3: Policy implementation is effective consistent and
transparent and involves local stakeholders
Dimension
            Investors provide sufficient information to B    Investors' business plans (application materials)
            allow rigorous evaluation of proposed            require some evidence of technical viability,
  5   3   1 investments.                                     community consultation, and availability of
                                                             resources but this is only sufficient to identify
                                                             project risk ex ante.
            Approval of investment plans follows a       B   All investment application related documents are
                                                             reviewed according to a uniform process and
  5   3   2 clear process with reasonable timelines.         receive a response within 6 months of date of
                                                             submission
            Right holders and investors negotiate        C   Those holding rights to land with potential for
            freely and directly with full access to          investment have incentives to properly negotiate
  5   3   3 relevant information.                            but their rights are unclear or opportunities to
                                                             obtain relevant information or assistance do not
                                                             exist.
              Contractual provisions regarding benefit   D   The majority of contractual arrangements do not
  5   3   4                                                  include information on benefit sharing
              sharing are publicly disclosed.
Analysis of Dimension 5.3.1: Evaluation of Investment Proposal based on Information
Provided by Investor
The Managing Director, BIADA, conducts pre-screening of the applications received for
allotment of industrial land in accordance with the guidelines.
A preliminary scrutiny is made on the following criteria and weightage for each category: -
        Pre-qualifying criteria
               Net worth of investor – should be at least 20% of the proposed investment.
        Ranking criteria
               Investment size – 30%
               Investment labour ratio – 30%
               Thrust area – 10%
               Experience of the investor – 10% & to be raised to 20% as per below
               Use of eco-friendly technology – 10%
               Date of application of the investor – 10%
The Board of Directors of BIADA decides on the weightage to be given for a particular
range to each of the ranking criteria as defined above.
       Uniformity on minimum cut off marks may be decided by Project Clearing Committee
(PCC) and the same is communicated to the applications before preparation of a ranking list.
If the number of eligible applications is more than number of available plots in that category,
the PCC decides the allotments by draw of lots amongst maximum of five times of the

                                                  96
number of plots, in that category. The draw of lottery is being held by PCC, on a pre-
announced date on which the applicants are requested to be present.
Analysis of Dimension 5.3.2: Process of Approval of Investment Plan
PCC scrutinizes applications by face-to-face interactions with the applicants on the criteria of
experience of the investors, source of financing, viability of project, employment potential
etc. PCC decides on allotment of land or rejection of application(s) on the basis of
satisfaction reached during personal interaction at PCC meeting in presence of all the
members. After the decision of land allotment, the applicant has to submit Affidavit.
Allotment Letter in prescribed format is finally issued after this. On payment of cost, the
entrepreneur is handed over possession of land and unit should have to start production in
accordance with the conditions of land allotment and subsequently, lease deed shall be
executed.
    In case of non-allotment the security money is refundable by account payee Cheque. In
this regard, the appellate authority for dispute resolution is Industrial Development
Commissioner, Bihar, and Patna.
    So there is a system of approving of investment plans. This follows a clear process with
reasonable timelines. All investment application related documents are reviewed according to
a uniform process and receive a response within 6 months of date of submission
Analysis of Dimension 5.3.3: Process of Negotiation between Right Holders and
Investors
The non-availability of updated land records emerged as challenges for transfer of lands in
Bihar. There was no system to negotiate freely and directly among the right holders and
investors with full access to relevant information earlier. Sliding scale for deciding minimum
compensation of land is given in annexure 4.5.7
    In new policy government is acting as facilitator. The land owners and investors have
started negotiation freely and directly but without much relevant information. Those holding
rights to land with potential for investment have incentives to properly negotiate but their
rights are unclear due to obsolete record of rights. As the right of under raiyats and share
croppers are not recognised and surveyed properly, these act as obstacles.
Analysis of Dimension 5.3.4: Contractual provisions regarding benefit sharing
There is no system of disclosing the contractual provisions regarding benefit sharing.
Contractual provisions are also not publicly displayed.
Assessment of Indicator 5.4: Contracts are made public, easily accessible and agreements are
monitored and enforced
 Dimension
               Information on spatial extent and duration C   Spatial     information     and      temporal
                                                              information is available to relevant
  5   4    1 of approved concessions is publicly              government institutions but not accessible
               available.
                                                              on a routine basis by private parties.
                Compliance with safeguards on            C    There is little third-party monitoring of
                concessions is monitored and enforced         investors' compliance with safeguards and
  5   4     2   effectively and consistently.                 mechanisms to quickly and effectively
                                                              ensure adherence are difficult to access for
                                                              affected communities.
                Avenues to deal with non-compliance exist D   There is little third-party monitoring of
                and obtain timely and fair decisions.         investors' compliance with contractual
  5   4     3                                                 provisions and mechanisms to quickly and
                                                              effectively reach arbitration are virtually
                                                              non-existent.
Analysis of Dimension 5.4.1: Availability of Information on spatial extent and duration
of approved concessions

                                               97
It is to be noted in this regard that, comprehensive and consolidated information on spatial
extent and duration of concessions/leases is not readily available at one place. Different
departments rely on different sources of information. The information on spatial extent and
duration of approved concessions are not publicly available.
Analysis of Dimension 5.4.2: Monitoring of Compliance with safeguards on concession
There is little third-party monitoring of investors' compliance with safeguards and
mechanisms for quickly and effectively ensure adherence. Under new Land Acquisition Act,
2013 the state government has set up a Social Impact Assessment unit which can monitor the
investor compliance with safeguards and ensure its adherence.
Analysis of Dimension 5.4.3: Avenues to deal with non-compliance
There are avenues available to deal with non-compliance and obtain timely and fair decisions.
However, it is not being implemented in an effective manner rather it is a difficult task for the
authority / investors to implement it in time. Many cases for noncompliance are pending in
courts. Currently 371 industries have been closed.
         There is little third party monitoring till now. Under the new Land Acquisition Act,
the state government has set up a Social Impact Assessment unit which can monitor the
investor compliance with safeguards and ensure its adherence. Mechanism to quickly reach
arbitration, are virtually non-existent. But an Authority has been provided under the new
Land Acquisition Act.
4.5.3 CONCLUSION
In Bihar there is change in policy related to industrialisation to attract more and more
industrial investment in the state by providing a number of benefits and exemptions. The land
issue is always a crucial for large scale investment in Bihar as in the state the lands are arable,
and land holdings of farmers are small. The State Government has to go for land acquisition
for large scale investments. Land acquisition, now, being conducted under guidance of new
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013, which came into effect from 1st
January, 2014. The change in the land acquisition policy assumes significance in the wake of
wide protest by landowners over acquisition of land in different parts of the country in
general and Bihar in particular. The land acquisition is mainly implemented through the
District Land Acquisition Officer and District Magistrate. In Bihar, most of the lands
acquired in last seven years are for public purposes only. BIADA plays a crucial role
regarding transfer of land to investor. For transferring land to private investor and
requisitioning body, BIADA follows a clear and identified process which is transparent and
based on pre-fixed criteria. Each investor’s application is evaluated through predetermined
criteria and based on the information provided by the investors. This transfer is transacted at
the market prices, which is paid by the investor through one or multiple instalments. BIADA
also monitors the process of maintaining contractual obligation and non-performing and
default firms are penalised or their plot is auctioned. The main concern over the current
scenario is that the there is no formal procedure to share with local people, the benefits
arising from change in land use pattern as well as there is no provision in the policy to
improve equity in asset. There is also no system of disclosing the contractual provisions
regarding benefit sharing.
                1.       STRENGTH
1.       Adopting services standard with time line, authority and appellate authority in
         BIADA for allotment of land. The time line in providing services is strictly adhered
         to. The mechanism is widely publicised which is transparent and clear for all
         concerned.
2.       Clear and transparent process and procedure to transfer land for industrial
         development by BIADA has been developed and put in practice. The process and
                                                98
        procedures have been uploaded on the website of BIADA. The terms and conditions
        of transfers, availability of plots, market rates etc., in various industrial areas, are also
        available on website.
3.      Creating pool of landowners willing to sell their lands for public purposes at their own
        desired rate in each district and uploading them after verifications by DM, on the
        website for the information of investors.
                1.       BEST PRACTICES
   4. To ensure equity in the society by provision of homestead land, about 5.05 lakh (Dec,
        13) house-sites have been allotted to Mahadalit families from the land taken from
        Gairmazruha Aam, Gairmazruha Khas, and land purchased from raiyat to enable
        them to construct houses. Most of these lands are public land. Here also to empower
        the women and give them land rights majority of beneficiaries are women.
   5. The State has policy/ rules under which Common property resources cannot be settled
        or transferred unless there is a change in the nature / uses of land and a formal assent
        from the gram sabha. This policy has helped in protecting the common property
        resources.
   6. Earlier any wrong entry in survey records was challengeable only in Civil Court. This
        used to be long drawn process. With the passing of Bihar Land Dispute Resolution
        Act, 2009, a revenue functionary, ‘Deputy Collector Land Reforms’ can adjudicate
        cases pertaining to record of rights. Similarly, section 9 of the Mutation Act
        empowers the additional collector of a district to cancel illegal zamabandi. Thus, the
        BLDR Act and Mutation Act together have helped the raiyat/under-raiyat in getting
        land record corrected in cost effective and time effective manner.
   1. Public lands falling in municipal areas in district headquarters are extensively
        surveyed through a drive. Budgetary provision has been made to erect boundary walls
        to save these public lands from encroachment.
4.5.5 WEAKNESS
   2. Cumbersome process of general land acquisition.
   3. A large number of Investors are waiting for land allotment to start industry.
   4. Difficulty in identifying the actual title holder obstructs the process of land acquisition
        and compensation.
   5. 422 industries in industrial areas are reported to be closed. No action has been taken
        to rehabilitate them or seize their plot as mentioned in their letter of allotment.
   6. Payment of compensation for land acquired under the Land Acquisition Act and
        National Highways Authority Act are delayed, leading to litigation and delay in
        completion of projects.
4.5.6 POLICY RECOMMENDATION
4.5.6.1 Short Term
   1. Institutionalize a coordination mechanism among all departments to expedite
        approvals. Inter – institutional coordination system with all related departments, such
        as land records, land acquisition. Industries Deptt, BIADA, District Collector, Land
        Acquisition Committee and MVR committee may be constituted at district level to
        strengthen and avoid any problems and monitor the activity as a team.
2.      Ensure stakeholder participation in the process of large scale transfers of public land.
3.      Provide for third party monitoring to ensure compliance of contractual obligations by
        investor. Third party Evaluation of the benefits gained by the society due to land use
        change and compliance of the contractual obligations, by the large scale investors,
        should be planned and conducted.
4.5.6.2 Medium Term
                                                 99
   1.   Waste land / barren and uncultivable land / hill lock may be utilized for mining,
        quarrying and industrial uses. Only such land should be acquired for industrial
        purpose.
   2. Develop a system of public interface between the investor and the administration to
        sort out problems coming in the way of allotment of plots for undertaking industrial
        activities. Problem resolving system need to be put in place in each district as well as
        at the state level.
   3. Developing infrastructure in the industrial area / growth centre to enable the investor
        to start the project quickly.
   4. Finalize and enforce a rehabilitation and resettlement policy to mitigate hardships.
4.5.6.3 Long term
   1. Actual implementation of the rehabilitation policy for closed / sick industries in the
        industrial area.
   2. Strategy should be developed for standardization of MVR based on objective criteria.
        The objection received with regard to fixation of MVR should be considered. Average
        minimum and maximum sale value of a particular mauza should be taken up to
        determine MVR, instead of taking the highest sale value of mauza.




                                              100
   4.6. PUBLIC PROVISION OF LAND INFORMATION – REGISTRY
                        AND CADASTRE
4.6.1 INTRODUCTION
The land record is an important instrument to ensure right of the tenure holder. In Bihar the
record of right first created through Cadastral Survey conducted more than 100 years ago.
After that though revisional survey operation started in the decade of 1960s, it was not
successful in creation of record of rights as it covers only a portion of the state, in a large
number of districts it could not be started, even in some of the district it started but did not
complete. The present chapter shall delineate public provision of land information and the
status of registration in Bihar.
4.6.1.1 Records of Rights
To regularize the status of raiyats, Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 provides ‘record of rights’ vide
sections 101-115 and made provisions for survey of the land. On behalf of this Act, Cadastral
Survey was conducted in Bihar during 1892-1922 in the whole state and finally the Cadastral
Khatiyan was published then. The scale of map was 16” = 1 mile and in certain cases the
scale was 32”= 1 mile also. The Cadastral Khatiyan finally provided the right of the records
of a raiyat and establish right and possession of a person on the occupant land. There are
1,06000 maps in Bihar (Cadastral Survey Map-62000, Revisional Survey map-44000), out of
which 72716 nos. of maps have been scanned and digitized. The detail of progress of
digitisation has been given in following table:
Table 4.6.1: Details of digitization of cadastral survey maps as on 30th June, 2014
                                    Total              Available            Digitisation done
Cadastral Survey                   62,000                61,731                   61,006
                                                         (99.57)                 (98.83)
Revisional Survey                  44,000                39,895                   11,710
                                                         (90.67)                 (29.35)
           Total                  1,06,000              1,01,626                  72,716
                                                         (95.87)                 (71.55)
(Source: Revenue and Land Reforms Department, Government of Bihar)
Figure in bracket indicate percentage.
About 4374 numbers of maps are either damaged or not available. Department is making
arrangement to procure a copy of these maps from the concerned Circle Office/Sub-divisional
office. Maps of five districts viz. Bhabua, Buxar, Bhojpur, Patna, Nalanda have put on
website for public use.
 71.55% of maps have already been digitized. Government is making effort to complete
100% digitization of maps by December, 2014 and placing them on website.
         Cadastral maps and records presently account for all the parcels, areas and tenancy
details. Up to date records of right is essential for raiyats as well as government for necessary
policy decision and dispute resolution. Revisional survey was started in the state in 1956.
The following table will amply clarify the progress of revisional survey operation in Bihar –
Table 4.6.2: Progress of revisional survey
 Revisional survey completed         Revisional survey partly            Revisional survey not
          ( 12 districts)                    completed                         taken up
                                            (14 districts)                   (12 districts)




                                              101
Purnea, Katihar, Kishanganj, Saharsha, Supaul, Madhepura, Nalanda, Munger, Jamui,
Araria, Muzaffarpur, Vaishali, Darbhanga,         Madhubani, Lakhisarai,    Sheikhpura,
Sitamarhi, Sheohar, Bhojpur, Samastipur, Bhagalpur, Banka, Khagaria,         Begusarai,
Buxar, Kaimur, Rohtash         Gaya, Nawada, Jehanabad, Chapra, Siwan, Gopalganj,
                               Arwal, Aurangabad, Patna      East-Champaran,      West
                                                             Champaran
        Revisional survey in the above districts could not be completed due to shortage of
adequate trained man power, lack of technology, lack of resources, and non updating of land
records. Old records and old maps in these districts are the basis of ensuring right on land.
This has become a major reason for disputes over land.
        Modern surveys have also been started through aerial photography in 13 districts
namely Nalanda, Saran, Bhagalpur, Munger, Sheikpura, Begusarai, Lakhisarai, Khagaria,
Siwan, Motihari, Purnea and Katihar. Aerial photography has been completed in 7696
villages. Data processing has been started for 2033 revenue villages. Khanapuri has been
completed in 237 villages and the map has been published for one village.
   The exact number of record of rights is not available in the states. However, the number of
Kheshra was 2,98,50,807 in 32 districts of Bihar (urban and rural). There is no bifurcation of
the rural and urban RoR. The total number of Kheshra for Arwal, Sheohar, Muzaffarpur,
Nawada, Kaimur and Supaul are not readily available. The total number of villages in Bihar
is 45,769 out of which computer data entry has been made for 32616 villages. Verification of
computerized data has been done in case of 28,140 villages. Updating of data has been done
in case of 3256 villages and Kheshra panjis have been prepared for 3445 villages. The record
of rights was prepared in a number of stages i.e.
      3. Khanapuri Bujharat,
      4. Attestation,
      5. Draft Publication
      6. Hearing of objections
      7. Collection of record of rights on the basis of decision of hearing of objections,
      8. Final publication of record of rights
      9. Inviting application for correction of mistakes, if any, in the final published record
           of rights.
      At each step, there is a need for active participation of people and government officials
to make the record error free. The computerized data for these villages are accessible on the
website. Due to absence of electronic linkage, the updated data becomes outdated again.
Presently there is no system to ensure that updated data are not outdated again.
4.6.1.2 Recognition of Rights
Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 provides the occupant of the land possession holder as an
Occupancy Right on that land and he is declared a raiyat of this land. The Bihar Privileged
Person Homestead Tenancy Act, 1947, which came into force on 18th February 1948,
provides right to homeless privileged persons occupying a piece of land for homestead.
Privileged person means, a person who is not proprietor or tenure holder and who holds no
other land other than homestead land occupied by him and which does not exceed one acre.
But, it is applicable only in rural areas. Circle Officers of the Department of Revenue and
Land Reforms are Collectors under this Act and they issue Basgit Parcha to privileged
persons for homestead land. In Bihar, Government land such as gaurmazarwa malik,
gaurmazarwa aam are also settled to the weaker section of the society such as Mahadalit,
Backward class, etc. After settlement of such land, the beneficiary gets tenancy right on such
land. But some restrictions were made for the transfer of the land.

                                             102
        Transfer of land from one person to another by sale deed acquires a title in the land.
The right of the land is decided by sale deed, occupancy, inheritance, settlement, transfer and
khatiyan. When a person does not possess any documentary evidence of his possession on a
piece of land then his occupancy right is determined by the local revenue officer on the basis
of findings of spot verification. As a matter of fact, peaceful possession on land, its validation
by spot verification creates occupancy right on it. By means of Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885
under section 49(C), Chapter VIIA some restrictions over the tenants’ right have been
created, protecting their land in the case of scheduled tribes, scheduled castes and backward
classes. There is some restriction on transfer of tenant’s right. No transfer of right on tenure,
holding, tenancy by private sale, gift, will, mortgage, lease or any contract or agreement shall
be valid to any extent. But the Patna High Court in Bhager in Thakur Vs Kewal Singh
reported in BLJR 1969 page 134, rules that the restrictions imposed by section 49 (c) is only
applicable to the members of scheduled tribes.
4.6.1.3 Land Registration
Registration of land has been made mandatory since 1864. To facilitate the process of
registration in the state of Bihar there are District Registration Offices in all the District Head
Quarter and also sub-registry offices. There are 38 District Registration offices and 83 sub-
registry offices in Bihar. Registration fee, Stamp duty, landlord fee, process fee and service
charge are payable at the Registry/Sub-Registry Offices for the transfer of land. Registration
fee for registry of the land has been prescribed by the Registration Act, 1908, the stamp duty
has been determined by the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, landlord and process fee are levied
under The Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885, and the service charge by the Registration Department.
The Stamp Act has been amended several times, and the last on 15.02.2013. Registration of
land, house, flat and other immovable property by Registry Officer requires registration fees
and stamp fees which are determined by Registration Department. Landlord and process fee
is determined by the Revenue Department. Three important Acts in this regard are
Registration Act, 1908, the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 and Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 with their
subsequent amendments. Recently, Indian Stamp Act 1899 was amended on 15th February,
2013 and Bihar Stamp (Prevention of under Valuation of Instruments) Amendment Rules,
2013 on 26th March 2013.
4.6.1.4 Process of Determining Market Value of Land
Registration Department vide notification on March, 2013 made amendment in Indian Stamp
Act, 1899 (Act II of 1899) providing process for fixation of estimated minimum market value
of land and other immovable properties.
        Estimated minimum value of urban and its peripheral areas and the commercial /
residential nature of land of rural areas shall be fixed every year, and after every three years
of agricultural land in rural areas on the recommendation of the District Valuation Committee
has been established for this purpose. Estimated minimum value of different categories of
rural, urban and peripheral areas is determined on the basis of average value of conveyances
of five highest values registered in the preceding financial year plus feedback obtained from
spot verification. People have been provided the privilege of lodging their objections
regarding value of any property at the time of Draft publication and such objections have to
be looked into judicially and disposed of by the District Valuation Committee. The
committee functions under the overall guidance and supervision of Central Valuation
Committee constituted at the state level. The Central Valuation Committee includes Principal
Secretary /Secretary, Registration, Excise and Prohibition and Inspector General of the same
department as Chairman and Vice-Chairman, respectively. The District Collectors have been
made Chairman of District Valuation Committee. Central Committee, time to time,
scrutinizes & supervises estimate of minimum value.
                                               103
         Inspector General determines the classification of land of rural areas for fixation of
minimum market value of land. The Chairman of the Central Valuation Committee may,
under the recommendation of the Committee, order the District Valuation Committee for
specific revision of Estimated Minimum Value in any specific area for (i) Setting up of
Industrial Estate (ii) large scale housing project (ii) any other specific circumstances having
impact on value of immovable property.
4.6.1.5 Unilateral Registration
In Bihar, many flats / houses, constructed by the builders, were not registered for years
together due to disputes amongst the builders and purchasers / death of builders /
disappearance of builders or due to certain reasons. With a view to give relief to such
harassed purchasers, the government through the Bihar Apartment Act, 2006, notified in
2006-07 that such aggrieved people can apply to Patna Municipal Authority giving a copy of
the agreement and proof of making the entire payment for purchase. On receipt of such
applications, the municipal authority has given permission, after verification, to the owner for
unilateral registration of the flat / house with a copy to registry office, to make unilateral
registry. This unique approach has helped many people in the state.
4.6.1.6 Registration at the door steps
The Registration Department in Patna started a unique practice of registration at door step, in
2006. A camp was organized by the registry office in various localities of Patna town after
giving proper publicity and registration was done in the camp.
4.6.1.7 Service Standard
In Bihar, initiative has been taken to provide prompt service to people in a transparent way
without harassment. Under the Right to Public Services Act, 2011 citizen charter of
Registration Department has been prepared and it gets displayed in all Registry Offices. Here
it is to be noted that non-compliance of the standards attracts fine and that should be deducted
from the person responsible. Till now, in Bihar, two Registry Officers (Bhagalpur,
Muzaffarpur) have been fined for non-compliance of the Act.
4.6.2 ASSESSMENT of DIMENSION
Assessment of Indicator 6.1: Mechanisms for recognition of rights
Dimension
      Land possession by the poor can be              C    There is a clear, practical process for the formal
                                                           recognition of possession but this process is not
6 1 1 formalized in line with local norms in               implemented       effectively,    consistently   or
      an efficient and transparent process.                transparently.
            Non-documentary evidence is                C   Non-documentary forms of evidence are used to
            effectively used to help establish rights.     obtain recognition of a claim to property along
                                                           with other documents (e.g. tax receipts or informal
6 1 2                                                      purchase notes) when other forms of evidence are
                                                           not available. They have less strength than the
                                                           documents provided.
            Long-term unchallenged possession is      C    Legislation exists to formally recognize long-term,
            formally recognized.                           unchallenged possession but due to the way this
6 1 3                                                      legislation is implemented, formal recognition is
                                                           granted to very few or no applicants for
                                                           recognition on either public or private land.
      First-time recording of rights on      C             On-demand recording of rights includes proper
6 1 4 demand includes proper safeguards and                safeguards to prevent abuse and costs do not
                                                           exceed 5% of the property value.
      access is not restricted by high fees.




                                              104
Analysis of Dimension 6.1.1: Formalization of Land Possession by the Poor
There is a clear, practical process for the formal recognition of possession, but this process
has not been implemented effectively. The process includes document and physical
verification based on formal or informal evidences. It can be formalized through the Acts i.e.
Bihar Tenancy Act and Bihar Privileged Person Homestead Tenancy Act. Land allotted to the
poor people under Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy Act, Ceiling Act and
Bhoodan Yagya Samitties Act is non-transferable. Giving possession is difficult, even
dispossession takes place. Though provision exists, but there are lots of gaps in
implementation.
Analysis of Dimension 6.1.2: Non-Documentary Evidence to Establish Rights.
Non-documentary form of evidence is used for obtaining recognition of a claim to land or
property along with other documents i.e. tax payment receipt, land rent payment receipt,
patta allotted by the government in case if other form of evidences are not available. But non
documentary proof does not have conclusive evidence. They have less strength than the
documents and hence it takes lots of time in recognition of claim. Persons have to go through
quasi-judicial / judicial process which is time consuming and costly. These evidences are
regarded as collateral evidences
         In legal parlance, the long term unchallenged possession is termed as adverse
possession. In private land such adverse possession does not create or extinguish the title over
the land but in public land adverse possession makes a difference as to decide the factum of
the title. Circulars have been issued from time to time by the State Government to regularise,
or not to regularise those long term unchallenged possession.
Analysis of Dimension 6.1.3: Formal Recognition of Long-term Unchallenged Possession
In Bihar legislation exists to formally recognize long-term, unchallenged possession. But due
to the way this legislation is implemented, formal recognition is granted to very few or no
applicants for recognition on either public or private land.
         Continuous possession for 12 years gives the people the right on land subject to
satisfactory documentary proof to establish 12 years or more possession. This is known as the
principle of adverse possession and well recognized under the civil law. But for this purpose
also people have to go through quasi judicial / judicial mechanism.
Analysis of Dimension 6.1.4: First-Time Recording of Rights on Demand
Record of rights is generally prepared through Survey. In this regard, it may be noted that,
record of rights, whether first time or second time, is done only when people approach for
registry / mortgage and, accordingly applicable registration fee and stamp duty are charged.
Record of rights can be corrected and created by decree of Civil Court. Completion of record
of rights requires mutation. On demand, recording of rights includes proper safeguard to
prevent abuse in limited case i.e. under section 6 (1) of Bihar Agriculture Credit and
Miscellaneous Act. In other cases, although there is a general lien of banks on the property,
but that does not include safeguard to prevent abuse. On-demand recording of rights does not
include proper safeguards to prevent abuse. Average cost does not exceed 5% of the property
value.
Assessment of Indicator 6.2: Completeness of the land registry
Dimension
      Total cost of recording a property D                The total cost for recording a property transfer is
6 2 1                                                     equal to or greater than 5% of the property value.
      transfer is low.
                                                          More than 90% of records for privately held land
      Information held in records is linked to A
6 2 2                                                     recorded in the registry are readily identifiable in
      maps that reflect current reality                   maps (spatial records).
                                                          Relevant private encumbrances are recorded but
6 2 3 All relevant private encumbrances are C             this is not done in a consistent and reliable
                                              105
       recorded                                            manner.
                                                           Relevant public restrictions or charges are
       All relevant public           restrictions   or C
 6 2 4                                                     recorded but this is not done in a consistent and
       charges are recorded.                               reliable manner.
                                                           Copies or extracts of documents recording rights
       There is a timely response to requests B
 6 2 5                                                     in property can generally be obtained within 1
       for accessing registry records                      week of request.
                                              A            The records in the registry can be searched by
 6 2 6 The registry is searchable.                         both right holder name and parcel.
                                                      B    Copies or extracts of documents recording rights
                                                           in property can only be obtained by
           Land information records are easily
 6 2 7                                                     intermediaries and those who can demonstrate an
           accessed.                                       interest in the property upon payment of the
                                                           necessary formal fee, if any.
 Analysis of Dimension 6.2.1: Cost of Recording of Property Transfer
In Bihar the cost of recording property transfer is greater than 5% of the value of property. In
urban areas – Registry fee, 2% + stamp duty 6% + 2% additional stamp duty for ULBs. In
Rural areas – Registry fee – 2% + stamp duty 6%. Besides, Rs. 150-500/- is charged per
deed as landlord and process fee and Rs.25/- per page is charged for scanning of documents.
So the cost of property transfer is not low in Bihar.
        The registration fee / stamp duty / other fees and charges applicable on various types
of deed are given in the annexure 4.7.1
        As per the Govt. of India directives, the stamp duty should not be more than 5% but
Bihar is still charging 6 percent. The total cost for recording the property transfer is greater
than 8% of the property value. There are certain exemptions towards stamp duty to revive
weak industry and promote IT and Communication Industry and provide relief to poor
people. There is waiver of registration fees and stamp duty for agriculture loan up to Rs. 5
lakhs under industrial policy incentive and communication and technology policy initiative
and waiver of stamp duty and registration fees on the transfer of three decimal lands to
Mahadalits of the state.
Analysis of Dimension6.2.2: Linking of Land Records
In Bihar more than 90% of the records of privately held land recorded in the registry are
readily identifiable in the maps. However, the information held in records has not been
linked to maps in Bihar as yet. Registration offices have not been linked with Circle Offices.
Registration offices should be also linked with Circle Offices so as the mutation of
transferred land can be done by Circle Offices in a short period. Computerization of Registry
offices has been made a very easy system to obtain sale deeds on the day of registration itself.
Presently, mutation process is being conducted by circle offices, which takes minimum 15 to
30 days. When Circle offices are linked with registry offices, it will take one to two days in
such process.
    Information of privately held land is recorded in the registry are identifiable in the map.
However, there is no system to mention the name of land holder in the map. Khesra (Plot)
numbers are provided on the map, on basis of which the record in registry is identifiable on
the map. To mention the name of current owner, in the land record, mutation is required.
    After computerization of Anchal records, the transfer of land vide registry offices may
become up-to-date & the records like Jamabandi, Rent Roll etc becomes visible in general.
Computerization of Circle Office shall facilitate the linking of database of registration office
and Circle office. This will enable the Circle Office to take data of transfer on daily basis and
update the mutation records. So government should take immediate steps to streamline the
computerization of Circle Offices and connect it with Registry Offices.

                                              106
Analysis of Dimension 6.2.3: Status of Recording of Private Encumbrances
Certain classes of documents are not compulsorily registrable such as Partition deed approved
by the court or revenue offices, inheritance, will, oral gift by Mohamedans. Hence they do
not become the part of registration office data base. Thus the non encumbrance certificate
does not reflect the above transfer. If people transfer/offer land as security and comes for
registry, encumbrances are recorded. Otherwise encumbrances are not recorded. Some
private encumbrances are recorded but this is not done in a consistent and reliable manner.
Analysis of Dimension 6.2.4: Recording of Public Restrictions or Charges
All Public restrictions are not recorded. About 60-70% of public restrictions are recorded.
Although the state has been authorized to prohibit the registration of such documents which
are against the public policy under Section 22 (A) of the Registration Act but the provision
made under this section by Rajasthan, Karnataka and Madras has been struck down by the
apex court in the state of Rajasthan Vs Basnath Mahto case reported in AIR 2005. The
charges are recorded in deed. Relevant public restriction or charges was not recorded in
Registry deed earlier. The government has started sending information regarding the land
under acquisition/government land to registry office/DCLR Office. The same can be verified
at Registry/DCLR office at very nominal cost by interested party. All the charges /fees are
recorded in the deed itself.
Analysis of Dimension 6.2.5: Accessing Registry Records
Since 2006 all the registry offices had been computerized and the server was linked with
main server of the Registry Department. All registry records of 2006 onwards can be seen on
bhumijankari.com.
    The registry records prior to 2006 can be accessed manually. However, the digitization of
registry records from 1995 to 2005 is in an advanced stage and is likely to be completed soon.
There is timely response to requests for accessing registry records as per service standard
prescribed by government. Time limit for various services prescribed by the government is as
under: -
    Non – encumbrance certificate – 3-14 working days
    Search and copy work - 7 working days
    Search fee – Rs. 40/- for first year for every name and Rs. 20/- for subsequent year per
year.
    Rs. 20/- for Inspection of document per year.
Analysis of Dimension 6.2.6: Searching of Registry
Registry is searchable in Bihar. All the registry offices have been computerized and the
server was linked with the main server of the registry department since 2006. All registry
records of 2006 onwards can be seen on bhumijankari.com. The registry records prior to 2006
and 1995 onwards may also be seen on bhumijankari.com soon as the digitization of records
from 1995 to 2005 is in its final stage of completion. The record of rights maintained and
publically known as Book-1 categorically shows the details of land parcels and the land
holder’s name
Analysis of Dimension 6.2.7: Accessibility of Land Information Records
Copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property can only be obtained by
concerned party and intermediaries and by those who are interested in the property upon
payment of the necessary formal fee.
Assessment of Indicator 6.3: Reliability: registry information is updated and sufficient
to make meaningful inferences on ownership
Dimension
6 3       1    Information in public registries is B Links are in place for all types of public land
                                               107
                synchronized to ensure integrity of        information registries but checks on the
                rights and reduce transaction cost.        legitimacy of transactions that affects certain
                                                           parties' land rights are only performed ex post.
                                                           Between 70% and 90% of the ownership
                 Registry information is up-to-date B
6 3       2                                                information in registry/cadastre is up-to-date
                 and reflects ground reality.              and reflects ground reality..
Analysis of Dimensions 6.3.1: Synchronisation of Information in Public Registries
After 100% computerization of registry office in 2006, the links are in place for all types of
public land / private land registries done after 2006 onwards. Since 2006 onward registry
information is up-to-date and reflects ground reality. From 1995 to 2005 registry information
is likely to be up-to-dated soon. The records are being scanned and put up on the network.
Before 1995 the registry information had to be searched manually. Mandatory checks are
performed to ensure legitimacy of any transaction that affects certain party land right before
they can be finalized. However, since land records are neither fully computerized nor updated
in circle offices and not interlinked with the registry offices; it is difficult to ensure
legitimacy. Thus legitimacy of transactions that affects certain parties' land rights is only
performed ex-post. It has been observed that the ffraudulent cases are minimal.
Analysis of Dimension 6.3.2: Updating Registry Information
It has been observed that the registry information is up to date and to some extent it reflects
ground reality.
Indicator 6.4: Cost-effectiveness and sustainability: land administration services are
provided in a cost-effective manner
Dimension
                The     registry     is   financially   The total fees collected by the registry exceed the
                sustainable through fee collection to   total registry operating costs. (Total operating
6 4       1     finance its operations.               A costs include all non-capital investment costs (i.e.
                                                        salaries and wages, materials, transportation, etc.)
                                                                associated with registry operating costs.)
                Investment in land administration is Investment in human and physical is sufficient to
6 4       2     sufficient to cope with demand for B maintain high service standards but does not allow
                                                     for proactively responding to future needs and new
                high quality services.               developments in the sector.
Analysis of Dimension 6.4.1: Financially Viability and Sustainability of Registry
In Bihar, the Registry Department charges 2 percent registry charge and 8/6 percent stamp
duty to make the system financially sustainable. The total fee collected by registry from
registration fee and stamp duty exceeds operating costs of registration (registry department
expenditure). Collection of revenue was 39.27 times higher than the revenue spent on
administrative expenditure in the year 2012-13. The details for revenue earned and
expenditure of the Registration Department in Bihar during eight years have been given
below in table.
Table 4.6.3: Revenue and Expenditure of Registration Department, Government of
Bihar

                                                                                   Annual
                                        Revenue Receipt (in crore)                             Proportion of
                                                                               expenditure of
  SI.                No. of deed                                                               expenditure in
      Financial year                                                             registration
  No.                registered                                                                  respect of
                                                                                 department
                                                                                                  revenue
                                     Registration                               (Rs. in crore)
                                                  Stamp fee          Total
                                         fee
   1      2004-05       989859           88.04         387.26        475.3           NA                  -
   2      2005-06       1004264          93.82         459.75       553.57           NA                  -
                                                 108
                                                                               Annual
                                        Revenue Receipt (in crore)                         Proportion of
                                                                           expenditure of
  SI.                No. of deed                                                           expenditure in
      Financial year                                                         registration
  No.                registered                                                              respect of
                                                                             department
                                                                                              revenue
                                     Registration                           (Rs. in crore)
                                                  Stamp fee       Total
                                         fee
   3      2006-07        883491         114.17         410.63     524.8         NA               -
   4      2007-08        909283         158.75          536      694.75        28.59          24.30
   5      2008-09        889798         169.77         600.88    770.65        33.39          23.08
   6      2009-10       1000847         241.12         906.83    1147.95       40.81          28.13
   7      2010-11        992540         228.3          1018.14   1246.44       36.68          33.98
   8      2011-12       1018655         308.13         1301.87    1610         45.69          35.24
   9      2012-13        925695            -              -      1619.3        41.24          39.27
(Source: Department of Registration, Govt. of Bihar)
         The table clearly indicates that the total fees collected by the registry exceeded the
total registry operating costs. [Total operating costs include all non-capital investment costs
(i.e. salaries and wages, materials, transportation, etc.) associated with registry operating
costs.]
         The registry office also charges Rs. 25/- per page on documents of transfer and Rs.
20/- per page for scanning of other deeds. The department gets sufficient fund from this
scanning operation and to maintain computerization and infrastructure in the department. Due
to this unique self sustaining model the Registration Department of Bihar got Prime
Minister’s Award for excellence in public administration for the year 2007-08.
         The table clearly indicates that the total fees collected by the registry exceed the total
registry operating costs. [Total operating costs include all non-capital investment costs (i.e.
salaries and wages, materials, transportation, etc.) associated with registry operating costs.]
         In all the District Registration offices, ‘May I help you’ Booths have been established
which provides to the registrant people the necessary information regarding the enclosures
required to be attached with a document and also amount of stamp duty as well as registration
and other miscellaneous fees chargeable on different kinds of documents. One may also
obtain the standard format of sale / mortgage / etc. and after the filling of the format with
required data, attaching all enclosures and paying the stamp duty and registration fees even
the seller may himself be able to get his sale deed registered without the help of scriber.
         One may also obtain the standard format of sale / mortgage / etc. and after the filling
of the format with required data, attaching all enclosures and paying the stamp duty and
registration fees. Even the seller himself may be able to get his sale deed registered without
the help of scribe.
Analysis of Dimension 6.4.2: Investment in Land Administration
Investment in human resources and physical infrastructure is sufficient to maintain high
service standards but does not allow for proactively responding to future needs and new
developments in the sector. The department has evolved a novel way of charging Rs. 25/- per
page for the deed of transfers and Rs. 20/- per page for other deeds scanning and investing
them in land administration to cope-up with demand for high quality service.
Assessment of Indicator: 6.5: Fees are determined transparently to cover the cost of
service provision
 Dimension
                                                 109
                Fees have a clear rationale, their A     A clear rationale and schedule of fees for
6 5       1     schedule is public, and all payments     different services is publicly accessible and
                                                         receipts are issued for all transactions.
                are accounted for.
                Informal payments are discouraged. B     Mechanisms to detect and deal with illegal
                                                         staff behavior exist in all registry offices but
6 5       2                                              cases are not systematically or promptly dealt
                                                         with.
                Service standards are published and A    There are published service standards
                regularly monitored.                     (including dealing with illegal staff
6 5       3                                              behavior), the registry actively monitors its
                                                         performance against these standards and
                                                         results are public.
Analysis of Dimension 6.5.1: Rationale for the Fee
In Bihar, the registry fee has a clear rationale, their schedule is public and all payments are
accounted for. The fee schedule has been made public by way of notification in the gazette.
Even in determination of circle rates of different kinds of land & structures, people have been
given facility to 10 days to make observation and complaint on the draft publication. All
payments are accounted for and mentioned on front of deed. The stamp duty in the state is
higher. Government of India has fixed maximum limited of 5% of stamp duty. In Bihar it is
6%.
        The rationale behind determining fees and other charges is to make the registry office
self sustained. Affordability, providing high class services and revenue generation are other
components for rationality of present fee structure.
        Exemption has been provided for the following priority area.
1.      100% waiver of stamp duty and registration fee for agriculture loan upto 5 lakhs, for
        easy access of affordable credit to farmers.
2.      100% exemption of registration fees and stamp duty under Bihar Industrial Incentive
        Policy 2001 and Information and Communication Technology Policy 2011, with a
        view to promote industrialization and IT Sector in the state.
The schedule of registry fee and stamp duty has been made public by notification in gazette
and uploading them on website.
Analysis of Dimension 6.5.2: Informal Payments
Though there is mechanism to detect and deal with staff behaviour exists in all registry
offices, but the cases are not systematically dealt with. Model deeds for generally resettable
documents have been prepared by the department and it is available at all registry offices to
avoid intermediaries. Mechanism to detect and deal with illegal staff behavior exists in all
registry offices.
        Fee schedule has been made public. Notices have been displayed in notice board to
not to make any illegal payment. Contact details of competent authority made public to
contact in case of need. Vigilance cases are being registered.
Analysis of Dimension 6.5.3: Service Standard
Service standard has been framed under Right to Public Service Act 2011. Designated public
servant, appellate authority and reviewing authority have been identified for each service and
publicly displayed on website. Maximum time limit for delivery of identified services varies
from 1 to 15 working days depending upon the kind of services. The maximum time for
appellate authority is 15 working days. Maximum time limit for reviewing authority is 21
working days. Regular monitoring is being done by the competent authority. Disposal rate is
very high under the service standard. Within short span, two Registry Officers (Bhagalpur
and Muzaffarpur) have been punished with Rs. 5000/- each for not fulfilling service standard
4.6.3 CONCLUSION

                                             110
In Bihar the record of right is a matter of concern. A significant section of RoR is outdated, as
after the Cadastral Survey, which concluded almost 100 years ago, there is gap in updating
land record with survey and settlement operations. Though the Revisional Survey started in
the decade of 1960s but it had been completed in only 12 districts, started but not completed
in 14 districts and in 12 districts it was not initiated. Even where it was completed it took
long time so the data became obsolete. Though the computerisation of land data has been
initiated in the state but they are digitising the old data which has little relevance with the
ground reality. However, the process and procedure of Land registration in Bihar is quite
praiseworthy. There are 100 percent self sustaining models of computerization of registry
under Registry Department and the department follows strict service standards. In Bihar the
Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 provides the occupant of the land possession holder as an
Occupancy Right on that land and he is declared a raiyat of this land and the Bihar Privileged
Person Homestead Tenancy Act, 1947 provides right to homeless privileged persons
occupying a piece of land for homestead. There is a clear, practical process for the formal
recognition of possession in Bihar, but it gets criticized for gap in implementation. There are
efforts to establish right to the persons having no formal documents. Though the non
documentary proof does not have conclusive evidence and they have less strength than the
documents and takes lot of time in recognition of claim yet non-documentary form of
evidence is used to obtain recognition of a claim to land or property through quasi-judicial /
judicial process. In Bihar, legislation exists to formally recognize long-term, unchallenged
possession. But due to the way this legislation is implemented, formal recognition is granted
to very few or no applicants for recognition on either public or private land. The cost of
registry is higher in Bihar compared to other states. But government provides several
exemptions towards weaker section and to promote industry in the state. Though the Registry
Offices have been computerized, yet lack of infrastructure and absence of updated data in
Circle Offices appear as constraint to linking up the data of local Registry Offices with Circle
Office. However, the data related to registry can be accessed in the internet, even if
providing hard copy of documents from Registry Offices, the service standard is followed. In
Bihar, the registry fee has a clear rationale, their schedule is public and all payments are
accounted for. The fee schedule has been made public by way of notification in the gazette.
However, the stamp duty in the state is higher, as Government of India has fixed maximum
limited of 5% of stamp duty, which is 5% in Bihar. The main concerns are non-linking of
registration computerization with circle office to facilitate automatic mutation and difficulties
in searching registration record prior to 2006 i.e. prior to computerization of registry.
4.6.4 STRENGTH
   3. The state has 100 percent self sustaining model of computerization of registration.
        This initiative received Prime Minister’s Award. Rs. 25 per page on the deed of
        transfer and Rs. 20 on all other deed for scanning of documents is being charged and
        invested to meet operational cost of computerization of registry office.
   4. Prescription and strict implementation of service standards have been ensured in the
        state. Two Officers at Bhagalpur, Muzaffarpur have been penalised with Rs. 5000/-
        each for non fulfilment of the service standards requirement.
   5. One time arrangement of camp for registry at the door step in different ward / area
        was organized by giving prior information.
   6. Waiver of registration fees and stamp duty for agriculture loan up to Rs. 5 lakhs,
        under Industrial Policy Incentive, Communication and Technology Policy Incentive
        for promoting agriculture, industry and information technology.
   7. Waiver of stamp duty and registration fees on the transfer of three decimal lands to
        Mahadalits of the state.
                                              111
4.6.5 BEST PRACTICES
   8. Model for 100% computerization of the registry office
       100% of the offices of the Registration Department of the state have been
       computerised through a process of self sustaining model. The registration office is
       charging fee for scanning all documents/deeds. The department gets sufficient fund
       from this scanning operation to maintain computerization and infrastructure in the
       department. The Registration Department received Prime Minister’s Award for this
       innovative model.
   9. Unilateral Registration
       In Bihar, many flats / houses, constructed by the builders, were not registered for
       years together due to disputes amongst the builders and purchasers / death of builders
       / disappearance of builders or due to certain other reasons. With a view to give relief
       to such harassed purchasers, the government through the Bihar Apartment Act, 2006,
       notified in 2006-07 that such aggrieved people can apply to Patna Municipal
       Authority for permission for unilateral registration by giving a copy of the agreement
       and proof of making the entire payment for purchase. On receipt of such applications,
       the municipal authority has given permission, after verification, to the owner for
       unilateral registration of the flat / house with a copy to registration office, to make
       unilateral registration. This unique approach has helped many aggrieved people in the
       state. Simultaneously state has received good revenue from stamp duty and
       registration fees. Municipalities were also benefitted by getting taxes from the flat
       owners.
   10. Registration at the door steps
       The registration department in Patna started a unique practice of registration at door
       step, in 2006. Camp was organized by the registration office in various localities in
       Patna town after giving proper publicity and registration was done in the camp. A lot
       of people were benefitted by this innovative approach of the department.
   11. Implementation of service standard
       The state government has prescribed the service standard for each of the activities of
       the Registration Department. Service standards are clear, effective and transparent.
       The Designated Public Servant provides the service notified to the person, eligible to
       obtain the service, within the stipulated time limit or reject the application. In case of
       rejection of application, they will record the reason in writing and intimate the
       applicant. Any person, whose application is neither rejected nor provided with the
       service within the stipulated time limit, may file an appeal to the Appellate Authority
       within thirty days from the date of rejection of application or the expiry of the
       stipulated time limit. The Designated Public Servant or the aggrieved Applicant, after
       the order of the Appellate Authority, may make a second appeal within 60 (sixty) days
       from the date of that order to the Reviewing Authority. If the Appellate Authority is
       of the opinion that the Designated Public Servant has failed to provide service within
       the time limit without sufficient and reasonable cause, he / she may be imposed a
       lump sum penalty, at the rate specified from time to time, as prescribed in the rules.
       Within a short span, two registration officers (Bhagalpur, Muzaffarpur) have already
       been punished @Rs. 5000/- each for not fulfilling the service standards. This has
       created a sense of accountability amongst the officials of Registration Department and
       people are getting services quickly from the department.
   12. Alternate Payment Mechanism for various Fees
       Special provision for depositing the amount of stamp duty, by special Challan, in
       designated branch of the Bank near the registration office has been introduced in the
                                              112
        state. Under Challan system people have been provided options either to pay full
        stamp duty through Challan or through printed stamp or partly through Challan and
        partly through printed stamp. The registration and miscellaneous fees is being paid by
        the parties through Challan only. This has provided registrant an additional mode of
        payment for stamp duty which can prevent them from being cheated from fake
        stamps. The Registration Department mentions the stamp duty and registration fees
        paid on the deeds.
4.6.6 WEAKNESSS
   13. Charging stamp duty of 6 percent against the maximum prescribed limit of 5 percent
        by Government of India.
   14. Non-linking of registration computerization with circle office to facilitate automatic
        mutation.
   15. Difficulties in searching registration record prior to 2006 i.e. prior to computerization
        of registry.
   16. Land value in MVR is being inflated every year due to adoption of average of 5
        highest registry deeds. This makes many economic activities unviable.
4.6.7 POLICY RECOMMENDATION
4.6.7.1 Short Term
   1. E-Linking of registration data on computer with the circle office, to be initiated to
        facilitate automatic mutations and updation of records on transfer of land.
2.      Scanning of old records prior to 2006 and placing them on the computer network, to
        be completed expeditiously.
4.6.7.2 Medium Term
   1. The State Government should reduce the stamp duty to make land registration
        affordable and bring it at par with other states. The stamp duty should not be more
        than 5 percent.
   2. Cases of inheritance, partition, sale certificate, mortgage by deposit of title deeds, oral
        gift etc. should be brought within the ambit of compulsorily registrable document so
        as to reflect their impact in the encumbrance certificate issued by the registry office.
3.      The Government should gradually do away with the use of stamp paper altogether and
        adopt the system of depositing stamp duty by Challan, in designated banks.
4.6.7.3 Long Term
4.      In registration, the transfer of title is presumptive, not exclusive. Steps should be
        initiated to transfer the exclusive /absolute title on the lines of Karnataka state.
        Accordingly, Registration Act should be amended and strategy should be developed
        to verify title before registration, by an expert appointed/empanelled, for this purpose.
        Thereafter, Electronic data base on transfer of land would help in updating the land
        record even after sale/transfer.
1.      Model Land Titling Bill framed by the DOLR / MORD may be considered for
        adoption with suitable modification.




                                              113
                    4.7. LAND VALUATION AND TAXATION
4.7.1 INTRODUCTION
Land has emerged as a crucial element in all kinds of developmental activities. Proper
valuation of land has significant impact upon socio-economic development of concerned
economy. Proper valuation of land is important in the context of making a transfer, exchange,
gift, sale and mortgage etc of the concerned piece of land. Rent of the land also gets fixed on
the valuation of land.
4.7.1.1 Land Rent
Before the abolition of zamindari, land revenue was the chief source of income for the State.
According to tenancy law, rent is the first charge on the land. Under section 3(5) of the Bihar
Tenancy Act, 1885 rent means whatever is lawfully payable or deliverable in money or kind
by a tenant to his landlord on account of the use or occupation on the land held by the tenant.
The rent on land is chargeable from very ancient period in India and in Bihar as well.
4.7.1.2 Valuation and Taxation of Land
Minimum Market Value Registers (MVR) for various types of land / building / flats based on
their location and use have been prepared and regularly revised and updated at district level
by a committee headed by District Magistrate. There are gaps in awareness among rural
people on the methodology of computing MVR. Valuation of land based on MVR is also
applicable for land acquisition for calculating compensation. The multiple of rate mentioned
in MVR is paid as compensation. There is no separate method for computing value of land
for land acquisition purpose. Registration fees are also determined based on MVR.
         The process of property valuation based on Annual Rental Value (ARV) located on
different types of roads and different uses are very clear. The holding tax in urban area is 2.5
percent of the ARV.
         The assessment of value of land/property for tax or compensation purposes reflects
market prices, but differences between recorded values and market prices across different
uses and types of users were also reported / observed.
         Valuation roll is publically accessible at every registry office / municipality / website
of municipality at Patna and Muzaffarpur / website of Registration Department. There is clear
process of property valuation, but the practical implementation is deficient.
         Valuation of land is determined for the purpose of registration of land. Transfer of
land through registration started in second half of the 18th Century. At present registration
fees and stamp fees are major sources of revenue of the state government. Keeping in view
the importance of this department in Bihar, Registration department became a separate
department in 1991. Before this date it was a part of the Department of Revenue and Land
Reforms.
         The registration of land is executed in accordance with the provision of the Indian
Registration Act, 1908. Transaction of any part of land or immovable property or non-
testamentary instruments, which acknowledge the receipt or payment of any consideration on
account of the creation, declaration, assignment, limitation or extinction of any such right,
title or interest, except the state government may by notification exempt, have been made
compulsory under section 17 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908.
4.7.1.3 Property Tax by Municipal Bodies
                                               114
In order to provide civic services to the citizens of the city, the Patna Municipal Corporation
(PMC) came into existence on 15th August, 1952 but earlier it was called as Patna City
Municipality, which was constituted by a resolution of Governor of Bengal in Council under
“District Municipal Act, 1864. (Bengal Act, III of 1864) on 1st November, 1864.
        The Bihar and Orissa Act, 1922, previously governed Patna. Later on it came under
the PMC Act, 1951. New rules were framed in 1993, under the Patna Municipal Corporation
Act 1951 wherein area linked systems of taxation were introduced. Again the Bihar
Municipal Act, 2007, promulgated which governs all the municipal bodies.
         In the Bihar and Orissa Municipal Act, 1922, the power to review the Municipal tax
was vested with “Review Committee”, consisting of two Ward Commissioners and two tax
payers of the municipality nominated or elected in the prescribed manner by the
Commissioners at a meeting, and one Deputy Magistrate nominated by the District
Magistrate on this behalf, provided that no Commissioner or tax payers shall be a member of
the Committee appointed to hear applications of review from the Ward was elected and that
three members shall form the quorum of the Review Committee meeting. But in the PMC
Act, 1951, the power to review the tax was vested in the Chief Executive Officer. The same
provision has been replicated in the Bihar Municipal Act, 2007 in which Power of Review
has been vested in the Chief Executive Officer of the PMC.
The government has made amendment in the property tax provision and the new rules known
as Bihar Municipal Property Tax (Assessment, Collection and Recovery rules 2013) has been
promulgated by Governor on 8th May, 2013. So far as the collection of this tax is concerned,
the collection of tax has improved gradually which can be observed from the following tables
of one municipality i.e. Patna Municipal Corporation.
4.7.2 ASSESSMENT OF DIMENSION
Assessment of Indicator 7.1: Transparency of valuations: valuations for tax and
compensation purposes are based on clear principles, applied uniformly, updated
regularly, and publicly accessible
Dimension
                There is a clear process of B          The assessment of land/property for tax or
                property valuation.                    compensation purposes reflects market prices, but
                                                       there are significant differences between recorded
7 1       1                                            values and market prices across different uses and
                                                       types of users; valuation rolls are updated
                                                       regularly
                Valuation rolls     are   publicly B   There is a policy that valuation rolls be publicly
7 1       2     accessible                             accessible and this policy is effective for most of
                                                       the properties that are considered for taxation.
Analysis of Dimension 7.1.1: Process of Property Valuation
The process of property valuation is done by the district level concerned committee.
Minimum Market value registers for various types of land / building / flats based on their
location and use have been prepared and regularly revised and updated at district level by the
committee headed by District Magistrate.
    The process of property valuation based on Annual Rental Value (ARV) located on
different types of roads and different uses are very clear. The holding tax in urban area is 2.5
percent of the ARV. The assessment of value of land/property for tax or compensation
purposes reflects market prices, but differences between recorded values and market prices
across different uses and types of users were also reported / observed.
    Valuation roll is publically accessible at every registry office / municipality / website of
municipality at Patna and Muzaffarpur / website of Registration Department. Though there is
clear process of property valuation, but the practical implementation is deficient.

                                              115
4.7.2.2 Accessibility of Valuation Roll
There is policy for preparation of valuation rolls and are being displayed in the office of the
District Registrar and Sub-Registrar for most of the property. Holding Tax for each fiscal
year becomes due on 1st April of each Fiscal year.
        Generally Municipality publishes, in local newspapers, the applicable rates and the
method of computation of Holding Tax, which shall be payable in advance before 30th June
of each fiscal year. Five percent rebate on total Property Tax is given to such holdings /
property that adopts the technology and structure for rain water harvesting.
Assessment of Indicator 7.2: Collection efficiency: land and property taxes are collected
and the yield from doing so exceeds collection cost
Dimension
7 2       1     Exemptions from property taxes A There are limited exemptions to the
                payment are justified and transparent. payment of land/property taxes, and the
                                                              exemptions that exist are clearly based on
                                                              equity or efficiency grounds and applied in
                                                              a transparent and consistent manner.
7 2       2     All property holders liable to pay C          Between 50% and 70% of property holder
                property tax are listed on the tax roll.      liable for land/property tax are listed on the
                                                              tax roll.
7 2       3     Assessed property taxes are collected.    B   Between 70% and 80% of assessed land/
                                                              property taxes are collected.
7 2       4     Receipts from property tax exceed the C       The amount of property taxes collected is
                cost of collection                            between 1 and 3 times cost of staff in charge
                                                              of collection.
Analysis of Dimension 7.2.1: Justification of Exemption
There are limited exemptions on the payment of land/property taxes and the exemptions that
exist are clearly based on equity or efficiency grounds and applied in a transparent and
consistent manner. The examples are, stamp duty and registration fee waiver for agriculture
loans upto 5 lakhs, under Industrial Policy incentive and under Communication and IT
policy.
    All dwelling units located in the slums and having a plinth area of less than 250 square
feet have been exempted from the payment of holding tax.
    State and Central Government offices, other than the commercial establishments and
undertakings are exempted from payment of holding tax, but are liable for payment of a
service charge which will be 75 percent of the normal holding tax under which such offices /
establishments are liable to pay under the rules.
    Places, centres and institutions of spiritual/religious nature are fully exempted from
payment of holding tax.
    In rural areas, remission of land rent is done in cases of natural calamities where the crop
damaged is more than stipulated as per crop cutting experiment and declaration of Anawari
by Government.
Analysis of Dimension 7.2.2: Enlisting of Property Holder for Payment of Property Tax
The coverage ratio of assessment of property tax in Bihar has been poor which can be evident
from the coverage ratio of one municipal corporation i.e. Patna Municipal Corporation as on
30th October, 2012.
PMC estimates of total number of holdings in Patna                    -      5 lacs
Electric connection in Patna Municipal Area                           -      4 lacs
Number of registered holdings in Patna Municipal Corporation          -      2.5 lacs
Coverage ratio                                                        -      50.0%
      More or less similar is the situation in other municipal bodies. Hence there is a need to
bring unregistered holdings into tax fold to increase the revenue for providing better services.
                                              116
Holding tax is only collected in urban areas. Around 90% of the holding tax payers
mentioned in tax roll are regular in paying the holding tax.
      Land rent is collected in rural and urban areas both. Around 90% of land holders or
their parents are listed in the tax roll. Property tax collected by Patna Municipal Corporation
during the various years is given below in table.


Table 4.7.1: Property tax collected by Patna Municipal Corporation during the various
years
                         Year                                  Receipt from Property Tax
                       2004-05                                             13.87
                       2005-06                                             21.12
                       2006-07                                             15.38
                       2010-11                                             17.00
                       2011-12                                             28.00
                       2012-13                                             22.00
(Source: Patna Municipal Corporation)
Analysis of Dimension 7.2.3: Collection of Assessed Property Tax
It is found that 47.18% of the land rent, 80% of the holding tax and 100% stamp duty and
registration fees are being collected. The collection made during the last five years for land
rent in rural and urban area is given below in table.
Table 4.7.2: Land rent collected during various years.
      Financial Year          Demand (in Rs.          Collection (in Rs.          Percentage of
                                  Crore)                    Crore)                  collection
         2007-08                    100                      27.46                    27.46
         2008-09                    100                      45.37                    45.37
         2009-10                    110                      39.16                    35.60
         2010-11                    112                      19.62                    17.49
         2011-12                    140                      28.03                    20.02
         2012-13                    185                      87.29                    47.18
The receipt of holding tax of Patna Municipal Corporation has been mentioned above.
Revenue from Sale of Stamp Duty and Registration Fee for Registration Purpose for last six
years in the state is given below in table.
Table 4.7.3: Number of deed registered and revenue receipt in various years.
  SI.                                                                        Revenue Receipt (in
               Financial year             No. of deed registered
  No.                                                                               crore)
    1             2007-08                           909283                          694.75
    2             2008-09                           889798                          770.65
    3             2009-10                          1000847                         1147.95
    4             2010-11                           992540                         1246.44
    5             2011-12                          1018655                         1610.00
    6             2012-13                           925695                         1619.30
Analysis of Dimension 7.2.4: Cost Effectiveness of Property Tax Collection
It is found that the amount of property taxes collected from all the sources is between 1 to 3
times the cost of staff in-charge of collection, if the land rent / holding tax and stamp duty are
considered. Individually, the revenue from the land rent and holding tax are not sufficient to
                                               117
meet the cost of tax collection. It is a fact that major portions of salary of municipal
employees, as well as other establishment costs are being met from the revenue collected by
the ULBs, out of which substantial portion comes from property tax.
        The State Government, being the developmental agency, sometimes provides major
services on nominal price. Hence meeting the cost of collection of taxes should be viewed
distinctly, considering the development of the state.


4.7.3 CONCLUSION
Land valuation and taxation are very important in the context of making a transfer, exchange,
gift, sale and mortgage etc. of land. For facilitating the valuation and taxation of land,
minimum market value registers for various types of land, buildings and flats based on their
location and use have been prepared by a committee headed by District Magistrate in each
district and updated regularly. In addition, property valuation is also done on the basis of
Annual Rental Value for assessing the holding tax of the property in urban area which also
takes into consideration location and use for fixation purposes. Registration of land is
governed by the Indian Registration Act, 1908. But the property tax in urban area is governed
by Bihar Municipal Act, 2007 and the amendments made in 2013. It is pertinent to point out
that the valuation rolls are publicly accessible. The rates of holding tax are published in the
newspaper every year before 30th June of each financial year. Incentive for water harvesting
is given in collection of tax. There is equity considerations in property taxes as slums having
a plinth area of 250 sq ft or less have been exempted from payment of holding tax. So far as
the enlisting of property holder for payment of property tax is concerned, the coverage ratio is
50 per cent for Patna Municipal Corporation and the situation is similar for other municipal
bodies. With respect to land rent, it is collected in urban as well as rural areas. The rational
for fixation of land rent is not clear and transparent. Stamp duty and registration fees are
being collected in full. Stamp duty in Bihar is 6 per cent (2 per cent additional for ULBs in
urban area) against the maximum stipulation of 5 per cent by Government of India. The
amount of property taxes collected from all the sources is between 1 to 3 times the cost of
staff in-charge of collection, if the land rent / holding tax and stamp duty are considered.
Individually, the revenue from the land rent and holding tax are not sufficient to meet the cost
of tax collection.
4.7.4 STRENGTH
   2. Clear and transparent policy for calculation of annual rent for different types of
        building / vacant land situated on different types of road and for different types of
        uses.
                1.      Self – assessment of holding tax and paying it to the Municipality
                        without waiting for a demand notice shall be the responsibility of the
                        tax payer or owner of the holding. Every assessee / tax payer and
                        owner of holding shall follow the scheme of self-declaration and self –
                        assessment for the purpose of calculation and payment of holding tax.
                        If any owner of the holding or assessee wilfully suppresses material
                        information essential for assessment of holding tax or under assesses
                        the holding tax, such persons shall be liable for payment of the
                        difference between the amount actually payable and the self-assessed
                        tax. In addition a fine of one hundred percent of such differential
                        amount will also be charged.
                2.      BEST PRACTICES

                                              118
   3.   The state government has exempted the payment of holding tax to the slum dwellers
        up to a particular size of dwelling units. All dwelling units located in the slums, and
        having a plinth area of less than 250 square feet, has been exempted from the payment
        of holding tax. This has benefitted the economically weaker sections of the society
        living in slums.
   4. Holding Tax for each fiscal year will be due on 1st April of each Fiscal year. Each
        Municipality publishes, in local newspapers, the applicable rates and the method of
        computation of Holding Tax which is payable in advance before 30th June of each
        fiscal year. If the entire Holding Tax due for the year is paid on or before 30th June of
        each fiscal year, five percent rebate is given, as incentive to the tax payer. No penal
        rate of interest shall be levied if the entire tax due is paid by 30th September of the
        fiscal year. After 30th September of a fiscal year penal interest at the rate of 1.5 (one
        point five) percent per month shall be levied.
   5. For promoting water harvest technology, the state government has decided to give
        rebate. 5 percent rebate on total Property Tax is given to such holdings / property that
        adopt the technology for rain water harvesting.
4.7.6 WEAKNESS
   6. The coverage ratio of assessment of property tax in Bihar has been poor (about 50 per
        cent) which is evident from the coverage ratio of one municipal corporation i.e. Patna
        Municipal Corporation as on 30th October, 2012.
        PMC estimates of total number of holdings in Patna                    -       5 lacs
        Electric connection in Patna Municipal Area                           -       4 lacs
        Number of registered holdings in Patna Municipal Corporation          -       2.5 lacs
        Coverage ratio                                                        -       50.0%
        (Source: Data collected from Patna Municipal Corporation and PESU)
        More or less similar is the situation in other municipal bodies. There is an urgent need
        to bring unregistered holdings into tax fold to increase the revenue and for providing
        better services.
   7. There is paucity of trained and qualified man power for tax administration.
   8. Even now, issue of holding tax / land tax collection receipt is done manually.
   9. Stamp duty is still more than 5 percent (urban area = 6+2 percent, rural area = 6
        percent)
   10. Inadequate civic amenities like cleaning of the city, parking space, water supply,
        drainage system etc., are repellent factors, as seen by tax payers, for paying holding
        tax.
   11. Holding tax has not been revised after 1993 in Bihar. Recently the holding tax was
        revised but withdrawn on public protest.
   12. Grant of full exemption to religious institutions from holding tax is not justified as
        these institutions are using it various types of services.
   13. Fixation of land rent has not been done based on objective criteria viz. classes of land,
        according to land capability criteria, type of land and productivity etc.
4.7.7 POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
4.7.7.1 Short Term
   1. Religious trusts, just like government offices, should at least pay 50 to 75 percent of
        the normal holding tax as service charges to provide better civic amenities.
   2. In order to avoid complications, or disputes for assessment of annual rental value, a
        self assessment format should be made available to the public to file the details of
        holding for assessment of annual rental value and holding taxes. Regular checking
        and verification of the same should be taken up on priority basis so that its
                                              119
        genuineness can be established. Strict penal action should also be taken in case of any
        discrepancy, after verification.
   3. No attempt has been made in the past to assess the cost of exemption of taxes to the
        government. Assessment of the cost of exemption of taxes to various institutions
        needs to be initiated.
4.7.7.2 Medium Term
   1. A Municipal Services Guarantee Act, along the lines of the Right to Public Service
        Act, 2011, is put in place.
   2. As the value of landed property in municipal areas has increased manifold, there is a
        need to enhance the holding tax for providing better civic amenities.
   3. Economic land rent should be decided / fixed, based on land use classification, type of
        land and productivity of the land.
   4. Tax Coverage ratio in Patna Municipal Corporation is 50 percent. More or less similar
        is the situation in other municipal bodies. There is a need to bring in unregistered
        holdings into tax fold to increase the revenue for providing better services. This work
        should be taken up in camp mode.
   5. The imposition and collection machinery of taxes in the Municipalities should be
        made more efficient. As this work is technical in nature, a thorough knowledge of the
        system with all its technicalities must be made known to the officers and staff
        engaged in municipal tax administration. Comprehensive administrative capacity
        enhancement is the need in ULBs.
   6. Proper administrative set up with well trained, qualified staff is necessary for efficient
        running of the tax administration department of ULBs.
   7. Community expects better civic amenities from the municipal authority. It cannot be
        provided without monetary resources. Even the sincere and dedicated Municipal
        personnel cannot serve the society according to society’s expectations without proper
        equipment and facilities. If the urban residents do not pay the taxes in time, they
        cannot expect proper civic facilities to be provided to them. The State Government
        used to give grant and loan to Municipality for infrastructure development or for
        employment generation schemes, but not for meeting the day-to-day expenses of the
        Municipality for providing different civic services. As such, proper rapport between
        the residents of town and Municipal authority is most essential. This will make the
        people realize that the money which is being collected from them, in the shape of
        various taxes and fees, are being utilized properly for their benefits. The role of
        municipal authority in this regard is very important.
4.7.7.3 Long Term
   1. The urban local bodies in Bihar are not using modern technology for better tax
        collection in urban areas, such as facility for online payment; GIS for better tracking
        of properties, electronic inter linkages with registries to track acquisition of properties
        etc. These varieties of modern technology should be adopted by ULBs.




                                               120
     4.8. DISPUTE RESOLUTION AND CONFLICT MANAGEMENT
4.8.1 INTRODUCTION
Dispute / conflict are an inevitable aspect of human interaction, an unavoidable concomitant
of choices and decisions. Conflict can be prevented on some occasions and managed on
others, but resolved only if the term is taken to mean the satisfaction of apparent demands
rather than the total eradication of underlying sentiments, memories, and interests. Only time
really resolves conflicts, and even the wounds it heals leave their scars for future reference.
But short of such ultimate healing, much can be done to reduce conflict and thereby release
needed energies for more productive tasks” (Zartman, 1991: 299).
     Disputes relating to record of rights, boundaries, entries in revenue records, unlawful
occupation of raiyati land, forcible dispossession of allottees and settlees of public land,
unlawful / wrong registry and unlawful mutation etc. generate problems / dispute / litigations
and cause unnecessary harassment to bona fide allottees / settlees / raiyats / occupants.
Corruption, bribery, fraud, nepotism, favouritism and clientalism in land administration and
land management is a widespread problem, and lead to a high number of land disputes.
Interdependency of land conflict causes is given in annexure 4.8.1.
     Disputes, unnecessarily, are occupying major space of Civil Courts and Hon’ble High
Court. Cases remain pending in the Courts for long periods and many settled cases are again
referred to another (Higher Court) for appeal / revision of decision. As perceived by the Bihar
Land Tribunal, 70% of the criminal activities are due to land disputes. Land disputes are
responsible for backwardness and economic plight of the people in substantial portion of
rural population. Although the Revenue Authorities were better equipped to deal with such
disputes due to their continued presence in the field offices and their expertise in Revenue
Administration, were not a major part of dispute resolution machineries till recently.
4.8.1.1 The Indian Adjudicatory System and the system in Bihar
India has a well structured Constitutional and statutory framework for dispute resolution. All
the decisions are subject to correction by higher courts through revision or appeal. The
Judges / Presiding Officers have sufficient competence to decide issues. There is a
Constitutional right under Article 300-A that “No person shall be deprived of his property
save by authority of Law”. Property includes land also.
4.8.1.2 Dispute resolution mechanisms in Bihar
The procedures prevailing for dispute resolution in respect to land may be classified as
judicial procedure, quasi-judicial procedure and alternative dispute resolution such as
Conciliation and Arbitration. Under conciliation, Lok Adalats have been set up under Legal
Services Authority Act 1987. Under Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996, disputes are
resolved through settlement / agreement.
        The different forums under different land laws have been provided for adjudication of
disputes. Disputes related to land pending before different forums in the State of Bihar are
                                             121
huge in number and the present machinery including Civil Courts / High Court is over-
burdened because of pendency of huge number of disputes relating to land. State was facing
with complexities arising out of the multiplicity of adjudicating machinery and delay in the
settlement of disputes. There is a large number of Act and Rules enacted to ensure right and
disposal of disputes especially related to land in the context of Bihar. A detail of these acts
and process and procedure of dispute resolution mechanism are given in the annexure 4.8.2
4.8.1.3 Land Related Case in the Revenue Court
The BLDR Act, 2009 is omnibus and cost effective. It has overriding effect over the
procedure laid down in 6 Acts viz., The Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, The Bihar Tenancy
Act, 1885, The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy Act, 1947, The Bihar Bhoodan
Yagna Act, 1954, The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling and Acquisition of Surplus
Land) Act, 1961 and the Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation
Act, 1956.
     Under this Act, 29649 cases, excluding mutation, were filled till 31st March, 2013. Out of
these cases 20296 cases, i.e., 68.45% have been disposed off. The details of cases under
various revenues court for different type of disputes is given in annexure 4.8.4.
4.8.1.4 Land Related Case in Bihar Land Tribunal
In larger public interest and in the interest of the people of the State and with a view to
provide a common and uniform forum for adjudication of disputes, Govt. of Bihar created a
Tribunal at the highest level in the hierarchy known as “Bihar Land Tribunal” under Bihar
Land Tribunal Act 2009 and Bihar Land Tribunal Rules 2010. The Bihar Land Tribunal is
constituted to address the land related issues of raiyats of state.
        The Tribunal has the power to entertain any application against the final order passed
by the Appropriate Authorities under the various land Act / Manuals within 90.
        In addition, the Tribunal shall decide any case transferred / referred to it by the
Government of Bihar or by the Hon’ble High Court of Judicature at Patna with regard to any
other revenue or land reforms law / manual for the time being in force.
     The Bihar Land Tribunal was constituted in January 2013. The Tribunal presently has
one Chairman and one member. Till June, 2014 1480 cases / appeal have been filed, out of
which 488 have been resolved. In a short span, the pace of disposal of cases with limited staff
is remarkable. There is need to strengthen the tribunal by filling up the post (s) of the
members lying vacant and providing adequate regular staff along with infrastructure.
 4.8.2 ASSESSMENT OF DIMENSIONS
Assessment of Indicator 8.1: Assignment of responsibility: responsibility for conflict
management at different levels is clearly assigned, in line with actual practice, relevant
bodies are competent in applicable legal matters, and decisions can be appealed against
Dimension
8 1       1     There is clear assignment of A          There are no parallel avenues for conflict resolution
                responsibility for    conflict          or, if parallel avenues exist, responsibilities are
                                                        clearly assigned and widely known and explicit
                resolution.                             rules for shifting from one to the other are in place
                                                        to minimize the scope for forum shopping.
8 1       2     Conflict resolution mechanisms A        Institutions for providing a first instance of conflict
                are accessible to the public.           resolution are accessible at the local level in the
                                                        majority of communities.
8 1       3     Mutually accepted agreements A          There is a local, informal dispute resolution system
                reached through informal dispute        that resolves a significant number of conflicts in an
                                                        effective and equitable manner and which is
                resolution systems are encouraged       recognized in the formal judicial or administrative
                                                        dispute resolution system.
8 1       4     There is an accessible, affordable C    A process exists to appeal rulings on land cases at

                                             122
                           and timely process for appealing         high cost and the process takes a long time/ the costs
                           disputed rulings.                        are low but the process takes a long time.

          Analysis of Dimension 8.1.1: Assignment of Responsibility for Conflict Resolution
          In Bihar, responsibilities regarding conflict resolution are clearly assigned unambiguously.
          The Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009 provides clear assignment of responsibility for
          dispute resolution. Under BLDR Act, 2009, the authority is looking after the cases relating to
          section 13 of the Act. Disputes under 6 Acts provided in schedule –I in the Act can only be
          looked into. However, there is provision that government can add or remove any law/manual
          from the list. Under BLDR Act, 2009, title is not being decided. The cases relating to titles
          and other complicated cases are left to be decided by civil courts of competent jurisdictions.
          In the year 2012-13, a total 29649 cases were filed under BLDR Act, 2009 till 31st March,
          2013. Out of this 20296 i.e. 68.45% of the cases have been disposed of till 31st March, 2013
          Analysis of Dimension 8.1.2: Accessibility of Conflict management
          It is accessible to the public but due to unawareness of the various land related laws
          promulgated in the state and the high costs in court cases, public in general are reluctant to
          avail them.
          Analysis of Dimension 8.1.3: Informal Dispute Resolution Mechanism
          Various types of Lok Adalat viz. Lok Adalat, Special Lok Adalat, Mega Lok Adalat, Pension
          Lok Adalat, Labour Lok Adalat, Awareness Programme, are being organized in the state.
          Under Section 19 read with section 21 of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987, the
          disputes resolved through Lok Adalats are recognized in the formal judicial dispute resolution
          system. It is so because every award given by the Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be a decree
          of a civil court. During last few years, the Lok Adalat has proved to be a most effective
          alternative dispute resolution forum in the state of Bihar.
              Its success can be seen in the recently held National Lok Adalats on 23rd November 2013
          in the state of Bihar whereby over 1.5 Lakh cases including 9,120 in the state capital were
          settled (as per report of the Bihar State Legal Service Authority). Apart from that the
          following data would evidently manifest the important role of Lok Adalat in this state.
          Table 4.8.1:Disposal of cases by various type of Lok Adalat in Bihar.
Year        Lok Adalat Special Lok Mega Lok Pension              Labour     Awareness        MANRE        Persons      Legal Aid
            (I)        Adalat      Adalat   Lok                  Lok        Programme        GA           Benefited by Provided
                       (II)        (III)    Adalat               Adalat     (VI)             (VII)        Legal Aid / (IX)
                                            (IV)                 (V)                                      Awareness
                                                                                                          (VIII)
1998     to 4,53,077        -               -              -     -          4963                          64,798       -
2008
2009        45,964          -               -              -     -          495                           54,929          -
2010-       11,365          34,707          1,02,335       163   7,330      381                           22,135          142
2011        10,136          16,379          49,435         34    -          794                           51,083          261
2012        6,911           49,425          18,309         15    1237       828                           68,533          337
2013 (Till 6,962            5,0963          32,733         18    -          819              8256         66,470          207
Dec.)
Total       5,34,415        1,51,474        2,02,812       230   8,567      8,280            8256         2,63,150        947
National    2,23,306
Lok Adalat                  Grand Total- (I (534415) + ( II + ( 151474) + ( III ( 202812) + ( IV ( 230) + ( V (8567) + (VII (8256) + (X
(X)                         (223306) = 11,29,060
          (Source: Bihar State Legal Services Authority)
                  It appears from the above that1129060 persons have been benefited by various types
          of Lok Adalat. The National Lok Adalat held on 23.11.2013, in which 628 cases relating to
          land have also been disposed off. This implies that Lok Adalat has also started settling the
          land related disputes. The details of Disposal & Legal Awareness Programme by Mobile Lok
          Adalat are given below in table.
                                                                     123
Table 4.8.2: Details of Disposal & Legal Awareness Programme by Mobile Lok Adalat
      Year           Number of Cases      No. of Legal Awareness No. of Persons benefited
                        Disposed           Conducted by Mobile during Mobile Lok Adalat
                                                Lok Adalat                 work
   Year,2005                38                       01                    1,003
   Year 2006              75,780                     82                    3,312
   Year 2007              83,669                     93                    4302
   Year 2008              82,331                    107                    5,301
   Year 2009              48,628                     95                    4,312
   Year 2010              37,432                    108                   12,153
   Year 2011              28,043                    117                    5,698
   Year 2012              32,927                    115                    8,131
 Year 2013 (Till          18332                      73                    6014
    Dec,13
  Grand Total            4,07,180                   792                     50,226
(Source: Bihar State Legal Service Authority)
    The table above shows that 4,07,180 persons have been benefited by the Mobile Lok
Adalat as yet. Legal aid has been provided to 50,226 beneficiaries. There is a need to
encourage the people to settle the land dispute in Lok Adalat which is cost effective and time
effective.
        There is a need to encourage the people to settle the land dispute in Lok Adalat which
is cost effective and time effective.
        The Government of Bihar exercising its power under section 146 of the Bihar
Panchayat Raj Act, 2006 (Bihar Act 6, 2006) has framed its rules called the “Bihar Gram
Kachahari Conduct Rules 2007”. It is to be mentioned here that under sections 106, 107, 108,
109 and 110 of the Bihar Panchayat Raj Act a Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat has been
provided with the jurisdiction to dispose of suits of which valuation does not exceed Rs.
10,000/-. In order to assist the Sarpanch, “Nyay Mitra” with a law degree has been provided
to each Gram Kachahari.
        Gram Katchahary is of the view that where in a suit for partition, complicated
question of law or title is involved; Gram Katchahri shall transfer such suit to the court of
competent jurisdiction. It should be noted that the system of Gram Kachahari is included in
the 73rd Amendment but not in operation. However, effective steps are underway for effective
functioning of Gram Kachahary by the State Government.
        In the state land disputes are also resolved by Panchayat (Panch constitutes of reputed
village elders and Sarpanch mutually agreed by both the parties). Minor disputes like
boundary, share of land of the family members etc. are resolved in the information channels.
This is based on the principle of mutually accepted agreement by village level informal
panchayat of the elders of the village / community.
        Resolution of disputes through Panchayat is not encouraged by the authorities who
decide land disputes as they are not trained to settle disputes through arbitration /
conciliation/ mediation. They are required to be trained to encourage informal channel.
Recently enacted BLDR Act, 2009 also does not mention settlement of disputes through
informal channels. However, the same are being practiced in the villages. One of the
arguments given against the informal channels is not hearing all the interested parties. Second
argument is government interests are also not kept in view while deciding the disputes
through informal channels.
Analysis of Dimension 8.1.4: Process of Appealing
There is an accessible, affordable and timely process for appealing disputed ruling under
BLDR Act, 2009. Under this new enactment an attempt has been made to reduce the time and
                                             124
the cost and make legal remedies affordable to the poor people of the state for securing the
ends of justice. Though Divisional Commissioner has been made the appellate authority, time
limit for the disposal of appeal has not been provided in the BLDR Act, 2009.



Assessment of Indicator 8.2: The share of land affected by pending conflicts is low and
decreasing
 Dimension
                       Land disputes constitute a small B                                 Land disputes in the formal court system
 8 2           1       proportion of cases in the formal legal                            are between 10% and 30% of the total court
                                                                                          cases.
                       system.
                       Conflicts in the formal system are B                               A decision in a land-related conflict is
 8 2           2       resolved in a timely manner.                                       reached in the first instance court within 1
                                                                                          year for 90% of cases.

                       There are few long-standing (> 5 years) D                          The share of long-standing land conflicts is
 8 2           3       land conflicts..                                                   greater than 20% of the total pending land
                                                                                          dispute court cases.

Analysis of Dimension 8.2.1: Magnitude of Land Dispute Cases in total cases
The number and description of the civil cases instituted in various district and subordinate
courts in Bihar are given below in table.
Table 4.8.3.: Number and description of civil suits instituted in various year in the state.
                       Classification of civil cases
                                      Other suits
                       Suit       for                                                                    Total    land Percentage of
           Total civil                not      falling Suit under Suit       for Suit     for
Year                   money       or                                                         Mortgage   related cases land related
           cases                      under any of the        rent immovable     specific
                       movable                                                                suit       (5+6+7+8)     cases
                                      the preceding land           property      relief
                       property
                                      heads
       1         2          3              4                5           6               7          8          9            10
2005       21848       813            3216             289         15181         1426         923        17819        81.56
2006       21989       694            3050             249         15622         1900         474        18245        82.97
2007       24862       692            6956             263         15344         1113         494        17214        69.24
2008       24653       681            6380             276         15432         1315         569        17592        71.36
2009       27646       626            7838             252         17072         1270         588        19182        69.38
2010       29911       592            8503             264         18540         1481         531        20816        69.59
2011       18097       1212           13052            406         1773          1263         391        3833         21.18
(Source: Bihar Statistical Hand Book 2012 – Information received from the Registrar, Patna
High Court).
The percentage of land related case with respect to civil cases varied from 70-82 percent till
2010. In 2011 the percentage of land related case was only 21.18 percent. It could be clearly
seen from the above table that the institution of land related cases has reduced after the Bihar
Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009. The cases instituted in the district / subordinate court in
Patna district during various years is given below in table.
Table 4.8.4: Cases instituted in Patna District / Subordinate Courts
                                     2007       2008         2009       2010        2012       2013
1. Suit for money or movable         152        147          142        138
property
2. Other suits                       252        240          242        212
3.Suit under the rent land           149        132          129        121
4. Title and other suit for          1627       1432         1383       1228
immovable property
5. Title and other suit for          72         68           67         64

                                                                  125
specific relief
6. Mortgage suit                     42          40          38          36
Total                                2294        2059        2001        1799       2012        2015
Out of which land related            1890        1672        1617        1449       830         823
cases (3+4+5+6)
% of land related case               82.39       81.20       80.81       80.54      41.25       40.84
(Source: Bihar Statistical Hand Book, 2012)
The land related cases in Patna district also varied from 80-82 percent till 2010. After that the
share came down to approximately to 40 percent, probably, due to Bihar Land Dispute
Resolution Act, 2009. As on 31st December, 2013 there are 27494 civil cases pending in the
district court of Patna out of which 10647 relate to land dispute. Percentage wise land related
cases constitute 38.72 percent of the civil cases in Patna district.
The number of civil cases decided during the various years in the subordinate courts of Bihar
is given below in table.
Table 4.8.5: Number of cases decided in the Sub-ordinate courts of Bihar
                                                          Civil
           Year
                                       Original                            Appellate
             1                           2                                    3
           2005                       26305                                 3482
           2006                       32875                                 3017
           2007                       30131                                 3478
           2008                       31386                                 5370
           2009                       32817                                 5651
           2010                       38405                                 6847
           2011                       37030                                 7479
(Source: Bihar Statistical Hand Book 2012)
The cases decided in the district / subordinate court of Patna district during various years are
given below in table.
Table 4.8.6: Civil cases decided in District / Subordinate Court Patna
    Civil
                                    Original                         Appellate
    2007                            2171                             198
    2008                            1794                             183
    2009                            2001                             186
    2010                            1799                             244
    2011                            NA                               NA
(Source: Bihar Statistical Hand Book 2012)
The bifurcated data for disposal of land related cases were not available.
         Substantial numbers of disputes are pending for more than 5 years. They are
especially related to
         i) Revisional Record Survey
         ii) Consolidation matter and
         iii) Mutation matter
         50% of the civil cases in the legal system are for land disputes. Approximately 70%
of the criminal cases also emanate from land disputes.
         About 90% cases go upto High Court and about 20% cases goes upto Supreme Court.
The courts are made to adjourn / postpone decision/proceedings by the reason of providing
false information / argument about other court proceedings by the habitual offenders /
                                              126
litigants and / or at their instance by their advocate. Hence Dispute resolution mechanism is
time taking and costly process. Many families are ruined during these processes as they sell
all property and even resort to heavy indebtedness in meeting the cost of getting justice.
         Appeals are not processed timely. After issuance of notice (s) to the parties concerned
the delay in its service or not properly issued notices leads to delay in disposal. Time taken in
disposing appeal is too long. Cost for appeal is also not affordable to poor.
     The percentage of land related cases out of total number of cases varied from 70 to 82
percent till 2010. In 2011 the percentage of land related case was only 21.18 percent. The
institution of land related cases has reduced in 2011, mostly due to the implementation of
Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009.
     The land related cases in Patna district also varied from 80-82 percent till 2010. After that
the share came down to approximately to 40 percent, probably, due to introduction of Bihar
Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009. As on 31st December, 2013 there are 27494 civil cases
pending in the district court of Patna, out of which 10647 relate to land dispute. Percentage
wise land related cases constitute 38.72 percent of the civil cases in Patna district. Apart from
the civil cases, 70 percent of the criminal cases also emanate from land dispute.
Analysis of Dimension 8.2.2: Timeliness of Resolving Conflict
Time frame is clearly mentioned in BLDR Act, 2009 for disposal in the first instance court of
the DCLR, who is the competent authority under the Act. Disputes under BLDR Act, 2009,
for more than 90% of the cases, are resolved within 1 year. Quasi judicial authorities assigned
with several other administrative jobs/ functions are unable to decide dispute in a timely
manner.
In the formal system (Civil Court) land related disputes are resolved within two years or more
in about 90% of cases.
Analysis of Dimension 8.2.3: Long Standing Conflicts
Normally Title Suits/ Revisions/ Appeal cases take more than 5 years for its final disposal
before the court of law. Nevertheless, all out efforts are made, so far as Revenue Courts are
concerned, to dispose of cases as expeditiously as possible.
4.8.3 CONCLUSIONS
In Bihar, responsibilities regarding conflict resolution are clearly assigned unambiguously.
The Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009 provides clear assignment of responsibility for
dispute resolution. Though the conflict resolution mechanism is accessible to the public but
due to unawareness of the various land related laws promulgated in the state and the high
costs in court cases, public in general are reluctant to avail them. However, there is a surge
for resolving disputes through alternative dispute resolution mechanism. It is also being
encouraged among people to settle the land disputes in Lok Adalat which is cost effective and
time effective. The strengthening of village level court is also a positive step. The land
disputes in Bihar constitute around 70-80% of total cases. However, there is significant drop
after 2010 in this regard. The introduction of Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act may be the
reason for this. The pace of the adjudication system need to be augmented as a large number
of cases is long pending cases in Bihar.
4.8.4 STRENGTH
1.       The Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009 / Rules 2010 are omnibus, cost
         effective and time effective to take care of land disputes arising out of dispossession
         or threatened dispossession of public land allottees / private land disputes. Under
         Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009, the disposal of cases has improved
         significantly. Even the cost in getting justice is less (compared to situation before)
         under this process, because of speedy disposal of cases

                                               127
1.     Establishment of Bihar Land Tribunal under Bihar Land Tribunal Act 2009 and rules
       2010 has significant impact on disposal of land related disputes.
2.     Alternative dispute resolution mechanism such as Lok Adalat has gained momentum
       during the last five years in Bihar for resolving various types of disputes.
3.     Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat has been provided with the legal powers to dispose
       of suits where valuation does not exceed Rs. 10,000/-. In order to assist the Sarpanch,
       “Nyay Mitra” with a law degree has been provided to each Gram Kachahari. In cases
       where suit for partition involving complicated questions of law or title, Gram
       Katchahri shall transfer such suit to the court of competent jurisdiction.

                1.      BEST PRACTICES
     4. Bihar Land Tribunal:
        Creation of a Land Tribunal at the highest level in the hierarchy known as ‘Bihar
        Land Tribunal’ under Bihar Land Tribunal Act, 2009 and Bihar Land Tribunal Rules
        2010 by Government of Bihar is a welcome step in larger public interest and in the
        interest of the people of the State with a view to provide a common and uniform
        forum for adjudication of disputes related to land. The Bihar Land Tribunal is an
        appellate authority which addresses the land related issues of raiyats/under
        raiyats/parcha holders etc. of the state. The Tribunal has the power to entertain any
        application against the final order passed by the Appropriate Authorities under the
        various land Acts / Manuals within 90 days. In addition, the Tribunal shall decide any
        case transferred / referred to it by the Government of Bihar or by the Hon’ble High
        Court.
        The Bihar Land Tribunal was constituted in January 2013. The Tribunal presently is
        having one Chairman and two members. A retired Judge of Patna High Court is the
        Chairman of the Bihar Land Tribunal. While meeting the constitutional obligations,
        the Land Tribunal has substantially reduced the work load of Patna High Court with
        respect to land related disputes. Till June, 2014, 488 cases were disposed off out of
        the 1480 cases / appeal filed. Out of these disposed cases, 315 cases have been
        disposed off by the Chairman of the Tribunal itself. In short span, the pace of disposal
        of cases with limited staff is remarkable and praiseworthy. After the constitution of
        Land Tribunal, the number of revenue cases filed before the High Court has come
        down. This system of setting up of land tribunal deserves to be replicated.
1.      The Bihar Land Dispute Resolution (BLDR) Act, 2009
Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009 is unique in nature which provides a uniform and
common forum, procedure and mechanism to achieve the objective of effective, efficacious
and speedy resolution of land related disputes. The BLDR Act, 2009 is omnibus, cost
effective and time effective. It has overriding effect over the procedure laid down in 6 Acts
viz. Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, The Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885, The Bihar Privileged
Persons Homestead Tenancy Act, 1947, The Bihar Bhoodan Yagna Act, 1954, The Bihar
Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling and Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961 and the Bihar
Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation Act, 1956.
A revenue functionary, Deputy Collector Land Reforms, at the level of sub-division, is the
competent authority to entertain and adjudicate cases under BLDR Act. He has been vested
with all the powers of Civil Court, including execution. He is required to dispose of the cases
within a period of 90 days. He decides disputes relating to different revenue acts. His
jurisdiction includes: making entry in RoR / maps / boundary disputes, family partition,
determination of rights, restoration of disposed public land assignees and preventive
dispossession. However, this Act bars the competent authority to decide disputes relating to
                                              128
complicated questions of title. The state becomes a necessary party in all cases in which one
of the parties in dispute is a public land allottee. Under this Act, the Appellate Authority is
the Divisional Commissioner.
Under this Act 29649 cases were filled till 31st March, 2013. Out of these cases 20296 cases
i.e. 68.45% have been disposed off. The system is proving beneficial to the people of the state
especially poor and economic weaker section of the society in getting justice in a cost
effective way. Adoption of similar act by other states will be beneficial for better land
governance.
    2. Providing of services of legal experts to Gram Kachahari (Village Court):
        To ensure quick, transparent and effective justice by the Gram Kachahari, the State
        Government has provided services of Nyaya Mitra (Law Graduates) to every Gram
        Kachahari. This has facilitated the Sarpanch in getting legal advice deciding the cases
        expeditiously as well as judiciously.
4.8.6 WEAKNESS
    1. The jurisdiction of Deputy Collector Land Reforms (DCLR) under BLDR Act 2009 is
        limited to determination of rights only, not title. In complicated cases, involving
        question of title, party concerned is advised to move Civil Court.
    2. The Collector, under the BLDR Act, has been vested with the powers of supervision
        of the work of Deputy Collector Land Reforms (DCLR). The same is not done on
        regular basis.
    3. There is no time limit for disposal of appeal by the Divisional Commissioner under
        BLDR Act 2009.
    4. Most of the Deputy Collectors, Land Reforms (DCLR) are not conversant with
        revenue laws / personal laws and thus face difficulties in adjudication of disputes.
    5. Non-updating of Khatiyan and land records is creating hindrance in deciding the title
        of land.
    6. Court cases are costly and time consuming for aggrieved parties.
    7. A number of cases under section 45B of the Ceiling Act in particular and under
        another section of the said act in general, are pending since long time in Bihar. Due to
        this delay of disposal of cases, the determination of surplus land becomes very
        complex.
    8. The process of disposal of cases involving sharecroppers for dispute resolution
        machinery is very slow. As on 31st March, 2013, 15.39 percent cases relating to
        sharecroppers were only disposed off, leaving the pending cases to 84.61 percent.
    9. Large number of pending cases for dispossession has been observed in the state.
4.8.7 POLICY RECOMMENDATION
4.8.7.1 Short Term
    1. Case flow Management Principles should be immediately implemented.
    2. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) implementation should be more
         meaningful with defined objectives.
    3. There is an urgent need to tackle cases pertaining to dispossession of land allottees. A
         time bound strategy should be developed to restore possession of land to these
         persons.
4.8.7.2 Medium Term
    4. Necessary changes should be made in the relevant laws for dealing with management
         aspects relating to progression of cases and their flow for enhancing reduction rates
         and timely disposal with quality.
    5. Responsibility to carry out judicial reforms should be assigned to a single identifiable
         body.
                                              129
   6.   No time limit has been prescribed for disposal of appeal by Divisional Commissioner
        in Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009. Specific time limit (60days) for disposal
        of appeals by Divisional Commissioner should be spelt out in BLDR Act 2009.
   1. Efforts should be made to create more and more permanent Lok Adalat in all the
        districts and sub-divisions. Litigant should be made aware and be encouraged to pre-
        litigation settlement through such permanent Lok Adalat.
   2. Adequate training to Deputy Collector Land Reforms (DCLR) and Circle Officers on
        different Acts and mechanisms of dispute resolution is a prelude for speedy disposal
        of disputes relating to land.
   3. The Court of Deputy Collector Land Reforms (DCLR) should be provided sufficient
        staff with adequate infrastructure.
   4. The Collector should ensure effective supervision of the work of Deputy Collector
        Land Reforms (DCLR) regarding dispute resolution, on regular basis. The same is not
        done on regular basis now.
   5. There is a need to strengthen the tribunal by filling up the post (s) of members lying
        vacant and by providing adequate, regular staff along with infrastructure.
4.8.7.3 Long Term
   1. Dispute related to land/holding falling within the municipal area should also be
        brought under the jurisdiction of BLDR Act, 2009. Similarly, Public land
        Encroachment Act, 1961, alluvium and delluvium land dispute should also be brought
        with the ambit of BLDR Act, 2009.
   2. Taking into the consideration the large number of cases of dispossession in Bihar,
        fresh punitive laws are required to punish those persons who are not having the title
        over land but involved in dispossessing the legal owner of land. Actually, these
        persons are resourceful and dispossess the legal owner of land on concocted or forged
        or false papers, by force. The state Government should frame punitive laws to prevent
        cases of dispossession. It is advisable that dispossession should be made a cognizable
        offence.
Section 4(B) of Bihar Land Disputes Resolution Act, 2009 pertains to the cases related to
restoration of possession of settled/allotted land in favour of legally entitled settled /allottee
or his successors/heirs, upon adjudication of unauthorized and unlawful dispossession.
Section 7 pertains to summary disposal of proceeding. There is no need to follow the
procedure for adjudication of cases of dispossessed persons. LRDC can issue notice to the
offender. On hearing from the offender, summary disposal of cases should be done. Besides
restoring possession, penalty/ punishment may be imposed. For a first time offender, penalty
up to Rupees Two Thousand or one year of imprisonment or both can be imposed. For the
second time, the penalty upto Rupees Ten Thousand or Two to Five years of imprisonment or
both may be imposed on the offender.
   3. There is a need to set up a Green Tribunal, with a bench in Patna, to resolve disputes
        related to forest and environment.
   4. Required amendments may be brought in to the BLDR Act, 2009 as well as Bihar
        Land Tribunal Act, to include alternative dispute redressal provision by way of
        arbitration, conciliation and mediation.
   5. Effective steps should be initiated for strengthening and smooth functioning of Gram
        Kachchahary by the State Government. The local Panchayati Raj institutions can help
        curb land disputes/ problems to a great extent. The Gram Kutchcharies of each Gram
        Panchayat may be empowered to decide on these cases at Panchayat level. However,
        adequate safety systems must be kept in place to curb the malpractices that occurred
        in this new concept of resolving land disputes at Panchayat levels.
                                               130
4.9. REVIEW OF INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND POLICIES
4.9.1 INTRODUCTION
Land governance is a state subject and the department of Revenue and Land Reforms is the
principle department in the context of Bihar. The present chapter shall review the institutional
arrangement and policies in force related to land governance in Bihar.
4.9.1.1 Institutional Structure
The institutional framework in Bihar for the last decades includes the halka karamchari at the
grassroots level who report to the Circle Inspector. Circle Inspector in turn reports to the
Circle Officer who reports to DCLR, who is accountable to the Additional Collector. The
Collector of the district is the head of revenue department in the district in various Acts
including the Act in land ceiling. There could also be the Collector under the Act duly
notified by the Government in this behalf. A detail organizational structure of Department of
Revenue and Land Reforms, Government of Bihar is given in the annexure 4.9.1A.
The Government of Bihar has a well structured Survey and Settlement Department to conduct
survey of land. The Survey and Settlement Department include the Director of Land Survey
who is assisted by the Assistant Director. As and when a district is notified for survey and
settlement, there is a Settlement Officer and Charge Office as also the Assistant Settlement
Officer Headquarter at the district level. When a camp is taken out, it comprises an Assistant
Settlement Officer, one or more kanungo, one or more Muharrirs, amins, surveyors,
Munstrion etc. The organizational structure of office of the Director, Land Records Survey
and Settlements is given in the annexure 4.9.1B. The organizational structure of office of the
Director of the land consolidation is given in the annexure 4.9.1C.
The Revenue Department officials at field level in Bihar as in the case of several states has a
range of general administrative responsibilities along with land governance. This includes
magisterial and executive functions. Specific land governance related function such as land
registration and valuation are being looked after by separate department known as
Registration Department. In addition to the revenue department the rural and local bodies also
have a role in land administration. The village level rural local bodies called gram panchayat
manage the Gairmazarua aam land while the urban local bodies are responsible for the
maintenance of the urban land under their jurisdiction. Moreover, Forest and Environment
Department manages the forest land and their control. The Urban Development and Housing
Department which controls ULBs are responsible for urban land management through ULBs.
The Principal Secretary of the respective departments (Revenue and Land Reforms, Forest
and Environment, Registration, Urban Development and Housing and Industries) is the
Principal Executive Head for the overall land administration / management in their respective
area. The organizational structure of the related department is enclosed as annexure 4.9.1D,
4.9.1E, 4.9.1F, 4.9.1G and 4.9.1H.
As regards land acquisition, there is Director Land Acquisition at the state level and District
Land Acquisition Officers / Additional District Land Acquisition Officers at district level.
                                              131
The roles and responsibility of functionaries dealing with the regulation and management of
land sector are clearly defined. However, supervision and monitoring of implementation is
suffering due to shortage of manpower and some key posts being managed in dual charge /
capacity.
         It would be pertinent to point out that restructuring & rationalizing land
administration in Bihar is the need of the hour. The jurisdiction of some functionaries is
widespread. It is necessary to bring the workload within manageable limits. The Government
of Bihar has already taken a decision to make territorial jurisdiction of a revenue halka to
concise with Gram Panchayat. However, there is acute shortage of halka karamcharis and
amin. Government decision to appoint halka karamchari and amin is yet to materialize.
         The halka karamcharis should have an office of his own. He can be accommodated in
the proposed Gram Panchayat Bhawan.
         It is also necessary to rationalize the jurisdiction of Circle Officer. An inspector
cannot super wise effectively the work more than 8-10 halka karamcharis. Depending upon
the same, additional post may be created.
         The position regarding both office and residential accommodation for the staff of
revenue department at various levels is unsatisfactory. The Government may take necessary
steps in this regard.
         The existing training facilities are inadequate. With the wide spread use of modern
technology, there will be greater need for the training of the staff at various levels. The
existing training institution should be suitably upgraded and whenever necessary, new
institutions should be set up at the divisional level, or for groups of district. The training
syllabie should be such that, besides upgrading the skills of trainees to enable them to
discharge their duties more competently, they also get an exposure to the technological and
human relations dimension of modern land administration. In order to attract better
professional qualified trainers in the training institutions, adequate financial and other
incentives should be provided for.
         Supervision, inspections and monitoring constitute the backbone of institutional
arrangements. Detailed norms have been laid down by the state government / Board of
Revenue, Bihar. These instructions are either ignored or carried out in a rather perfunctory
manner. The need for close supervision will be all the more felt with the introduction of
modern technology. The state government should review this carefully, revise these
instructions where ever necessary and ensure that the instruction is followed.
The administrative and organizational structure pertaining to issues dealt with by the
department of Revenue and Land Reforms has been delineated in the foregoing. As per rules
of Executive Business, all land related matters including public land management and
common property resource fall in the exclusive domain of the department of revenue. As time
rolled on, certain other land related issues, like conversion of agriculture land and resolution
of land disputes were addressed by the revenue department.
         As far as Roles of Divisional Commissioner and Collector vis-à-vis Revenue
Department is concerned, these functionaries is do not fall directly in revenue hierarchy.
They are controlled by the General Administration Department. Functionally, these offices
exercise power and authority given to them under various laws including law relating to
revenue, registration, motor vehicles, excise, food and civil supplies and the like. Hence,
technically speaking, these offices cannot be placed directly in the heretical tree of Revenue
Department. The revenue department ensures that these functionaries discharge their
responsibilities as per provision of the revenue law involving them. Besides Divisional
Commissioner and Collector, in every district, there is also post of Additional Collector who
although falling in the General Administration Department line of control is responsible
                                              132
exclusively to Revenue Department. Only DCLR, Circle Officer, Circle Inspector and Halka
Karamcharis are exclusively in the line of revenue hierarchy. Even here, DCLR belongs to
the Senior Deputy Collector grade whose services are placed by the General Administration
Department with Revenue Department.
        The administrative and organizational structure pertaining to issues dealt with by the
department of Revenue and Land Reforms has been delineated in the foregoing. As per rules
of Executive Business, all land related matters including public land management and
common property resource fall in the exclusive domain of the department of revenue. As time
rolled on, certain other land related issues, like conversion of agriculture land and resolution
of land disputes were addressed by the revenue department.

4.9.1.2 Institutional Activity Related to Land
Department of Revenue and Land Reforms is the key department in land governance. Other
departments in the government also manage their land under the guidance of Department of
Revenue and Land Reforms. It is to be noted that there is no such overlap in the
responsibilities of Ministries and agencies dealing with land. As well there is very limited
scope of overlapping in land administration hierarchy as well as interdepartmental
transactions. Even if overlaps exist, they are technical in nature and exist for a short period.
4.9.1.3 Availability of Manpower in Department Of Revenue and Land Reforms, Govt
of Bihar
 Creation of a Revenue cadre for the purpose to get knowledgeable persons dealing with the
land management has been made by the state government vide notification number 4020
dated 15th January, 2010. The sanctioned post for various revenue officials were created vide
this notification right from Circle Inspector to Additional Collectors / Dy. Directors under the
various section of Revenue Department.
All the offices of under the department of Revenue and Land Reforms Department suffer
from huge crunch of manpower. The crisis is highest at the Circle Inspector Offices, where
63% positions are vacant. At the level of Revenue Karamchari Also, there are 53% positions
are vacant. Due to the shortage of staff in all the relevant departments, officers are working
on dual/triple charges, which affect productivity and quality of work. The municipalities also
found running with 64% vacant positions.
4.9.1.4 Other Issues in Institutional Arrangements
Following major issues in institutional arrangements were observed.
   6. Dearth of trained manpower in land related department is still prevalent.
   7. Lack of use of technology for survey and land records.
   8. Prevalence of oral sharecroppers in the state.
   9. Poor management of land records. The exact number of record of right is not available
        in the states.
   10. Lack of capacity building initiative to improve efficiency of land revenue officials.
   11. Lack of conviction in government machinery to get the revenue records updated.
   12. Lack of monitoring of updating of revenue records.
   13. Pending cases of civil disputes in different courts of Bihar is very high.
4.9.1.5 Recent Steps
The following steps have been taken by the State Government to strengthen structure of
Revenue and Land Reforms Department
   14. Prescribed service rules / standards for each department with time limit, authority
        responsible, appellate authority and reviewing authority.
   15. Have started massive capacity building, procedure and technology use.
   16. Have started appointment in various departments to fill the sanctioned posts.
                                              133
   17. Creation of Revenue cadre in the state vide notification number 4020 dated 15 th
       January, 2010. The sanctioned post for various revenue officials have been created
       vide this notification right from Circle Inspector to Additional Collector / Dy. Director
       under various sections of Revenue Department.
   18. Transparent policy initiative for each land related department and uploaded them in
       the website.
   19. System of regular monitoring of policy initiatives has been introduced and is now
       being followed.



4.9.2 ASSESSMENT OF DIMENSIONS
Assessment of Indicator 9.1: Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates
concerning the regulation and management of the land sector are clearly defined,
duplication of responsibilities is avoided and information is shared as needed.
 Dimension
                Land policy formulation,                 B   In situations that can entail conflicts of interest
                implementation and arbitration are           or are sensitive to abuse (e.g. transfers of land
 9 1      1     separated to avoid conflict of interest.
                                                             rights) there is some separation in the roles of
                                                             policy formulation, implementation and
                                                             arbitration.
                Responsibilities of the ministries and B     The mandated responsibilities of the various
                agencies dealing with land do not            authorities dealing with land administration
 9 1      2     overlap (horizontal overlap).
                                                             issues are defined with a limited amount of
                                                             overlap with those of other land sector
                                                             agencies but there are few problems.
                Administrative (vertical) overlap is     A   Assignment of land-related responsibilities
 9 1      3     avoided.                                     between the different levels of administration
                                                             and government is clear and non-overlapping.
                Land right and use information is      C     Information related to rights in land is
                shared by public bodies; key parts are       available to interested institutions but this
 9 1      4                                                  information is not readily accessible or not
                regularly reported on and publicly           available at a reasonable cost.
                accessible.
                Overlaps of rights (based on tenure C        The Legal framework and procedures for land-
                typology) are minimal and do not             related matters (incl. renewable and subsoil
 9 1      5     cause friction or dispute.
                                                             resources) deal with land-related matters very
                                                             differently but have functioning mechanisms
                                                             for redressing overlap in place.
                Ambiguity in institutional mandates B        With minor exceptions, the processes applied
                (based on institutional map) does not        by public institutions dealing with land are
 9 1      6                                                  fully integrated and consistent.
                cause problems.

Analysis of Dimension 9.1.1: Land Policy Formulation, Implementation and Arbitration
There is a clear separation in the roles of policy formulation, implementation and arbitration
in situations which can entail conflict of interest or are sensitive to abuse, for example,
transfer of land rights. The roles and responsibility of functionaries dealing with the
regulation and management of land sector are clearly defined. The major policy initiative lies
with the state government including enactment of laws relating to land rights. The
implementation lies with field functionaries, which is clearly delineated. Even in situations,
where, implementation and arbitration are not strictly separated, to avoid over staffing and
Parkinson’s law, the officers sitting in quasi-judicial capacity act as a court as per law. In that
capacity, their other roles are over shadowed. This arrangement is made as the Collector of
                                               134
the district / Collector under the Act are clearly defined. There would not be more than one
Collector in a district to take care of implementation and arbitration separately. Supervision
and monitoring of implementation is suffering due to shortage of manpower and some key
posts being managed in dual charge / capacity.
    There is distinct hierarchy in all the districts in Bihar. Disputes are first resolved at the
grass root level by the concerned Anchal Adhikari (Circle Officer). Appellate and Revisional
authority also belong to revenue hierarchy. However, Bihar Land Tribunal and Municipal
Building Tribunal are independent appellate authorities. Policies are formulated at the
government level in the department of Revenue and Land Reform. Policies are also modified
through field experiences and feedbacks, as in many cases suggestions emanate from below,
pointing out constraints and difficulties. Adjudication of disputes is done by machinery
inclusive of administrative officers at various levels endowed with quasi-judicial powers and
authorities under various revenue laws, and this system is beneficial to the common mass of
people as the dispute resolution mechanism is omnibus, simple, cost effective and time
effective. If the general administration is isolated from implementing agencies, a whole
parallel pyramid of hierarchy has to be created which will be expensive and unnecessary and
the benefits accruing out of experience would go remiss.
Analysis of Dimension 9.1.2: Responsibilities of the Ministries and Agencies Dealing
With Land
There is no overlap in the responsibilities of Ministries and agencies dealing with land.
At the state level, as per the Rules of Executive Business, the Department of Revenue and
Land Reforms is in exclusive charge of all issues pertaining to land administration. Any
interdepartmental government land transfer / settlement and private land acquisition has to be
routed through the Revenue and Land Reforms department.
    There is no overlapping in land administration hierarchy as well as interdepartmental
transactions. The land question cropping up in various departments are eventually addressed
by the Department of Revenue and Land Reforms. Files go to the cabinet through the
Revenue and Land Reforms Department only. In case of land acquisition, for example, there
could be a plethora of requisitioning bodies and yet the Collector of the district / District
Land Acquisition Officer is the competent authority for the disposal of all such requisitions as
per the Land Acquisition Act for the time being in force.
    Various departments of government need land for pursuing their respective departmental
responsibilities and need. The Collector of a district has the final say in the choice of a piece
of land. Records are prepared at the grass root level which through a proper channel reaches
the Collector of a district who after taking the approval of the government finalizes the
proposal of land acquisition. The revenue department issues notification regarding the land
being required for public purpose.
    The Land Acquisition Officer of a District disposes of claims and objections in a
transparent manner. He prepares award and disburses compensation and takes over the
delivery of possession of the land on behalf of the government. Therefore, it can be safely
said that there is a common thread for the land acquisition process irrespective of the fact of
the existence of a plethora of requisitioning body.
Analysis of Dimension 9.1.3: Assignment of land-related responsibilities between the
different levels of administration and overlap
There is no question of administrative (vertical) overlap, as in the field administration there is
a clear cut hierarchy of Collector, Additional Collectors, Sub Divisional Officer, Deputy
Collector Land Reforms, Circle Officer, Circle Inspector and halka karamchari. Some
delegation is made in accordance with the provision of some or the other prevalent Revenue
Law. There is no overlap at all or else the entire system will go haywire.
                                               135
        Administrative (Vertical) overlapping has been avoided in land administration and
management. There is a clear cut division and assignment and roles and responsibilities /
jurisdiction and authorities in matter of land administration and dispensation of justice in
contested cases.
Analysis of Dimension 9.1.4: Reporting, Sharing and Accessibility of Information by
Public Bodies related to Land Right and Use
In Bihar, all land related information is not available on the website. However, information
related to land rights is available in the following offices in Bihar –
        1. Anchal Office-- Computerisation of land records / existing Khatiyan / Jamabandi
             register (Register II) is available and accessible.
        2. Survey & Settlement offices at the district level prepare record of rights and the
             same is maintained at Circle Office.
        3. Land Acquisition offices at the district level maintain records of land acquired.
        4. Khas Mahal offices at the district level maintain records of leases granted against
             Khas Mahal lands.
        5. Land particulars pertaining to government / community lands are available in
             Anchal Offices.
        6. The Directorate of Land Records & Survey has placed land related data of 8
             districts on the website.
        Since computerization of land records has not been completed, all land records are not
in public domain. Efforts are being made to computerize the land records as available on date
and put the same on the website to enable the common citizen to have easy & inexpensive
access to information. But it has not taken a shape due to the fact that much of the land
records in the offices are out dated ever since the last survey / revisional survey was
conducted.
        At the time of land acquisition, the Land Acquisition notifications are published with
full particulars of land in question in public domain.
        Survey / settlement have been such a long drawn process running into quite a few
decades. By the time final ROR (Record of Rights) is prepared, it becomes obsolete, hence
survey and settlements have, of late, become a misnomer. In Bihar, in 12 districts no
Revisional Survey could take place after the Cadastral Survey conducted about 100 years
ago. There are 12 districts where revisional survey was taken up, but was concluded after a
time span of quite a few decades. There are 14 districts where revisional surveys were taken
up several years ago but are yet to be concluded. All this builds up the rationale for a quick
focused, snap, abridged survey and settlement encompassing the entire state in one go. The
Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act / Rules have recently been passed and maps are
being prepared through application of modern technology. Government of Bihar has adopted
this Act / Rules in the interest of a focused survey and settlement without sacrificing quality,
transparency and grievances redressal procedures. The survey was started in 13 districts and
the progress as on 30th November, 2013 is as under.
        7. Revenue map preparations – Aerial photography has been done for 7696 revenue
             villages.
        8. Construction of ground control points – 15594 revenue villages.
        9. Processing of data received from Aerial photographs – 2033 revenue villages.
        10. Resurvey mapping verification – 53 revenue villages.
        11. Khanapuri done – 237 revenue villages.
        12. Publication of maps – 1 revenue village
        But for the above, land information system will continue to be replete with redundant,
irrelevant and obsolete records of rights and data. There will be no use computerising this
                                              136
 data which can hardly relate to current reality. As the revenue records are not updated and
 these are not upto the mark, huge cases of land disputes amongst raiyats are pending before
 the court. Pending cases of civil disputes in different courts of Bihar is very high. The
 number and description of the civil cases instituted in various district and subordinate courts
 in Bihar during various years are given below in table.




  Table 4.9.1: Number and description of civil suits instituted in various year in the state
                                      Classification of civil cases
                                  Other
                   Suit for suits not Suit                                       Total land Percentage
          Total
                    money         falling under Suit for Suit for                  related    of land
 Year civil                                                          Mortgage
                      or       under any the immovable specific                     cases     related
          cases                                                          suit
                  movable of the             rent property relief                (5+6+7+8)     cases
                  property preceding land
                                  heads
1       2         3           4            5       6            7    8          9           10
2005 21848 813                3216         289 15181            1426 923        17819       81.56
2006 21989 694                3050         249 15622            1900 474        18245       82.97
2007 24862 692                6956         263 15344            1113 494        17214       69.24
2008 24653 681                6380         276 15432            1315 569        17592       71.36
2009 27646 626                7838         252 17072            1270 588        19182       69.38
2010 29911 592                8503         264 18540            1481 531        20816       69.59
2011 18097 1212               13052        406 1773             1263 391        3833        21.18
  (Source: Bihar Statistical Hand Book 2012)
        The percentage of land related cases with respect to civil cases varied from 70-82
  percent till 2010. In 2011, the percentage of land related case was only 21.18 percent. It could
  be clearly seen from the above table that the institution of land related cases has reduced after
  the promulgation of the Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009.
        The land related cases in Civil Court in Patna district also varied from 80-82 percent till
  2010. After that the share came down to approximately to 40 percent, probably, due to Bihar
  Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009. As on 31st December, 2013 there are 27494 civil cases
  pending in the district court of Patna out of which 10647 relate to land dispute.
        The pending cases in the revenue court for land ceiling in the state are 650. The
  pending cases of sharecroppers in the state as on 31st March, 2013 are 995 the details of
  which are given below in table.
  Table 4.9.2: Details of cases with respect to sharecroppers as on 31st March, 2013 in
  Bihar
                                                                            No. of cases pending
                             No. of Cases as on No. of cases disposed
  Particulars                  st                                           as on 31st March,
                             31 March, 2013           during 2012-13
                                                                            2013
                          st
  No. of cases as on 31 1176                          181                   995
  March 2013                                          (15.39%)              (84.61%)
                                               137
Area involved in acres 5005.7                    271.30                  4734
                                                 (5.42%)                 (94.57%)
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reform, Govt. of Bihar)
        The encroachment cases pending in the state with the various courts are 5219, the
details of which is given below in table.
Table 4.9.3: Encroachment of public land as on 31st March, 2013 in Bihar
Particulars                                      Number                    Area in acre
Cases as on 31.03.2012                             4587                       1860.72
Cases filed during 2012-13                         3502                        602.25
                      st
Total cases as on 31 March, 2013                   8089                       2462.97
Disposal of cases in 2012-13                       2870                        749.16
Pending cases as on 31st March, 2013               5219                       1713.81
                                                 (64.52%)                    (69.58%)
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reform, Govt. of Bihar)
Supervision and monitoring of dispute resolution is not adequate / up to the mark, due to
shortage of manpower and absence of clear framework of monitoring.
Analysis of Dimension 9.1.5: Consistency of Overlap of Rights Based on Tenure
Typology
In Bihar sub-tenancy is not on record. However, the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 provides for
u/s 48 (e) safeguards against threatened or actual ejectment of sub-tenants. Conflicts over
land rights go to Civil Courts / DCLR courts under the BLDR Act, 2009 and Bihar Land
Tribunal.
    The word ‘tenure typology’ relates to occupancy raiyats, non-occupancy / occupancy
under raiyats and non occupancy under raiyat. The aforesaid term has been dealt in the
concern Tenancy Acts. The rights / status of landowner (Raiyat) have been duly defined in
the Bihar Tenancy Act 1885, and by and large, they are also reflected in their records of
rights except when such land has been recorded in the names of the non-deserving raiyats
illegally. However, it will not be possible to enumerate such cases of fraudulent or collusive
entry, until and unless, one embarks upon time bound focused survey and settlement in the
entire state in one go. Such a survey requires three things: -
        1. Availability of adequate funds, Massive funds would have to be applied not only
             to meet establishment cost but also to get modern equipment and modern
             technology.
        2. Massive deployment of efficient and dedicated officers and staff to man different
             positions in the field and discharging responsibility in a systematic and scientific
             manner.
        3. Proper training of staff and officers involved in survey work with respect to new
             technologies and new enactments.
        As the revenue records are not updated, there are many cases of overlaps of right
(based on tenure typology). There are large numbers of cases of civil disputes pending in the
competent courts of Bihar (already mentioned above). Since the cases are not being disposed
of on priority basis, many persons stake claim over the same piece of land.
        As per section 4 of Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, after the vesting of Zamindari in
the State, all sub-soil rights, including mines and minerals, whether discovered or not and
whether worked or not, have vested in the State. Forest wealth, which comes under the
category of renewable common property assets is governed by relevant Forest Laws and
policies in place and are fully consistent in provision and application.
Analysis of Dimension 9.1.6: Existence of Ambiguity in Institutional Mandates

                                              138
There is hardly any incidence of ambiguity in institutional mandates (based on institutional
map). As per executive instructions, approved by the Cabinet Secretariat, the Department of
Revenue and Land Reforms carries exclusive mandate for land administration. It includes
land transfers, land settlement, land leases, land acquisition and lands falling under the direct
management of the government (especially in urban areas). Land policies, as formulated at
the state or central level are in place and there is no occasion for any deviation at any level
either in the Revenue and Land Reforms Department or any other department. For
implementation, Officials are duly identified responsibilities fixed at various levels through
legislation or executive instructions.
    The various land related laws e.g., the Bihar Privileged Person Homestead Tenancy Act,
1947; the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, Bihar Bhoodan Yogjna Act, 1954, the Bihar
Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation Act, 1956, the Bihar Ceiling Act,
1961, the Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act, 1969, the Bihar Public Demand Recovery
Act, 1914 the Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009, the Bihar Land Mutation Act, the
Bihar Conversion of Agriculture Land for non-agricultural purposes Act, the Bihar Special
Survey & Settlement Act, 2011 and Bihar Khas Mahal Policy, clearly & unequivocally
determine and define the respective jurisdiction of original, appellate and revisional
authorities and there is no scope of any ambiguity. Any scope for ambiguity is removed by
the collector seeking clarifications and the government issuing clarifications.
    After the promulgation of the New Bihar Khas Mahal Policy, quite a few collectors
wanted clarifications on certain issues which were promptly attended to. So much so,
necessary amendments were also carried out in the aforesaid policy by the government.
Ambiguity, if any, on conceptual or theoretical matter, is brought to surface on two
occasions: (a) Implementation stage, vertical by implementing officers and staff. Here
ambiguity can, as well, take shape due to some lurking misunderstanding or
misinterpretation, lacunae, loopholes, objectives unfulfilled, lack of clarity on roles and
responsibilities and the likes. Such doubts and clarifications are sent to head quarter by
collectors, settlement officers or Deputy Director of Consolidation. (b) A second platform of
discussing ambiguity, if any, is provided by monthly review meetings at various levels and
training camps organized at various levels.
    In Bihar, it is gratifying to note that innumerable revenue training and workshops all over
Bihar (in all the 38 district HQ conference halls) and in BIPARD, Patna were conducted in
the last six to eight years. On the basis of feedback in some district level training camps /
workshops, power of execution to competent authority under the Bihar Land Dispute
Resolution Act was vested in them by amendment in the Act. Clarifications with regard to
land regulations concerning Forest, Industrial and Urban sectors, if any, are addressed
promptly and any ambiguity with regard to policy and implementation is removed.
Ambiguity not only creates conflict of interest and jurisdictions, but also creates a roadblock
and one may also land up in a state of drift. A special care has been taken to ensure the
absence of ambiguity.
Assessment of Dimension 9.2: Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making
process: policies are formulated through a decision-making process that draws on
inputs from all concerned. The legal framework is non-discriminatory and institutions
to enforce property rights are equally accessible to all
 Dimension
                Land policies and regulations are          B   A comprehensive land policy exists or can be
                developed in a participatory manner            inferred by the existing legislation, and
 9 2      1     involving all relevant stakeholders.
                                                               sections of the community affected by these
                                                               decisions are informed, but feedback is
                                                               usually not sought or not used in making
                                              139
                                                             decisions
               Land policies address equity and poverty B    Land policies incorporate clearly formulated
               reduction goals; progress towards these       equity and poverty objectives that are
                                                             regularly and meaningfully monitored but
9 2       2    are publicly monitored.                       their impact on equity and poverty issues is
                                                             not compared to that of other policy
                                                             instruments.
               Land policies address ecological and      B   Land policies incorporate clearly formulated
               environmental goals; progress towards         ecology and environmental sustainability
                                                             objectives that are regularly and
9 2       3    these are publicly monitored.                 meaningfully monitored but their impact is
                                                             not compared to that of other policy
                                                             instruments.
               The implementation of land policy is      D   The implementation of land policy is not
               costed, matched with benefits and             costed and there is inadequate budget,
9 2       4                                                  resources and capacity to implement the land
               adequately resourced.                         policy.
               There is regular and public reporting         Formal land institutions report on land policy
9 2       5    indicating progress in policy                 implementation in a regular and meaningful
                                                             way but reports are not made public.
               implementation.
               Land policies help to improve land use        Policy is in place to improve access to and
               by low-income groups and those who            productive use of assets by poor and
9 2       6                                                  marginalized groups, is applied in practice,
               experienced injustice.                        but is not effective
                Land policies proactively and effectively    Policy is in place to prevent settlement in
9 2       7                                                  high risks areas but which is not enforced.
                reduce future disaster risk.
Analysis of Dimension 9.2.1: Involvement of all Relevant Stakeholders in Developing
Land Policies and Regulations
A comprehensive land policy can be inferred by the existing legislation and circulars. There
are old classical laws, like the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885, the Chhotongpur Tenancy Act,
1908, the Santhal Paraganas, Tenancy (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 1949, Bihar Land
Reforms Act, 1950 and the like in yesteryears, regarding which it is not possible as of now to
say whether beneficiaries or affected interest groups / people had been consulted or not or
feedback taken or not. However, it can be said that, the above tenancy laws were born to
meet special contingency in determining the relationship between landlord and the tenant.
        Successive revenue laws after Independence were enacted with a special demand on
the political system. People were reeling under the atrocious zamindari system and its
abolition was the product of a social and agrarian demand. Ceiling law came in the wake of
focus on distributive justice to break the concentration of landed assets and distribution of
surplus land among the landless. The law of consolidation, Bhoodan, Public Land
Encroachment etc. reflected the need of the hour. Recent enactments were based on the
following factors.
        1. To meet a special contingencies as presented by changing times
        2. Discussion and deliberation at field and head quarters level regarding the
            deficiencies in existing laws or absence of an appropriate and relevant law.
        3. The felt needs of the weaker section of the society as perceived by the authorities
            at head quarter & field levels and as demand as ventilated by the target groups.
      A striking example of felt need as mentioned above is the Bihar Mahadalit Land
Purchase Policy. The government had set an ambitious target of providing house sites to
nearly 2.25 lakh, house-siteless mahadalit families in Bihar. Apart from three land streams,
viz. Gairmazarua Aam, Malik and BPPHT lands, a fourth land stream was evolved on the
basis of feedback from local officials & beneficiary, that is, purchase of land, where land
                                             140
from the other three land streams was not available. Similarly, power for the grant of
Gairmazarua Aam land was earlier vested in the cabinet. In the light of feedback and to cut
down procedural delays, the power of sanction was delegated to Divisional Commissioner by
a cabinet decision.
        Summary of Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act was published in newspapers for
general information to enable and encourage people taking recourse to this act. All the laws
and policies promulgated during the recent years are available on web site of the revenue and
land reforms department and accessible to all including target groups. The proposed Building
Bye Law, 2013 has been placed on the website of Urban and Housing Department for seeking
public opinion.
        Regarding land acquisition, certain policies, beneficial to land-losers were formulated
in last six years in light of representation and grievances ventilated by interest groups in
many districts of Bihar at district level. For example, the highest rate of land of a given class
in a given mouza will apply to the same class in another mouza provided both the mouza are
covered by the same scheme/project. Further, the classification of lands may be re-
determined overriding entries in land records from agriculture to residential to commercial, in
case there is a potential of such conversion in near future in the land acquisition area. This
has helped the administration elicit prompt and proactive response and cooperation from the
land losers.
Analysis of Dimension 9.2.2: The Goal of Equity and Poverty Reduction through Land
Policy and its Monitoring
In Bihar, concerted efforts have been made during the decades following Independence to
address land policies to equity & poverty reduction goals. Close monitoring of the progress is
done at monthly interval at the State Level.
    Land is the crux of most of development activities, including educational, industrial and
infrastructural development activities. Many projects remain a non-starter if land is not made
available in time whether it is public land or private land. Many projects for which land was
partly arranged remain hanging in balance, till the requirement of additional lands is met. The
policies programmes and laws in state government especially formulated recently have been
people centric, equitious and inclusive. They aim at poverty reduction with equity, with the
ultimate objective of covering the utterly landless and resource less segments of the
population. Through policy statements of the state government land acquisition processes
were tilted in favour of land losers. Special care was taken to provide land to the
housesiteless Mahadalit families in Bihar. The survey of such families was conducted in two
phases. In the 2nd phase care was taken of families left out in the 1st phase. Addressing
policies to equity concerns, gender equity was ensured in two ways (a) by ensuring that sale
deed were executed in favour of female beneficiaries exclusively in land purchase policy of
the Mahadalit. Similarly, an amendment was made in the ceiling law of the state to ensure
that 50% of the surplus land beneficiaries were women exclusively. The parcha/pawna of
lands issued to land allottees is also being made in the joint name of wife and husband. The
wife’s name is written first followed by husband’s name.
    The State Government also provides the land for link roads in Bihar under the belief that
there would be economic growth of far flung tolas inhabited by the poor by extending road
connectivity to them. The schemes of many other departments revolve around land. What
purpose a bi-cycle for school going residence is served, if the tola is not connected with main
road?
    One major roadblock in rural development is the identification and registration of share
croppers. It does not seem to be a working proposition now. What was true to Kerala in 1971,
the same thing could not materialize in West Bengal (1974). All over India, tenancy reforms
                                              141
have been forgotten for want of political will and things have been left to take care of
themselves. If pushed through, under pressure, the existing tenants will be evicted by land
owners, afraid of losing lands. Hence the idea gaining ground now is to allow forces of social
equilibrium and inter-personal accord to let share cropping be pursued in mutual interest of
both the parties. It is almost impossible to launch and come out survey of share croppers on
mass scale. Nonetheless, in Bihar Tenancy Act, section 48(E) is usually invoked by the share
croppers who have got anything to say against the land owners. The matter goes to a Revenue
Arbitration Board, which is free to collect local evidence on a case to case basis. This element
in law takes care of equity concern vis-à-vis the sharecropper. There are NABARD / RBI
guidelines stating that no collaterals need to be furnished for agricultural credit upto Rs.
50,000/, ensure agriculture credit to sharecropper. Ensuring security of tenure under section
48(E), coupled with facilities for institutional credit leads one to the goal of economic growth
with social justice. The land policies of the State Government address equity and poverty
reduction goal.
    As mentioned above, surplus land has been allotted to economically weaker section
people for the purpose of equity, livelihood and dignity. Dispossession issues have not been
properly addressed in Bihar, resulting in equity concerns unattended. It is one thing to assign
public land to disadvantaged group and another to ensure their continuous possession over
the same. Figures of dispossession of SC/ST and other deserving people are compiled on a
regular basis in a fixed format in Bihar where dispossession or threatened dispossession is
taken care of by the Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act (through revenue court of D.C.L.R.
in a time bound manner). Out of the land allotment made to 23,11,944 beneficiaries, the
cases of dispossession was reported in case of 3126 beneficiaries (0.13%) involving an area
of 2070.5 acres till 31st March, 2013. Possession was restored in case of 604 beneficiaries
(19.32%) covering 481.35 acres. 2522 (80.68%) cases of dispossession is pending as on 31st
March, 2013 involving an area of 1588.70 acre. It may be possible that certain instances of
dispossession may not be reported by the poor people to the government for threat of
harassment.
Analysis of Dimension 9.2.3: Ecological and Environmental Goals through Land Policy
and its Monitoring
In Bihar, The Bihar Agricultural Land (Conversion for Non-Agricultural Purposes) Act, 2010
and Rules 2010 have already been passed. Certain riders have been provided in the Act and
rules so that ecological/environmental concerns are not jeopardised. Bihar is one of the few
states in the country to have passed the Bihar Agricultural Land (Conversion for Non
Agricultural Purposes) Act which gives certain powers to competent authority in this regard
in extremely limited way. Pollution and related issues, often interdisciplinary in nature, are
duly taken care of by the Bihar Pollution Control Board, Department of Environment &
Forest, Department of Industries and Department of Urban Development.
      With the new Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement Act, ecological &
environmental concerns are addressed more stringently. Even in the previous land acquisition
act these concerns were not altogether left in the lurch.
      There is a State Industrial Promotional Board, under the chairmanship of Development
Commissioner, which enquires into pollution & other factors, besides the availability of land
& water for upcoming industries.
      The Second Agriculture Roadmap prepared by the Government of Bihar, the
sustainability and environmental concern were given prime importance. Progress under
Agriculture Roadmap is being monitored regularly by the committee under the chairmanship
of Chief Secretary. Watershed Development Schemes are being implemented in the state
through Agriculture Department of the State Government and NABARD, wherein
                                              142
sustainability and ecological concern has been addressed. These schemes are being monitored
regularly by the implementing agencies and high power committee constituted under the
Chairmanship of Development Commissioner.
Analysis of Dimension 9.2.4: Cost and Benefit Analysis of the implementation of land
policy
The benefit-cost ratio cannot be worked out in a scenario where lands are to be distributed or
settled free of cost to eligible categories of raiyats. The whole edifice of distributive justice
rests on the government concern for the poor & resourceless. Government lands are settled
with eligible raiyats belonging to poor landless and resourceless families without charging
any price.
       Lands are settled by the Industries Department though the instrumentality of BIADA to
entrepreneurs on lease basis with certain conditions. The market rate is being charged from
the allottees along with developmental/administrative cost. However, the annual appreciation
costs are not charged. Here also the main concern is development of industry and entailing
job avenues for unemployed.
       The sole revenue earning policy of the Government of Bihar is the New Khas Mahal
policies. The government settles the khas Mahal land on a periodic lease basis after taking
current market value of land as initial salami. Subsequently, 2% of that amount is taken for
residential leases and 5 percent for commercial leases on an annual basis. At the time of
renewal, at the end of 30 years, renewal salami worth 10 per cent of current market value is
charged for all types of leases. Similarly, in violation cases there are punitive measures
including financial ones and evictions. This exercise of leases hardly calls for any budget
resources for sustenance. Land acquisition costs, in lump sum, are deposited in advance by
the requisitioning body. In such cases benefit cost ratio are worked out well in advance.
However, hardly any requisitioning bodies ultimately concerned with financial profit enter
into a land deal through private purchase or land acquisition, where cost are higher than
benefits.
       When a government takes resort to land acquisition for many public purposes, those
may not be and need not be guided by profit motive, like educational institution, hospitals,
old age homes and similar welfare philanthropic institutions and activities.
       All lands in Bihar including urban and rural, owned and possessed by private
individuals are subject to appropriate rents, payable annually.
Table 4.9.4: Collection of Land Rent during various years in Bihar
                                            Total Demand                     Total Collection
                 Year
                                            (in Rs. Crore)                    (in Rs. Crore)
               2007-08                            100                              27.46
               2008-09                            100                              45.37
               2009-10                            110                              39.16
               2010-11                            112                              19.62
               2011-12                            140                              28.03
               2012-13                            185                              47.18
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reforms, Government of Bihar)
       Land transfers, under the Transfer of Property Act, as are subject to registration, entail
payment of registration charges, stamp duty and other miscellaneous charges. However,
Registries, all over Bihar are fully computerized and self-sustained.
Analysis of Dimension 9.2.5: Report on Land Policy Implementation
Public reporting indicating progress in policy implementation is monitored regularly by the
concerned department at various levels.

                                              143
      In the website of the Revenue and Land Reforms Department, Urban Development
Department, Registration Department, Forest Department, Municipal Corporation,
Organization Chart, Acts, Rules, Circulars, Proceedings, Land Acquisition Notices,
Allotment Orders, Guidelines for various schemes, best practices, annual reports, notices,
Draft Rules / Acts for seeking public opinion etc., are loaded. Public can easily see the above
parameters of the department. Different formats have been designed for reporting progress
on each parameter on monthly basis and are being reviewed at state level on a monthly basis.
However, the progress report is not uploaded on the website.
      For land acquisition, detailed notification is made in local newspapers for the purpose
of public reporting.
      Policies, which are in place in Bihar, are regularly monitored at various levels as
regards their implementation. The Circle Officers hold weekly staff meetings with grass root
level functionaries and review progress of implementation. The Collector holds regular
review meetings at district level with all concerned officials including officials dealing with
land The Divisional Commissioner holds frequent reviews with Collectors. It is also a fact
with administrative life that Circle Officers & DCLRs are in regular and constant touch with
each other. Because of the small area of a DCLR’s, sub-division, the DCLR & Circle Officers
are part of a close knit family. State Government review the progress of implementation on
monthly basis from the ADM, Land Revenue. Regular meeting is conducted at the state
headquarter on last Monday of every month, where in Principal Secretary, Revenue and
Land Reforms review the progress on each and every aspects of land governance.
      Informal channels of review & instructions on policy implementation are also in
practice, which in no way is less important than formal reviews and instruction, because this
indeed create a sense of urgency by them.
      For land acquisition, detailed notification is made in local papers for the purpose of
public reporting.
Analysis of Dimension 9.2.6: Land Policy to Improve Access to and Productive Use of
Assets by Poor and Marginalized Groups
Successive policies of the State Government have pursued the goal of improving access to
and productive use of assets by poor and marginalized groups. These policies applied in
practice and effective.
      Land policies for allotment of surplus land to the landless people for livelihood
/production, helps in improving the use of land by low income group. A total number of
23,11,944 landless families has been allotted land till 31st March, 2013. Policy of
construction of Apna Ghar, Ranbasera, etc., is meant for low income groups and those who
experience injustice due to poverty. Similarly allotment of homestead site to 212472 numbers
of mahadalit families helps low income group who have experience injustice in having their
own home sites.
      Category wise distribution of surplus ceiling lands also indicates the preference given
to Schedule Caste, Schedule Tribe and Other Backward Caste community people, which
constitutes 81.23% of the land allottees. The details can be seen from the following table.
Table 4.9.5: Category wise distribution of surplus ceiling land in Bihar as on 31 st
March, 2013
           Category                  No. of Beneficiaries                Area in acre
                                           228700                         170793.63
              SC
                                          (64.16%)                         (62.50%)
                                            29140                          25350.33
              ST
                                           (8.18%)                          (9.28%)
             OBC                            31681                          24844.95

                                             144
                                            (8.89%)                         (9.09%)
                                             66910                         52262.73
            General
                                           (18.77%)                        (19.13%)
             Total                          356431                         273251.6
Figures in bracket shows percentage
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reform, Govt. of Bihar)

    Although Bataidari / sharecropping in Bihar is mostly oral, policy framework has been
developed for giving agriculture loan to bataidar upto Rs. 50,000/- on their simple declaration
that they cultivate so much of land as sharecropper. These self declarations are to be certified
by the Mukhiya of the local Gram Panchayat / President of the farmers club. There is no need
for any collateral security for obtaining agricultural loan upto Rs. 50,000/-.
       In Bihar, the Urban Planning and Development Act 2012 has been passed which helps
to improve low income groups. The proposed building bye-laws 2013 provide for zoning
restrictions on land uses as well as accessibilities of the economically weaker section to land
use. But it is not implemented meticulously in Bihar resulting into haphazard construction of
houses in urban areas of Bihar.
       Provision of Basigat Purcha to the houseless poor is being provided in the rural areas of
Bihar.
       Slums have been identified for provision of shelters to slum dwellers. A clear and
transparent slum policy has been prepared and approved. However the goal of these
mechanisms is still far away.
       The State Government has decided to make available 3 decimals of land for the
construction of households of their own to the Mahadalits at the government level. The
progress of provide lands to mahadalits is much satisfactory. A large number of mahadalits
families have been benefited by this policy of the government. It can be said that the policy of
the government in this regard is very useful to poor people of rural areas of Bihar and it was
implemented successfully in the state due to commitment of the state Government.
The house sites allotted to mahadalit families from various types of government land in Bihar
is given below in table.
Table 4.9.6: House sites allotted to mahadalit families from various types of government
land as on 31st December, 2013
                                                                        Raiyat land
                   Gairmazruha         Gairmazruha                       purchase
  Particulars                                            BPPHT Act                      Total
                       Malik               Aam                          (Grihsthali
                                                                          Yojna)
     Phase I           67343               33792             46839         37227       185201
    Phase II           11754                3943              8368          3206        27271
      Total            79097               37735             55207         40433       212472
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reform, Govt. of Bihar)
       Policy to ensure delivery of low cost building does exist and is in place. Bihar Housing
Board (BHB) and Housing and Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO), Government of
India, have been constructing and providing for housing for EWS, LIG, MIG and HIG.
Majority of housing units are meant for EWS and LIG groups. Under Indira Aawas Yojana,
house construction is being done in the rural area for the weaker section of the society.
Under Rajiv Aawas Yojana (for urban area), the state has started a modest beginning by
approving the projects of construction of 40,746 houses for EWS under 27 ULBs of the states
with a cost of 16.66 crores. In principle, approval has been given by the state level
sanctioning and monitoring committee. The proposal is being sent to Government of India for
                                              145
approval. A 15 per cent reservation has been proposed in Draft Building bye-laws (2013) for
EWS (Economically Weaker Sections) of the population.
Currently HUDCO has been allocating its loan disbursement which is illustrated in the
following table.
Table 4.9.7: Allocation of loan disbursement for house construction
(a) Economically Weaker Section               30 per cent
(b) Low Income Group                          25 per cent
(c) Middle Income Group                       25 per cent
(d) High Income Group                         20 per cent
(Source: HUDCO Office, Patna)
The government is providing housing to economically weaker section under Integrated
Housing for Slum Development Programme (IHSDP) and under Basic Services for Urban
Poor (BSUP). Similarly, the provision of link road in remote and far flung areas inhabitants,
mostly poor, will go a long way in improving access and connectivity to the poor people.
Analysis of Dimension 9.2.7: Land Policies to Reduce Future Disaster Risk
As mentioned in land policy, the settlement in high risk area is prevented. Appropriate zoning
has been done for risk mitigations. Land utilization policies of the government also address
the core issues of disaster management. Special care is being taken in construction of houses
in seismic zone. Construction of houses in riverbed or riverbed site has been restricted. The
height of the building near airport is restricted, minimum distance has been prescribed for the
house from high-tension electric wire, dumping yard and petroleum depot. All above policies
and restrictions have been made to proactively and effectively reduce future disaster risk.
However, the implementation of this policy is deficient.
4.9.3 CONCLUSION
Land governance is a state subject and the department of Revenue and Land Reforms is the
principle department in the context of Bihar. Regarding institutional structure, the said
department is well organised and duties and responsibilities are clearly delineated for
effective land governance. However, the department is suffering from huge crunch of
manpower. Shortage of manpower is evident in all layers of the department and shortage is
very at the grass root level layer of the department. Condition related to manpower is almost
same in the other relevant department. Apart from manpower there is lack of skill to
effectively perform duties also evident. The non-availability of adequate infrastructure
especially at the grass root level became the reason for gap maintenance of record related to
land. There is a clear separation in the roles of policy formulation, implementation and
arbitration and there are hardly any overlap exists in assignment of responsibilities. Even if
any technical overlap crop in it does not last longer. However, though there are gaps in
implementation of rights. There are large numbers of cases of civil disputes pending in the
different courts of Bihar. The percentage of land related cases with respect to civil cases
varied from 70-82 percent till 2010. The silver lining in this regard is the enactment of Bihar
Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009. It has been observed that the land related pending cases
dropped significantly after passage of this Act. There are large numbers of disputes cropped
up due to non-availability of updated land record. There is limited scope of ambiguity in the
institutional mandate as different Acts and Laws related to land clearly & unequivocally
determine and define the respective jurisdiction of original, appellate and revisional
authorities and scope of any ambiguity eliminated. The policies are developed and
amendment introduced to ensure equity and social justice as well to incorporate demand by
the target group the experience gained through implementation and feedback from grass root
level officials. The land policies of the government address equity and poverty reduction
goal. Though there are some safeguard provided for safeguard to under raiyat but their right
                                             146
has not recognised properly. Though there are policies to ensure ecological and
environmental balance, it also needs to be strengthened. The implementation of policies is
monitored effectively formally and informally on regular basis; however there are also cases
of dispossession, encroachment etc in the context of Bihar.
4.9.4 STRENGTH
   20. There is clarity of mandate and practices in regulation and management of land sector
       in Bihar.
   21. Original, Appellate and Revisional Authorities have been clearly defined under
       respective Revenue Acts.
   22. Bihar Land Tribunal hears the appeal cases which have been decided at the
       revisional/final level of the revenue quasi-judicial hierarchy.
   23. Policies are formulated at the government level and programmes emanating there
       from are implemented/ supervised at the anchal/sub-divisional/district/divisional
       level.
   24. Conflicts/disputes resolutions with regard to dispossession of public land allottees, as
       well as private land disputes, are the priority on the part of anchals and police station
       concerned.
   25. Setting up of separate revenue cadre in state will strengthen institutional arrangement
       in due course.
4.9.5 BEST PRACTICES
   26. Creation of Separate Revenue Cadre
       The State Government has created a separate revenue cadre in the state vide
       notification number 4020 dated 15th January, 2010. Creation of separate Revenue
       Cadre is a step forward in the direction of improved and efficient land governance.
       The sanctioned posts for various revenue officials have been created vide this
       notification, right from Circle Inspector to Additional Collector / Dy. Director, under
       various sections of Revenue Department. Since these officials will remain in the
       Revenue Department throughout their career, their training, grooming and experience
       in course of time will help them to discharge their duties efficiently and effectively.
4.9.6 WEAKNESS
   27. There is no rural land use policy and land use board in the state.
   28. E-linking of computer of registry office with circle office has not yet been done.
   29. All land related departments are suffering from large shortage of staff.
   30. 15-20 percent of cultivators are oral bataidars. Land owners used to rotate the oral
       bataidar on every two to three years. Due to this reason, the bataidars do not make
       long term investment in land.
   31. Circle Officers drawn from various departments may lack specialized expertise to
       discharge duties with regard to land revenue administration. However this problem
       has been taken into consideration by creating separate revenue cadre.
   32. Under the BLDR Act, Deputy Collector Land Reforms (DCLR) is the competent
       authority, but their functions as presiding officers, are not regularly supervised by
       respective District Collectors.
   33. Many Directors under Land Reforms and Revenue Department are running under dual
       charge resulting in inadequate attention.
   34. There is a wide gap in capacity building initiatives for revenue officials and officials
       of all other land related department to upgrade and sharpen their skills. Even under
       Special Survey and Settlement Operation, modern technology is being used for
       preparation of record of rights and generation of revenue maps, but most of the

                                              147
        officials/staff engaged with this work are not conversant with the modern systems,
        knowledge of ETS/DGPS etc.
   35. Sub-divisional Officer is the controlling officer in the sub division. Sometimes the
        Deputy Collector Land Reforms (DCLR) is senior to their Sub-division Officers. It
        creates ego problems. The sub divisional officer is not the controlling officer of
        DCLR. DCLR is responsible to the Collector through Additional Collector. SDO’s
        responsibility in revenue is confined only to Bihar Agriculture Land (Conversion for
        Non-Agricultural Purpose) Act where in SDO is the competent authority for
        permitting conversion. Secondly, SDO has the power to settle Gairmazarhua Malik
        land with eligible categories of raiyat.
   36. There is no unified system for collection and maintenance of data for land possessed
        by different State Government Departments, Central Government Departments and
        Public Sector Corporations. These data are not available. Hence, information
        regarding the management of these lands is lacking.
   37. People are facing problem in getting maps, land possession certificate, copy of
        khatiyan and record of rights due to non updating of the land record, its
        computerization and digitisations.
4.9.7 POLICY RECOMMENDATION
4.9.7.1 Short Term
   1. A State Land use Policy based on existing laws and policies should be developed. A
        Land Use Board in Bihar should be set up for formulating the Land Use Policy,
        making 10-15 years perspective land use plan and monitoring the implementation of
        land use plan.
   2. Government should devise a unified system in Revenue Department for collection of
        data for land possessed by different State Government Departments, Central
        Government Departments and Public Sector Corporations. Each department should
        maintain and update the status of the land they possess. This will help in efficient
        management of land in future.
   3. Set up an effective Grievance Redressal machinery for the people of the state.
   4. A vigorous special / massive time bound programme should be started, focusing on
        giving possession to dispossessed persons, with proper co-ordination between revenue
        and police officials. A need based system of summary trial may help in solving the
        dispossession cases in rural areas of Bihar.
4.9.7.2 Medium Term
1.      Enumerating Common Property Resources (CPR), Common land and public land in
        every National Sample Survey (NSS) should be made mandatory. An inventory of
        common property resources, common land and public land should be prepared and
        make it available on public domain for public scrutiny.
2.      Special survey should be completed within the prescribed time framework.
        Computerization of record of rights and digitization of maps based on special survey
        should be completed by 31st March, 2016. Special drive should be launched to update
        land record jointly by all concerned department.
3.      E-Interlinking of Land Records with Registry in entire state.
   4. Capacity Building need to be greatly enhanced as the existing training facilities is
        inadequate. With wide spread use of modern technology, there is a greater need for
        the training of the staff at various levels. The existing training institutions should be
        suitably upgraded. The training syllabi should be such that, besides upgrading the
        skills of trainees to enable them to discharge their duties more competently, they also
        get an exposure to the technological and human relations dimension of modern land
                                              148
        administration. Capacity building programmes on process, procedure and technology
        use should be designed and implemented, sooner. In order to attract better
        professionally qualified trainers in training institutions, adequate financial and other
        incentives should be provided for.
   5. The halka karamcharis should have an office of their own. They can be
        accommodated in the proposed Gram Panchayat Bhawan.
   6. It is also necessary to rationalize the jurisdiction of Circle Officer. An inspector
        cannot supervise effectively the work of more than 8-10 halka karamcharis.
        Depending upon the same, additional posts may be created.
   1. Provision for sufficiently trained and qualified manpower in the survey and settlement
        departments should be made. Latest tools / machines and adequate budget should be
        provided to complete the special survey by 31st March, 2016.
   2. Filling of the vacant, sanctioned posts in all land related departments need to be
        undertaken, on urgent basis, to improve revenue administration and strengthen related
        institutional arrangements.
   3. Awareness creation programme should be launched on a massive scale. In Bihar, a
        comprehensive set of measures should be undertaken involving legislative,
        administrative and public awareness building to ensure the rights of the tribals over
        land, forest, water, minor forest produce, and mineral resources.
4.9.7.3 Long Term
   4. The status regarding office and residential accommodation for the staff of revenue
        department, at various levels is unsatisfactory. The Government may take necessary
        steps in this regard.
   1. Supervision, Inspection and Monitoring constitutes the backbone of institutional
        arrangements. Detailed norms have been laid down by the state government / Board
        of Revenue, Bihar on this. These norms are either ignored or carried out in a rather
        perfunctory manner. The need for close supervision is felt more with the introduction
        of modern technology. The state government should review these aspects thoroughly
        and revise these norms, and ensure adherence of norms. Supervision / Monitoring
        mechanisms need to be strengthened at every stage starting from state head quarter to
        the circle office level.
   2. Amendment of various acts (Bihar Agriculture Land Act, 2010, Bihar Land Reforms
        Act, 1961, Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011, Bihar Land Dispute
        Resolution Act, 2010, Bihar Land Tribunal Act, Registration Act etc.,) as suggested in
        panel 1, panel 2 and panel 8 can be attempted on priority basis.




                                              149
                                      CHAPTER – 5

                   SUMMARY & RECOMMENDATION
5.1 SUMMARY
Land is one of the most critical and important resources for inclusive growth in the state as
2.88% of India’s land mass support 8.58% of the population of the country. A balance in land
use for industrial purpose and agriculture is essential for this predominantly agrarian
economy. Given this background the situation calls for an efficient, transparent, accountable
and equitable land governance system. The present study is an attempt to assess the status of
land governance in the state of Bihar by using the Land Governance Assessment Framework
of the World Bank in 9 LGAF theme consisting of 27 land governance indicators (LGI) and
116 dimensions.
        Since independence Bihar has taken proactive measures to ensure legal land rights
over land of individuals in rural and urban areas through legal provisions and enactment of a
large number of Acts and Rules. There is recognition of land rights in urban areas against
lands held by individuals, households, apartments, group housing, commercial complexes,
slums and the like. For equity purpose, house sites and land for production were allotted from
various land streams in favour of economically weaker sections of society. In recent years
several initiatives have been taken to give land rights to women. Still the proportion of land
in the name of women is very less. Steps were initiated for checking encroachment,
dispossession or threatened dispossession and land dispute resolution by enacting Acts and
Rules. There is no dearth of legal provisions. However, the areas of concern are deficient
implementation of Acts / rules, non-completion of revisional survey, slow progress in special
survey, poor availability of Record of Rights (RoR), un-updated record of rights, lack of
Land Use Policy and Plan for rural areas in Bihar. Perspective land use plan and their
integration in the state plans and the national perspective development plan are required. A
significant section of RoR is outdated. The Cadastral Survey concluded almost 100 years ago.
There is a gap in updating land record with proper survey and settlement operations after
cadastral survey. Though the Revisional Survey started in the decade of 1960s but it had been
completed in only 12 districts. The revisional Survey started but not completed in 14 districts
and in 12 districts it was not at all started. Even where it was completed it took long time, so
the data became obsolete. Though the computerisation of land data is initiated in the state but
they are digitising the old data which have little relevance with the ground reality.
        The forest and common land are clearly identified in Bihar and the same are recorded
as such. Due to absence of proper survey, the demarcation of forest land is a matter of
concern. In major urban areas, common land has been identified and arrangements have been
made to construct boundary walls to protect them from encroachment. There is no user’s
right as such in 13 national parks / wildlife sanctuaries in Bihar. Though there is hardly any
group right over forest produce, but the usufructuary rights of users on natural resources and
forest produce is recognized and the Joint Forest Management Committee is instrumental for
ensuring this. The implementation of Forest Right Act (FRA) in the context of Bihar is very
tardy. Another area of concern is the steady erosion of village commons/common property
resources. These lands are encroached on or no rejuvenation plan exists after change in
nature. It is found that common land related cases are not diligently pursued and hardly any
case is filed against illegal jamabandi of common land. Removal of encroachment from
common lands and implementation of FRA with right spirit are the need of the hour.
        There is a significant increase in the urban population in Bihar. The Municipalities
and Urban local bodies suffer from unplanned spatial expansion of urban area. There is no
                                              150
approved Master Plan except 28 City Development Plans prepared under JNNURM.
Activities of urban development are primarily guided by the Bihar Municipal Act. To
enhance quality of service delivery, the service standard has been adopted for each activity by
setting time – line, authority, appellate authority and reviewing authority. The GIS-based
mapping also has been started in different towns. The state government has adopted policies
to ensure low cost housing in urban areas and the tenural security for slum dwellers also
provided through the recent Slum Policy. The coverage ratio and collection of property tax is
also less. Formulation of Master Plan for guided urban development, removal of
encroachments, construction of proper drainage and sewerage system are the most important
concerns.
        Since the Cadastral Survey the public lands under different categories have been
identified and recorded. The authority and criteria for management of public land are also
clearly defined and the information related to public land, though not updated, available at
various offices under Department of Revenue and Land Reforms. Government can distribute
and settle common land to landless people only when the nature of the land changes and with
prior approval of Gram Sabha. The state government has not yet come up with any policy
related to Gairmazruha Aam land in urban areas. A large amount of public lands under
different categories like Gairmazruha-Khas/Malik, Gairmazruha Aam, Ceiling Surplus land
and Bhoodan Land have been distributed amongst weaker sections for livelihood support and
for providing housesites. Reasons of unsuitability of each category of public land should be
identified and strategy for making them suitable for distribution should be developed.
Ensuring possession of the beneficiary on distributed land is a matter of concern. Regarding
record of rights, a large section of the record of Public Land are based on Cadastral Survey,
conducted almost 100 years ago and due to in-completion of Revisional Survey and non-
computerization of records, some records are in dilapidated condition. However, a legal
platform has been created through special survey to conduct abridged survey and settlement
adopting modern technology.
        The lands are acquired mainly for public purpose through Department of Revenue and
Land Reforms and by District Land Acquisition Officer and District Collector. Land to
private investors is being allotted by BIADA based on the clear and transparent criteria and
process. However, providing compensation to the land loser is an area of concern as the
record of rights are not updated and there is no system of providing compensation to the share
cropper and other people affected by the land acquisition who do not have legal rights over
land. Provision has been made in the Bihar Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy, 2007 to
provide relief to the people who earn livelihood on acquired land and have been rendered
unemployed for 1 to 3 years. Independent and accessible avenues for appeal against land
acquisition and compensation exist in Bihar.
        In Bihar, most of the lands acquired in last seven years are for public purposes only.
For transferring land to private investors, requisitioning body BIADA follows a clear and
identified process which is transparent and based on pre-fixed criteria. It has adopted service
standards for effective service delivery. The total plots available to BIADA in an industrial
area are demarcated in various categories and for allocation of these plots to investors
BIADA follows a clear and transparent evaluation process which is based on the information
provided by the investors depending on many pre-fixed criteria. Project Clearing Committee
(PCC) evaluates investment proposals and gives approval. BIADA also monitors compliance
of contractual obligations by the investor. Difficulty in identifying the actual title holder
obstructs the process of land acquisition and compensation. There is no system of sharing
benefits arising from changes in permitted land use with the people as well as no provision in
the policy to improve equity in asset access. The state government has set up Social Impact
                                             151
Assessment Unit under new Land Acquisition Act, 2013. The inter–institutional coordination
system with all related departments needs to be strengthened.
        The Registration Offices have been fully computerised in the state. Since 2006 all the
data / documents have been digitised and are available in digital form. The computerization
model of registration office is self sustaining and has received Prime Minister’s Award for its
self sustaining nature of management. There is a clear, practical process for the formal
recognition of possession in Bihar. Though the non documentary proof does not have
conclusive evidence and they have less strength than the formal documents and takes lot of
time in recognition of claim, yet the non-documentary form of evidence is used to establish
recognition of a claim to land or property through quasi-judicial / judicial process. In Bihar,
legislation exists to formally recognize long-term, unchallenged possession. However, formal
recognition is granted to very few or no applicants for recognition on either public or private
land. The cost of stamp duty is 8 per cent in Bihar which is higher in comparison to other
states and government of India norm of 5 per cent. Some exemption in stamp duty has been
provided to promote agriculture, industries, IT and communication sector in the state. Due to
non-linking of computer of registry office with Circle Offices, automatic mutation and
automatic updation of records are not facilitated. The data related to registry are available
from the year 2006 in digital form. Hard copies of registered documents from Registry
Offices are being provided on the same date. Registry office is following the prescribed
service standard scrupulously. The registry fee has a clear rationale, their schedule is public
and all payments are accounted for.
        There is clear process of land valuation in Bihar. The minimum market value of land
and other immovable properties are determined following Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (Act II of
1899) and notification by Registration Department, Government of Bihar. Minimum Market
Value Registers (MVR) for various types of land / building / flats based on their location and
use have been prepared and regularly revised and updated at district level by a committee
headed by District Magistrate. Valuation of land based on MVR is also applicable for land
acquisition for calculating compensation. The process of property valuation based on Annual
Rental Value (ARV) located on different types of roads and different uses are very clear.
Valuation roll is publically accessible at every registry office / municipality / website of
municipality at Patna and Muzaffarpur / website of Registration Department. Though
individually, the revenue from the land rent and holding tax are not sufficient to meet the cost
of tax collection, but considering amount of collection from all the sources including stamp
duty and registration fee, the total collection is between 1 to 3 times the costs of collection.
The collection of land rent is poor, compared to the collection of registration and property
tax. The coverage ratio is very low in the state. The adoption of self-assessment of holding
tax and penalty for wilful suppression will help in better collection of property tax.
        In dispute resolution and conflict management with respect to land, responsibilities
are clearly assigned unambiguously. The enactment of Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act,
2009, and establishment of Bihar Land Tribunal is a milestone in respect of land dispute
resolution. The disposal of cases has significantly improved after this Act and establishment
of tribunal has lessened the burden of civil courts and high court. Even the cost in getting
justice is less (compared to situation before) under this process because of speedy disposal of
cases. The Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act is omnibus, cost effective and time effective.
Alternate dispute resolution mechanism such as lok adalat is also gaining momentum in the
state. Gram Panchayat has also been empowered and strengthened with ‘Nyaya Mitra’ to
dispose of suits of lower valuation.
        Land governance is a state subject and in Bihar there is well structured set up for
effective land governance with the Department of Revenue and Land Reforms as the
                                              152
principle department for land administration. The work relating to land records and survey,
land acquisition and land consolidation are being looked after by the respective directorate
under the Revenue and Land Reforms Department. Other matters pertaining to land
administration such as land ceiling, bhoodan land and other related matter are being looked
after by the different sections of the Revenue and Land Reforms Department. Besides, Urban
Development Department, Forest Department, Registration Department and Industries
Department are also involved in land administration in some way or the other. The role and
responsibility of functionaries dealing with the land administration, regulation and
management are clearly defined and there is a clear separation in the roles of policy
formulation, implementation and arbitration in the context of Bihar. The major concern in the
land administration in the state is lack of proper land use policy, land use plan, poor
infrastructure with the concerned department, lack of trained manpower in the concerned
department, obsolete land records. The major initiative in the revenue department is the
creation of revenue cadre in the state. The equity concern for the economically weaker
section of the society and land rights to women are the driving force of the state policy of
land governance.
5.2 KEY POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following theme wise recommendations have been made based on the findings of the
study. The recommendations are classified in to three timeframes viz. short term, medium
term and long term, to facilitate implementation.
5.2.1 Land Right Recognition
Short Term
   3. Comprehensive circulars/ guidelines of allotment of homestead land covering BPPHT
        Act 1947, Gairmazarua Aam land, Gairmazarua Malik land and allotment of 3
        Decimal of Rayati land along with check list should be developed and made available
        to Circle Office for ready reference.
   4. Survey/Resurvey work has been taken up in Bihar on priority basis, under the Bihar
        Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011. District collectors have been made in
        charge as settlement officers of the respective districts in the Act. Since the survey
        operation is technical in nature, it requires day to day monitoring, and disposal of
        cases in the camps by junior officials. The collector of the district has hardly any time
        to monitor the day-to-day operations of the Survey/Resurvey, organization of camps,
        disposal of cases, grievance redressal etc. It is advisable to have a full time settlement
        officer to look after all these activities.
   5. Since ‘continuous khatiyan’ is being prepared in the districts before the
        Survey/Resurvey operation, the Continuous Khatiyan, so prepared, should be verified
        and authenticated by senior revenue officials. They should be asked to put their
        signatures after verification so that the entries made in the ‘continuous khatiyan’
        match with the ground realities.
Medium Term
   6. Special survey should be completed within the prescribed time frame.
        Computerization of record of rights and digitization of maps based on special survey
        should be completed by 31st March, 2016.
   7. Formulate Land Leasing Policies to ensure land rights in favour of share croppers and
        economically weaker sections. This will facilitate availability of bank credit to them
        and motivate them in investing for long term infrastructure in farming.
   8. Around 279 land ceiling cases, involving about 26000 acres of land, are pending in
        the High Court of Bihar. The State Govt. has started reviewing the cases and chalking

                                               153
       out strategy such as empanelment of competent advocates and request to Chief Justice
       to constitute separate bench to hear all the pending cases expeditiously.
  9. All the government land, such as ceiling surplus land, bhoodan land, homestead land,
       gairmazarua aam and gairmazarua khas land which is stated to have been distributed
       to the landless poor should be physically verified to see whether the assignees are in
       possession of these lands. There is a need to physically verify all the land given SCs
       and STs by involving landless poor, local youth and SHGs of Women, under the
       overall supervision of Revenue Authorities. Effective steps should be taken to give
       possession of land to such persons.
  10. State should prepare and maintain an inventory of all ceiling surplus land, bhoodan
       land, gairmazarua aam, gairmazarua malik and khasmahal land and make it available
       for public scrutiny.
  11. All cases of alienation or transfer or unauthorized occupation of land, in violation of
       existing laws, should be identified and necessary steps should be taken to restore the
       land back to the poor. All the restored land should be recorded in the name of women
       family member to increase women’s stake in land. The Registration Department
       should strictly be instructed not to entertain any transaction of these land allotted to
       poor by government.
  12. Exemptions to religious, educational, charitable, research and industrial organizations
       as well as plantations and aqua farms under the Land Ceiling Act should be
       discontinued. These institutions should not be allowed to use more than one unit of 15
       acres.
Long Term
  13. State should revise its ceiling limits. The proposed limit should be around 10 acres in
       the case of irrigated land and 15 acres for non-irrigated land.
  14. Recommendations on Amendment of Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling
       Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961.
The following modifications are required in some section of the above Act:
         1. Section 45B of the Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and
              Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961, empowers the state government
              (Minister in the instant case) to reopen the cases disposed off by the collector.
              Keeping in view the timely disposal of the cases, it is advisable that this power
              should be exercised by the Divisional Commissioners. There are many issues in
              land ceiling. Various issues which might have been raised and adjudicated at
              various forums. Any authority or land holders, at any point of time, may inform
              that some points have not been raised earlier and that may change the decision
              in the case. Hence, power of reopening cases may be given to Divisional
              Commissioner based on left over points/issues.
         2. In Section 21 of the Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and
              Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961, the land holders have been given
              facility to resume land cultivated by an under raiyat within the ceiling area.
              These facilities are retrograde and should be withdrawn.
         3. Under section 21 of the Act, the under raiyat, after the acquisition of raiyati
              status, should have transferrable rights. This provision is fraught with the risk of
              sale under duress rendering the under raiyat landless. This provision should be
              removed/ deleted.
         4. Section 22 of the Bihar Land Ceiling Act deals with the provision for an under-
              raiyat. To prevent benami transaction by the land holder, or to prevent entry of
              fake name in the relevant record, it would be relevant to make provisions by
                                               154
              recording non-transferable rights to under-raiyat so that the actual under raiyats,
              who are the tillers of the soil, may get benefit.
         5. The State should impose ceiling not only on ‘Ownership’ of land holdings but
              also on ‘Operational’ land holdings to prevent concentration of large tracts of
              land through lease-in. A person/ institution/organization should not be allowed
              to own more land than the ceiling limit.
   15. Enactment of Right to Homestead Land: Right to Homestead Land Act, just on the
       lines of Right to Service Act 2011, should be promulgated. Definition of homeless,
       procedure for survey to identify homeless and ways and means to provide house sites
       in the Act from various types of land, should be made clear.
   16. Land Development: Land allotted to landless generally have problems such as
       salinity, alkalinity, water logging and soil degradation etc. Lot of opportunities are
       available for developing the land belonging to the poor by accessing various Central
       and State Government schemes existing now such as MGNREGA, Watershed
       Management Program and NABARD supported Rural Infrastructure Development
       Fund etc. The govt. should prepare an inventory of land for the poor who require
       development, and should also systematically take up land development work on those
       lands. Priority should be given to all land belonging to Scheduled Cates and
       Scheduled Tribes, first. As far as possible, land development work should also include
       provision of irrigation facility with priority to SCs and STs land. Along with land
       development, all other sustainable agriculture programmes available for increasing
       productivity of land should be linked to this land so that the poor can earn better
       income from the land
5.2.2 Forest and Common Land Management
Short Term
   17. Building Public Awareness regarding Common Property Resources (CPR), FRA,
       forest and environment.
   18. The implementation of Forest Right Act should be geared up. The following actions
       should be initiated with regards to Forest Right Act:
   19. Primary importance is to be given to Community Forest Resource Rights (Sec.3(1) i)
       of FRA. All villages/hamlets should claim and obtain Community Forest Resource
       (CFR) Rights and in case there are villages/hamlets which don’t claim or obtain CFR
       rights, it should be incumbent on the District Level Committee to record, in writing,
       the reasons thereof (see iv. Community Forest Resource Right’s ‘Guidelines on the
       implementation of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
       (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act 2006; No.23011/32/2010-FRA (Vol. ii(pt.) ),
       Ministry of Tribal Affairs dated 12 Jul 2012. Further, the Gram Sabha should
       constitute a Forest Management Committee, as envisaged under Rule 4(e), to protect,
       conserve and manage the CFR area, including its resource use.
   20. State Level Monitoring Committee should also monitor effectively the process of
       determining and approval of all the rights under Sec. 3(1) and (2) category wise
       ranging from:
       1. Individual rights
       2. Community rights
       3. Rights of ownership, use and disposal of Minor Forest Produce
       4. Rights to community tenures and habitat rights particularly to vulnerable tribal
                groups
       5. Rights in and over disputed land
       6. Rights of conversion of pattas or leases or grants
                                              155
      7. Rights of settlement and conversion of all forest villages, unsurveyed villages and
              other villages in forest, whether recorded, notified or not, in to revenue
              villages
      8. Traditional rights
      9. Right to in-situ rehabilitation including alternate land for displaced persons
      10. Development rights under Section 3(2)
  21. Patta Distribution in the name of women, as specified under the FRA, should be
      implemented, in letter and sprit, with greater vigour and efficiency.
  22. Vulnerable Tribal Groups should be given exemptions with regard to filing of claims.
      A definite time frame should also be specified for settling their claims. Furthermore,
      there should be a provision for withdrawal of cases against PVTGs for minor forest
      offences filed by the State.
  23. The state level committee should review and ensure that all cases of large scale
      rejection of claims (and modifications to what is claimed) are referred back to the
      DLC for their reconsideration and/ or rectification, following due process. Further, the
      process of acceptance of claims and implementation of FRA should not be subjected
      to arbitrary deadlines. The Gram Sabha is empowered to continue the process till the
      complete implementation of FRA. The committees at the higher level should not
      insist on any specific evidences for approval of rights decided upon by the Gram
      Sabha. Further, all safeguards under Section 4 of the Act, in respect of recognition of
      rights and resettlement, should be adhered to in case of critical wild life habitats,
      national parks and sanctuaries.
  24. The Ministry of Social Welfare should ensure that the State Level Monitoring
      Committee send their reports on a monthly basis and take cognizance of the
      recommendations. The Ministry should follow up and take proactive steps at the State
      level through issue of advisories and / or directives under Para 5 of Fifth Schedule
      applicable not only for Scheduled Area but also to all Scheduled Tribes. Wherever
      necessary, the Ministry should not desist from taking legal and other appropriate
      action against offenders.
Medium Term
  25. Enumerating Common Property Resources (CPR) in every National Sample Survey
      (NSS) should be made mandatory.
  26. Minimum area of Common Property Resources (CPR) in a village should be
      determined, keeping in view the growing trend in population / live stock.
  27. Joint Forest Management (JFM) model could be followed as the development model
      for Common Property Resources (CPR).
  28. Developing fresh land records (update the existing one) using modern Information
      Technology support.
  29. State government, through its State Level Monitoring Committee constituted under
      FRA, should review all diversion of forests for non-forestry purpose since January 1st,
      2008 and particularly from 30 July 2009. Whether consent for diversion is obtained
      from the concerned Gram Sabhas. Further, the committee should monitor and ensure
      that this guideline is complied with, in all future proposals of the State, for such
      diversion to ensure that the rights of forest dwellers are protected.
  30. Ban should be imposed on diversion of Common Property Resources (CPR) for other
      purposes.
  31. Steps should be initiated for removal of encroachment on common land / public land /
      forest land. The Gram Sabha should have the power to evict all encroachers from
      public land.
                                             156
   32. Rights of management of common land should be vested in the Gram Sabha of the
       Gram Panchayat, which will include the village wasteland, common land, land under
       public utility, government land, community land, dedicated land, etc. The right of
       settlement of land should rest with the Gram Sabha of the Panchayat. No settlement of
       Gram Sabha land should be made on a permanent basis.
   33. The State government should ensure allocation of funds to the concerned Gram
       Sabhas for (a) protection and conservation of forests within the CFRs of the villages
       and (b) follow up counselling and guidance sessions post-FRA rights recognition to
       achieve the intended objects of FRA.
   34. The processes of identification, of hamlets or settlements, for the purpose of the
       Forest Right Act (FRA), 2006 have been specified under Rule 2A of the FRA. The
       State should complete the identification process within a period of one year and
       ensure that the Gram Sabha of these hamlets constitute the Forest Right Committee.
   35. In the Bihar Land Ceiling Act, section 27 deals with the allotment of surplus land to
       eligible categories. It also deals with earmarking a portion of surplus land for public
       purposes. In the consolidation law, community land also has to be set apart in the
       scheme.
   36. Initiating fast track, time bound, process for resolving disputes on Common Property
       Resources (CPR)
Long Term
   37. Institutional arrangements to govern Common Property Resources (CPR) with
       increased role for user groups, community based organizations, should be delineated
       with regard to ownership access, rights and other benefits.
   38. There should be a Standing Committee at state level to deal with land issues,
       including the management of waste land, common land etc.
5.2.3 Urban Land Use Planning and Development
Short Term
   39. Municipal survey (Urban Cadastral) of urban land should be started on priority basis.
   40. Strict enforcement of anti-encroachment law, to remove encroachment on priority
       basis, particularly from road side vendors should be initiated to save people from
       traffic jam.
Medium Term
   41. The office of the town planner is of vital importance and, hence, should be made
       functional by appointing Chief Town Planner and provide sufficient staff and
       infrastructure.
   42. The sanctioned posts for Urban Development & Housing Department of urban local
       bodies should be filled with qualified and trained staff by launching special
       recruitment drive.
   43. Municipal Services Guarantee Act, along the lines of the Right to Public Service Act,
       2011 to be put in place.
   44. Construction / provision of parking space at different places for vehicles in urban
       areas should be given topmost priority.
   45. Strict enforcement of building completion certificate / occupancy certificate to be
       done.
   46. Development of proper drainage system and solid waste management system in the
       cities should be ensured. A time bond action plan may be drawn for each city.
   47. Green area and children parks should be demarcated in each town. An action plan
       with definite timeframe work should be chalked out for every city.
Long Term
                                             157
   48. Formulation of master plans for development of urban areas, with statutory backup on
       urgent basis, should be ensured. Its proper implementation will solve the problems of
       water logging, traffic jam and poor civic amenities.
   49. Settlement policy of street vendors should be developed for each ULB.
   50. Inclusion of Modernisation Plan of old areas of the city in Master Plan of each ULB.
5.2.4 Public Land Management
Short Term
   51. Steps should be initiated to give possession of the land to more than 0.2 million
       beneficiaries who have already been allotted land under housesite policy for mahadalit
       family and other schemes.
   52. All the public land, which has been distributed to the landless poor, should be
       physically verified to see whether the assignees are in possession of this land. If not,
       steps should be taken to give possession of those lands to the real assignees.
   53. Evict encroachers from public land and bring the land back for public use by
       following due process of law. Resettlement / rehabilitation for genuine persons viz.
       Economically Weaker Section of the Society (EWS) may also be taken up
       simultaneously.
   54. Get an inventory of all public land prepared and make it available for public scrutiny.
       There should be a unified system, under revenue department, to collect data from each
       department / district regarding the land under the concerned department and update
       the same on regular basis for its effective management. The need of the hour for
       every department having public land is to have an estate section with sufficient staff,
       estate officer and an inventory of public lands owned and possessed by it. The estate
       officer shall be responsible for safeguarding property, prevent and remove
       encroachment, if any, as per law.
   55. Gairmazarhua Aam land should be used for public purpose only except for group
       housing purpose for EWS/Mahadalit.
Medium Term
   56. Complete the ongoing special survey in all parts of the State by 31st March, 2016. Digitise
       record of rights and maps prepared on the basis of special survey.
   57. Efforts should be made to bridge the gap between allotment of land and mutation.
       Since the allotment of land is made from the public land (government land), the
       allotment/ issue of ‘parcha’ and mutation should happen simultaneously. At the time
       of issue of ‘parcha’, its copy should be sent to the Circle Officer/Karmchari concern
       for automatic mutation of the land, creation of Jamabandi, and fixation of rent. After
       creation of jamabandi, the settlee should be informed.
   58. There is a need to ascertain the reasons regarding the unsuitability of ceiling surplus
       land, Gairmazruha Malik, Gairmazruha Aam and bhoodan land, by launching special
       survey. Strategy for developing these lands for making them suitable for distribution,
       wherever applicable, should also be planned.
   59. New Khasmahal Policy has already been promulgated with respect to land in direct
       possession of government. Same is to be enforced in letter and spirit.
   60. Process of confirmation of Bhoodan land should be expedited. ‘Dan Patra’ must be
       confirmed without any further delay.
   61. Dan Patra (Gift letter) of some Boodan land is not available with LRDC or even in
       Bhoodan office. Records of 13 districts for Bhoodan land have been digitized.
       Digitization of records of the rest 25 districts should be taken up expeditiously.
   62. In the course of the ongoing special survey, lower level revenue functionaries should
       be instructed to ensure recording of public land in the records of rights. As soon as the
                                                158
       textual data on public land is generated, all out efforts should be made to trace public
       land which is privatized officially, prior to special survey. Following due process of
       law, public land settled, unauthorizedly, must come back to the public domain. It is
       noteworthy to point out that even during special survey operation the state has to be
       impleaded as a party in cases pertaining to public land.
Long Term
   63. The state government has not yet come up with any policy related to Gairmazruha
       Aam land in urban areas. For Gairmazruha Aam land, falling in urban areas the
       government may identify a competent authority for issuing no objection, parallel to
       the gram sabha, that too wherever the nature of land has changed.
   64. Enumerating public land in every National Sample Survey (NSS) should be made
       mandatory.
5.2.5 Transfer of Large Tracts of Land to Investor
Short Term
   65. Institutionalize a coordination mechanism among all departments to expedite
       approvals. Inter – institutional coordination system with all related departments, such
       as land records, land acquisition. Industries Deptt, BIADA, District Collector, Land
       Acquisition Committee and MVR committee may be constituted at district level to
       strengthen and avoid any problems and monitor the activity as a team.
   66. Ensure stakeholder participation in the process of large scale transfers of public land.
   67. Provide for third party monitoring to ensure compliance of contractual obligations by
       investor. Third party Evaluation of the benefits gained by the society due to land use
       change and compliance of the contractual obligations, by the large scale investors,
       should be planned and conducted.
Medium Term
   68. Waste land / barren and uncultivable land / hill lock may be utilized for mining,
       quarrying and industrial uses. Only such land should be acquired for industrial
       purpose.
   69. Develop a system of public interface between the investor and the administration to
       sort out problems coming in the way of allotment of plots for undertaking industrial
       activities. Problem resolving system need to be put in place in each district as well as
       at the state level.
   70. Developing infrastructure in the industrial area / growth centre to enable the investor
       to start the project quickly.
   71. Finalize and enforce a rehabilitation and resettlement policy to mitigate hardships.
Long term
   72. Actual implementation of the rehabilitation policy for closed / sick industries in the
       industrial area.
   73. Strategy should be developed for standardization of MVR based on objective criteria.
       The objection received with regard to fixation of MVR should be considered. Average
       minimum and maximum sale value of a particular mauza should be taken up to
       determine MVR, instead of taking the highest sale value of mauza.
5.2.6 Public Provision for Land Information: Registry and Cadastre
Short Term
   74. E-Linking of registration data on computer with the circle office, to be initiated to
       facilitate automatic mutations and updation of records on transfer of land.
   75. Scanning of old records prior to 2006 and placing them on the computer network, to
       be completed expeditiously.
Medium Term
                                             159
   76. The State Government should reduce the stamp duty to make land registration
       affordable and bring it at par with other states. The stamp duty should not be more
       than 5 percent.
   77. Cases of inheritance, partition, sale certificate, mortgage by deposit of title deeds, oral
       gift etc. should be brought within the ambit of compulsorily registrable document so
       as to reflect their impact in the encumbrance certificate issued by the registry office.
   78. The Government should gradually do away with the use of stamp paper altogether and
       adopt the system of depositing stamp duty by Challan, in designated banks.
Long Term
   79. In registration, the transfer of title is presumptive, not exclusive. Steps should be
       initiated to transfer the exclusive /absolute title on the lines of Karnataka state.
       Accordingly, Registration Act should be amended and strategy should be developed
       to verify title before registration, by an expert appointed/empanelled, for this purpose.
       Thereafter, Electronic data base on transfer of land would help in updating the land
       record even after sale/transfer.
   80. Model Land Titling Bill framed by the DOLR / MORD may be considered for
       adoption with suitable modification.
5.2.7 Land Valuation and Taxation
Short Term
   81. Religious trusts, just like government offices, should at least pay 50 to 75 percent of
       the normal holding tax as service charges to provide better civic amenities.
   82. In order to avoid complications, or disputes for assessment of annual rental value, a
       self assessment format should be made available to the public to file the details of
       holding for assessment of annual rental value and holding taxes. Regular checking
       and verification of the same should be taken up on priority basis so that its
       genuineness can be established. Strict penal action should also be taken in case of any
       discrepancy, after verification.
   83. No attempt has been made in the past to assess the cost of exemption of taxes to the
       government. Assessment of the cost of exemption of taxes to various institutions
       needs to be initiated.
Medium Term
   84. A Municipal Services Guarantee Act, along the lines of the Right to Public Service
       Act, 2011, is put in place.
   85. As the value of landed property in municipal areas has increased manifold, there is a
       need to enhance the holding tax for providing better civic amenities.
   86. Economic land rent should be decided / fixed, based on land use classification, type of
       land and productivity of the land.
   87. Tax Coverage ratio in Patna Municipal Corporation is 50 percent. More or less similar
       is the situation in other municipal bodies. There is a need to bring in unregistered
       holdings into tax fold to increase the revenue for providing better services. This work
       should be taken up in camp mode.
   88. The imposition and collection machinery of taxes in the Municipalities should be
       made more efficient. As this work is technical in nature, a thorough knowledge of the
       system with all its technicalities must be made known to the officers and staff
       engaged in municipal tax administration. Comprehensive administrative capacity
       enhancement is the need in ULBs.
   89. Proper administrative set up with well trained, qualified staff is necessary for efficient
       running of the tax administration department of ULBs.

                                               160
   90. Community expects better civic amenities from the municipal authority. It cannot be
        provided without monetary resources. Even the sincere and dedicated Municipal
        personnel cannot serve the society according to society’s expectations without proper
        equipment and facilities. If the urban residents do not pay the taxes in time, they
        cannot expect proper civic facilities to be provided to them. The State Government
        used to give grant and loan to Municipality for infrastructure development or for
        employment generation schemes, but not for meeting the day-to-day expenses of the
        Municipality for providing different civic services. As such, proper rapport between
        the residents of town and Municipal authority is most essential. This will make the
        people realize that the money which is being collected from them, in the shape of
        various taxes and fees, are being utilized properly for their benefits. The role of
        municipal authority in this regard is very important.
Long Term
   91. The urban local bodies in Bihar are not using modern technology for better tax
       collection in urban areas, such as facility for online payment; GIS for better tracking
       of properties, electronic inter linkages with registries to track acquisition of properties
       etc. These varieties of modern technology should be adopted by ULBs.
5.2.8 Dispute Resolution and Conflict Management
Short Term
   92. Case flow Management Principles should be immediately implemented.
   93. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) implementation should be more
        meaningful with defined objectives.
   94. There is an urgent need to tackle cases pertaining to dispossession of land allottees. A
        time bound strategy should be developed to restore possession of land to these
        persons.
Medium Term
   95. Necessary changes should be made in the relevant laws for dealing with management
        aspects relating to progression of cases and their flow for enhancing reduction rates
        and timely disposal with quality.
   96. Responsibility to carry out judicial reforms should be assigned to a single identifiable
        body.
   97. No time limit has been prescribed for disposal of appeal by Divisional Commissioner
        in Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009. Specific time limit (60days) for disposal
        of appeals by Divisional Commissioner should be spelt out in BLDR Act 2009.
   98. Efforts should be made to create more and more permanent Lok Adalat in all the
        districts and sub-divisions. Litigant should be made aware and be encouraged to pre-
        litigation settlement through such permanent Lok Adalat.
   99. Adequate training to Deputy Collector Land Reforms (DCLR) and Circle Officers on
        different Acts and mechanisms of dispute resolution is a prelude for speedy disposal
        of disputes relating to land.
   100. The Court of Deputy Collector Land Reforms (DCLR) should be provided sufficient
        staff with adequate infrastructure.
   101. The Collector should ensure effective supervision of the work of Deputy Collector
        Land Reforms (DCLR) regarding dispute resolution, on regular basis. The same is not
        done on regular basis now.
   102. There is a need to strengthen the tribunal by filling up the post (s) of members lying
        vacant and by providing adequate, regular staff along with infrastructure.
Long Term

                                               161
   103. Dispute related to land/holding falling within the municipal area should also be
        brought under the jurisdiction of BLDR Act, 2009. Similarly, Public land
        Encroachment Act, 1961, alluvium and delluvium land dispute should also be brought
        with the ambit of BLDR Act, 2009.
   104. Taking into the consideration the large number of cases of dispossession in Bihar,
        fresh punitive laws are required to punish those persons who are not having the title
        over land but involved in dispossessing the legal owner of land. Actually, these
        persons are resourceful and dispossess the legal owner of land on concocted or forged
        or false papers, by force. The state Government should frame punitive laws to prevent
        cases of dispossession. It is advisable that dispossession should be made a cognizable
        offence.
Section 4(B) of Bihar Land Disputes Resolution Act, 2009 pertains to the cases related to
restoration of possession of settled/allotted land in favour of legally entitled settled /allottee
or his successors/heirs, upon adjudication of unauthorized and unlawful dispossession.
Section 7 pertains to summary disposal of proceeding. There is no need to follow the
procedure for adjudication of cases of dispossessed persons. LRDC can issue notice to the
offender. On hearing from the offender, summary disposal of cases should be done. Besides
restoring possession, penalty/ punishment may be imposed. For a first time offender, penalty
up to Rupees Two Thousand or one year of imprisonment or both can be imposed. For the
second time, the penalty upto Rupees Ten Thousand or Two to Five years of imprisonment or
both may be imposed on the offender.
   105. There is a need to set up a Green Tribunal, with a bench in Patna, to resolve disputes
        related to forest and environment.
   106. Required amendments may be brought in to the BLDR Act, 2009 as well as Bihar
        Land Tribunal Act, to include alternative dispute redressal provision by way of
        arbitration, conciliation and mediation.
   107. Effective steps should be initiated for strengthening and smooth functioning of Gram
        Kachchahary by the State Government. The local Panchayati Raj institutions can help
        curb land disputes/ problems to a great extent. The Gram Kutchcharies of each Gram
        Panchayat may be empowered to decide on these cases at Panchayat level. However,
        adequate safety systems must be kept in place to curb the malpractices that occurred
        in this new concept of resolving land disputes at Panchayat levels.
5.2.9 Review of Institutional Arrangements and Policies
Short Term
   108. A State Land use Policy based on existing laws and policies should be developed. A
        Land Use Board in Bihar should be set up for formulating the Land Use Policy,
        making 10-15 years perspective land use plan and monitoring the implementation of
        land use plan.
   109. Government should devise a unified system in Revenue Department for collection of
        data for land possessed by different State Government Departments, Central
        Government Departments and Public Sector Corporations. Each department should
        maintain and update the status of the land they possess. This will help in efficient
        management of land in future.
   110. Set up an effective Grievance Redressal machinery for the people of the state.
   111. A vigorous special / massive time bound programme should be started, focusing on
        giving possession to dispossessed persons, with proper co-ordination between revenue
        and police officials. A need based system of summary trial may help in solving the
        dispossession cases in rural areas of Bihar.
Medium Term
                                               162
  112. Enumerating Common Property Resources (CPR), Common land and public land in
       every National Sample Survey (NSS) should be made mandatory. An inventory of
       common property resources, common land and public land should be prepared and
       make it available on public domain for public scrutiny.
  113. Special survey should be completed within the prescribed time framework.
       Computerization of record of rights and digitization of maps based on special survey
       should be completed by 31st March, 2016. Special drive should be launched to update
       land record jointly by all concerned department.
  114. E-Interlinking of Land Records with Registry in entire state.
  115. Capacity Building need to be greatly enhanced as the existing training facilities is
       inadequate. With wide spread use of modern technology, there is a greater need for
       the training of the staff at various levels. The existing training institutions should be
       suitably upgraded. The training syllabi should be such that, besides upgrading the
       skills of trainees to enable them to discharge their duties more competently, they also
       get an exposure to the technological and human relations dimension of modern land
       administration. Capacity building programmes on process, procedure and technology
       use should be designed and implemented, sooner. In order to attract better
       professionally qualified trainers in training institutions, adequate financial and other
       incentives should be provided for.
  116. The halka karamcharis should have an office of their own. They can be
       accommodated in the proposed Gram Panchayat Bhawan.
  117. It is also necessary to rationalize the jurisdiction of Circle Officer. An inspector
       cannot supervise effectively the work of more than 8-10 halka karamcharis.
       Depending upon the same, additional posts may be created.
  1. Provision for sufficiently trained and qualified manpower in the survey and settlement
      departments should be made. Latest tools / machines and adequate budget should be
      provided to complete the special survey by 31st March, 2016.
  2. Filling of the vacant, sanctioned posts in all land related departments need to be
      undertaken, on urgent basis, to improve revenue administration and strengthen related
      institutional arrangements.
  3. Awareness creation programme should be launched on a massive scale. In Bihar, a
      comprehensive set of measures should be undertaken involving legislative,
      administrative and public awareness building to ensure the rights of the tribals over
      land, forest, water, minor forest produce, and mineral resources.
Long Term
  4. The status regarding office and residential accommodation for the staff of revenue
      department, at various levels is unsatisfactory. The Government may take necessary
      steps in this regard.
  118.Supervision, Inspection and Monitoring constitutes the backbone of institutional
      arrangements. Detailed norms have been laid down by the state government / Board
      of Revenue, Bihar on this. These norms are either ignored or carried out in a rather
      perfunctory manner. The need for close supervision is felt more with the introduction
      of modern technology. The state government should review these aspects thoroughly
      and revise these norms, and ensure adherence of norms. Supervision / Monitoring
      mechanisms need to be strengthened at every stage starting from state head quarter to
      the circle office level.
  1. Amendment of various acts (Bihar Agriculture Land Act, 2010, Bihar Land Reforms
      Act, 1961, Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011, Bihar Land Dispute

                                              163
          Resolution Act, 2010, Bihar Land Tribunal Act, Registration Act etc.,) as suggested in
          panel 1, panel 2 and panel 8 can be attempted on priority basis.



5.3 POLICY MATRIX

                 Issues                            Recommendations                 Responsible        Monitoring indicator

1. Rural land records are not updated         1.        Identify & implement on DoLR/Revenue         % of records verified and
regularly, presumptive and lack                         a priority basis, cost-    and Land Reforms updated
spatial reference; legal framework                      effective ways of          Department, GoB
                                                        verification & updating                      % of records identified on
Records are not updated and weak                        textual records based on                     maps
                                                        ground reality.
capacity for maintenance, records not         2.        Complete the recently
verified before digitalization; records not                                                          % of area mapped with land
                                                        enacted Special Survey
geo-referenced; most maps not updated                   within the stipulated time                   holder identified
after 1922; slow progress resurvey (Out                 period
of 45,769 villages, 71% have                  3.        Develop, pilot and                           % of area mapped with land
computerized records; verification was                  implement mechanism                          holder identified having
                                                        for continued updating of                    documentation of tenure
done for 62%; special drive produced
                                                        textual and spatial                          (gender disaggregated)
aerial photos 17% villages, Updating for                records to overcome
7% villages; Kheshra panjis prepared                    need for special drives
for 7.5%).                                    4.        Assess the resource
                                                        requirements for
                                                        digitized record
                                                        maintenance, verification
                                                        and resurvey in different
                                                        situations
                                              5.        Develop a program that
                                                        would allow to
                                                        accomplish record
                                                        maintenance and
                                                        resurvey in a specified
                                                        and realistic time frame
                                              1.        Establish legal basis to
                                                        link records and
                                                        registration
2. Urban land records are incomplete,         1.        Define workflows           Revenue and Land % of area mapped with land
presumptive and not spatially                           involved in urban land Reforms               holder identified having
referenced; High level of housing is in                 management, records        Department ,      documentation of tenure
                                                        maintenance,building
violation with urban regulations                                                   Department for    (gender disaggregated)
                                                        permits and
                                                        enforcements re-engineer   Urban and Housing
                                                        where possible;            Development,
                                                        effectively and            ULB
RoR system not adjusted to urban areas                  sustainably
and overlapping responsibilities; lack of     2.        Assess resource
base maps Many urban land holdings                      requirementsand clearly
and houses lack records of ownership in                 assign institutional
urban areas, although no exact data are                 responsibilities.
available; Tax records are now used as        3.        Establish a base map for
                                                        all cities, using existing
evidence of tenure. High level of                       information as much as
housing is in violation with urban                      possible; establish a
regulations                                             common spatial data
                                                        infrastructure focusing
(60 % house lack completion certificate;                on maintenance and
70- 80% no occupancy certificate; 55 %                  updating of records
multi-storied buildings not conform                     rather than repeated one-
                                                        off re-surveys.
                                                       164
                 Issues                          Recommendations                    Responsible           Monitoring indicator

Floor Area Ratio, height, map and           4.          Review strategy tenure
approved building plans)                                upgrading in informal
                                                        settlements and increase
                                                        effectiveness and
                                                        efficiency


3 Records are not updated                   1.          Reduce stamp duty/           Department of      Ratio of textual to spatial
automatically and not all transactions                  bring it at par with other Registration/        records
registered                                              states.                      Revenue and Land
                                            2.          E-Linking of registration                       Ration Registered vs.
                                                                                     Reforms
Records are still not updated                           data on computer with                           mutated transactions
                                                        the circle office to         Department
automatically following registration of                 facilitate automatic
transfers.Registration offices have not                 mutations and updating
been linked yet with Circle Offices that                of records on transfer of
conduct the mutation. Encumbrances are                  land.
recorded for 60-70%; It is estimated that   3.          Scanning of old records
about 30% of transactions are not                       prior to 2006 and placing
                                                        them on the computer
registered due to high costs
                                                        network.
                                            4.          Simultaneous allotment
                                                        of land and mutation for
                                                        public land (government
                                                        land),
                                            5.          Compulsory registration
                                                        of cases of inheritance,
                                                        partition, sale certificate,
                                                        mortgage by deposit of
                                                        title deeds, oral gift etc.
4. Revision of Legislative framework        1.          Identify sections that
required to eliminate outdated and                      need amendment in the
ineffective sections, and update specific               Bihar Land reforms
                                                        Act,1961, (areas already
sections; develop new legislation to
                                                        identified relate to
make e-governance possible                              fixation ceiling area,
                                                        acquisition surplus land;
                                                        regularization of
                                                        leaseholds;
                                            2.          Prepare enabling legal
                                                        environment for e-
                                                        governance and facilitate
                                                        transition towards a
                                                        system of conclusive title
                                            3.          Discuss option of a
                                                        Model Land Titling Bill
                                                        framed by the DOLR /
                                                        MORD for adoption by
                                                        State Government with
                                                        suitable modification.
5 . Effectiveness of public land            1.     Identify available land for       Revenue and Land   % of area mapped with land
redistribution for eligible poor and                    redistribution as well as Reforms               holder identified having
the actual possession for granted                       the number of land- or Department               documentation of tenure
                                                        homeless who could
public land needs strengthening                                                      Panchayati Raj     (gender disaggregated)
                                                        benefit from land
                                                        distribution                 Institution,
50-90% public lands is declared             2.     Identify measures to make
unsuitable for distribution , while some                land that is currently
surplus land is still not available;                    inapt available for
Incomplete possession grantees state                    distribution to poor or
land for 200.000 grantees; received                     acquisition by private
possession in 90.6% all cases, mutation                 sector
                                            3.     Develop effective steps to
                                                       165
                Issues                          Recommendations                    Responsible        Monitoring indicator

for 80.8%, rent fixation for 59.3%; In                 ensure continued
slums, most only received leases for                   possession and effective
dwelling, not for the land; 1 lakh of                  use of land that has been
                                                       redistributed to marginal
people is dispossessed
                                                       groups (incl.
                                                       comprehensive circulars,
                                                       guidelines and checklists
                                                       on BPPHT Act 1947 for
                                                       circle officers and
                                                       standard verification on
                                                       the ground)
                                           4.     Identify number of people that
                                                       have been dispossessed
                                                       and develop effective
                                                       mechanisms to restore
                                                       such land so as to
                                                       improve the affected
                                                       population’s livelihoods.
6. Lack of clarity in assignment of        1.          Define responsibilities Department of        No. of FRA claims...
institutional responsibility for                       and workflows involved Environment and
forestland that prevents assigning                     in forest land            Forest, Department % of land mapped identified
                                                       management and                               as CPR/public land +
ownership                                                                        of Tribal and
                                                       assignment of                                management responsibilities
                                                       ownership/CPR rights      Social Welfare,
Overlapping responsibilities (forest,                                                               clearly identified (CPR or
                                                       and re-engineer where
tribal revenues, GP etc.); forest lands                possible                  DLC                not)
assigned to revenues and vice versa.       2.          Accelerate
Limited results yet FRA: Out of the                    implementation of Forest Gram Panchayat
2930 claims filed under FRA, 585                       Right Act (Sec.3(1) i) by
claims are under process and 31 titled                 review progress and
                                                       identify best practice to
deeds were disbursed up to 2013. About
                                                       improve results and
350 Gram Sabhas are yet to claim                       overcome bottlenecks
individual rights. Continuation loss of    1.          Review by DLC of cases
tribal land by ST.                                     of massive
                                                       rejection/modification of
                                                       claims FRA for
                                                       reconsideration and/ or
                                                       rectification, following
                                                       due process;
                                           2.          Empower Gram Sabha to
                                                       continue till complete
                                                       implementation of FRA
                                           3.          Establish State Level
                                                       Monitoring Committee to
                                                       monitor effectively the
                                                       process of determining
                                                       and approval of all the
                                                       rights under Sec. 3(1)
                                                       and (2)
7. legal and administrative                1.          Promote Patta             Revenue and Land Share of ROR held by
opportunities to enhance women’s                       Distribution in the name Reforms             women
access to land are not used sufficiently               of women in context       Department
                                                       FRA                                          Share of allottees issued to
Estimated that only 12.8% land is          2.          Promote title on name of                     women
                                                       women for public
recorded in the name of women even
                                                       land/housing distribution
although RoR cannot be used to identify                                                             (share of women holding
                                           3.          Add field on gender to
women’s ownership of land; Women                       data base records of                         land?)
seem not to inheriting more land.                      rightsto help tracking of
Existing programs to enhance women’s                   progress with respect to
ownership have to be used effectively                  women land rights.


                                                     166
                 Issues                           Recommendations                   Responsible         Monitoring indicator

(FRA, land redistribution surplus land
under ceiling act, house sites allottees)

8. Urban development and expansion           1.        Review the justification Department for        % of urban land with
is unplanned and reactive                              for urban land use           Urban and Housing claimant identified/
                                                       restrictions and eliminate Development         documented evidence.
Urban expansion is unplanned;                          those that do not serve
inadequate infrastructure, width of road,              any useful purpose.
                                             2.        Maintain databases that
proper drainage system parking space;                  allow for routine and
housing; Only 17 towns have base map;                  effective implementation
                                                       of land use restrictions.
                                             3.        Assess the resource
                                                       requirements for town
                                                       planning; urban
                                                       development and design
                                                       strategy to address
                                                       capacity constraints
9. Public lands not protected nor            1.        Identification          and Revenue and Land Share of land in different
managed effectively; Transfer of                       recordingremaining           Reforma           categories mapped with
public land to private investors does                  public      lands,      and Department,        ownership and use rights
                                                       establish unified system
not always serve growth and                                                         Department for    clearly assigned
                                                       for land possessed by
contribute to inequity and conflict                    different             State  Industry
                                                       Government                   Development,
No up-to-date knowledge public lands;                  Departments,        Central IDA, BIADA
public land is appropriated during                     Government                                     No. disputes filed over land
revisional surveys due to lack of control;             Departments and Public                         acquisition ?
much encroachment of public land while                 Sector Corporations.
removal is not very effective ( Removal      2.        Develop State Land Use
                                                       perspectives and policy
encroachers for 24% of encroached
                                                       for rural land, protect
urban land and 36% in rural areas by                   remaining public land
March 2013); transfer of public land to                and                  assign
private investor is not transparent, not               responsibilities         for
following auction and contract                         implementation          and
conditions are not enforced .                          monitoring
                                             3.        Inventory of land that has
                                                       been privatized following
                                                       encroachment              in
                                                       violation of the law and
                                                       design      strategy      to
                                                       recover
                                             4.        Enumeration of Common
                                                       Property Resources and
                                                       Common Land in each
                                                       National Sample Survey.

                                             1.        Enhance effectiveness of
                                                       protection rural
                                                       Gairmazarhua Aam land
                                                       (village commons) and
                                                       decide on strategy for
                                                       urban Gairmazarhua
                                                       Aam land
                                             2.        Review and streamline
                                                       responsibilities and
                                                       procedures and assess
                                                       resource requirements
                                                       for every department
                                                       having public land and
                                                       legal responsibility for

                                                      167
                  Issues                           Recommendations                  Responsible        Monitoring indicator

                                                        safeguarding public
                                                        property, prevent and
                                                        remove encroachment,
                                                        involved in land
                                                        acquisition approval and
                                                        monitoring and
                                                        institutionalize
                                                        coordination mechanisms
                                                        (departments land
                                                        records, land acquisition.
                                                        Industries Dept, BIADA,
                                                        Land Acquisition
                                                        Committee and MVR)
                                              3.        Standardization of MVR
                                                        based on objective
                                                        criteria.
                                              4.        Regular publication of
                                                        transfers and lease/rent
                                                        payment, which also
                                                        allows follow-up;
                                                        consider third party
                                                        monitoring to ensure
                                                        compliance of
                                                        contractual obligations
                                                        by investor.
                                              5.        Finalize and enforce a
                                                        rehabilitation and
                                                        resettlement policy to
                                                        mitigate hardships
10. Improve tax collection and                1.        Identify and publicize      Revenue and Land Ratio Property tax collected/
rationalize exemptions                                  revenue potential vs.       Reforms          potential by municipalities
                                                        actual collection for all Department ,
Tax revenues are an important for                       major cities.
                                                                                    Department for
improving service delivery but cities are     2.        Improve recording of
                                                        holdings and updating of Urban and Housing
not maximizing revenue potential and
                                                        records and bring into tax Development,
have not rationalized collection                        fold to increase the        ULB
mechanisms. Tax Coverage ratio in                       revenue for providing
Patna Municipal Corporation is 50                       better services (see also
percent and not better in other cities; tax             2)
exemptions, such as for religious lands       3.        Increase holdingtax and
                                                        bring this in line with the
may be misused and holding tax has
                                                        increase in value of
become undervalued                                      landed property in
                                                        municipal areas
                                              4.        Review cost to
                                                        government of
                                                        exemption of taxes to
                                                        various institutions and
                                                        religious trusts and
                                                        explore option for
                                                        increasing their
                                                        contribution to service
                                                        charges through holding
                                                        taxes
                                              5.        Review and streamline
                                                        procedures for tax
                                                        collection and assess
                                                        resource requirements to
                                                        improve the
                                                        administrative capacity
                                                        of ULB
11. Build monitoring capacity and             1.        Develop scheme for          Department of    For various courts/ instances

                                                       168
                 Issues                          Recommendations                     Responsible        Monitoring indicator

pursue initiative to enhance the                      categorization/recording     Law, Bihar Judicial & categories of disputes
effectiveness of dispute resolution                   of disputes for all          Academy, Revenue
mechanisms                                            courts/instances so as to    and Land Reforms 1.          Level of pending
                                                      allow identification of                                   land related
                                                                                   Department
Bihar has undertaken legal and                        legislative/regulatory                                    disputes
                                                      bottlenecks.                                     2.       No. of cases
institutional reforms to improve the        2.        Review and streamline                                     treated;
effectiveness and efficiency of dispute               procedures and apply                             3.       Length
resolution mechanisms and by                          Case flow Management
establishing new forums for the                       Principles and more use
adjudication of land disputes                         of ICT
(e.g.Lokadalat, land tribunal, capacity     3.        Design strategy for
                                                      disposal of specific cases
Gram Kachahari) with good results
                                                      (land ceiling,
(civil courts drop land disputes from 70              sharecropping,
to 21%, 90 cases within one year;                     dispossession in rural
tribunal dealt already with 68% cases),               areas)
but which requires regular monitoring to    4.        Set up effective
identify problems timely, if any. In                  Grievance Redressal
addition, a number of special cases are               machinery for Land
still pending (Ceiling Act, sharecroppers             disputes.
( 85% not disposed), dispossession).
                                            5.        Dissemination of
                                                      information about Legal
                                                      and Institutional Reform

                                            6.        Bridging gap in
                                                      manpower in land related
                                                      department and and
                                                      capacity building of
                                                      Officials




                                                     169
                                                                       CHAPTER – 6
                                                              DIMENSION RANKING
The overall dimension scores have been compiled and presented below:

1              PANEL I: LAND RIGHT RECOGNITION
               Recognition of a continuum of rights: the law
               recognizes a range of rights held by individuals (incl.
1   1    0                                                             A   B     C   D
               Secondary rights of tenants. Sharecroppers, women
               etc.)
               Individuals' rural land tenure rights are legally                         Existing legal framework recognizes rights held by more than 90% of the rural
1   1    1a
               recognized.                                                               population
               Individuals' rural land tenure rights are protected in                    Existing legal framework protects rights held by 70% - 90% of the rural
1   1    1b
               practice                                                                  population
               Customary tenure rights are legally recognized and                        Customary rights are not legally recognized and not protected in practice
1   1    2
               protected in practice.
               Indigenous rights to land and forest are legally                          Partly Recognition of indigenous rights, which are protected
1   1    3
               recognized and protected in practice..
               Urban land tenure rights are legally recognized and                       Existing legal framework recognizes rights held by 50% -70% of the urban
1   1    4
               protected in practice.                                                    population
1   2    0     Respect for and enforcement of rights
                                                                                         Although there is demand, the law provides no opportunities for those holding
               Accessible opportunities for tenure individualization
1   2    1                                                                               land under customary, group, or collective tenures to fully or partially
               exist.
                                                                                         individualize land rights.
                                                                                         More than 90% of individual land in rural areas is formally recorded and
1   2    2     Individual land in rural areas is recorded and mapped
                                                                                         mapped.
1   2    3a    Individual land in urban areas is recorded.                               More than 90% of individual land in urban areas is formally recorded
1   2    3b    Individual land in urban areas is mapped.                                 Between 70% and 90% of individual land in urban areas is formally mapped.
                                                                                         The number of illegal land transactions is low and some are unambiguously
1   2    4     The number of illegal land sales is low.
                                                                                         identified on a routine basis.
                                                                                         Existing legal restrictions on land leases, if any, are clearly identified, justified
1   2    5     The number of illegal lease transactions is low.                          and accepted by all parts of society, but not fully understood by land users, so
                                                                                         that compliance is partial.
                                                                                         Less than 15% of land recorded to physical persons is recorded in the name of
1   2    6     Women's property rights are recorded.
                                                                                         women either individually or jointly.
                                                                               170
                            Women's property rights to land are equal to those by                          Equality of women's property rights to those by men is established by law, but
1           2       7
                            men both in law and in practice.                                               there are considerable limitations to exercising such rights in practice.

                            PANEL II: RIGHTS TO FOREST AND
                            COMMON LANDS & RURAL LAND USE
        2                   REGULATIONS
    2           1       0   Rights to forest and common lands                     A   B   C   D
                            Forests and common lands are clearly identified                         Forests and common land are clearly identified, responsibility for land use is clearly
    2           1       1   in law and responsibility for use is clearly                            identified but implementation is ambiguous.
                            assigned.
                                                                                                    The tenure of most groups in rural areas is formally recognized and clear regulations
                            Rural group rights are formally recognized and
    2           1       2                                                                           regarding groups’ internal organization and legal representation exist and can be
                            can be enforced.
                                                                                                    enforced.
                            Users’ rights to key natural resources on land                          Users’ rights to key natural resources are legally recognized but only some are
    2           1       3   (incl. fisheries) are legally recognized and                            effectively protected in practice or enforcement is difficult and takes a long time.
                            protected in practice.
                            Multiple rights over common land and natural                            Co-existence is possible by law but rarely respected in practice.
    2           1       4
                            resources on these lands can legally coexist.
                            Multiple rights over the same plot of land and its                      Co-existence is legally possible but rarely respected in practice.
    2           1       5
                            resources (e.g. trees) can legally coexist.
                            Multiple rights over land and mining/ other sub-                        Co-existence is not possible by law; mining rights override land rights.
    2           1       6   soil resources located on the same plot can
                            legally coexist.
                            Accessible opportunities exist for mapping and                          Although there is demand, the law provides no opportunities for those holding group
    2           1       7
                            recording of group rights.                                              land under customary, group, or collective tenures to record and map land rights.
                                                                                                    Less than 10% of the area under communal and/or indigenous land has boundaries
    2           1       8   Boundary demarcation of communal land.
                                                                                                    demarcated and surveyed and associated claims recorded.
                            Effectiveness and equity of rural land use
    2           2       0
                            regulations
    2           2       1   Restrictions regarding rural land use are justified                     Regulations regarding restrictions on rural land use effectively serve public purpose

                                                                                              171
            and enforced                                                             but enforcement is weak.
            Restrictions on rural land transferability                               There are a series of regulations that are for the most part serve pubic purpose but that
2   2   2
            effectively serve public policy objectives.                              are not enforced.
            Rural land use plans are elaborated/ changed via                         Public input is required and sought in preparing and amending land use plans but
2   2   3
            public process and resulting burdens are shared.                         comments are not reflected in the finalization of land use plans.
                                                                                     Less than 30% of the land that has had a change in land use assignment in the past 3
            Rural lands, the use of which is changed, are
2   2   4                                                                            years has changed to the destined use (e.g. forest, pastures, wetland, national parks
            swiftly transferred to the destined use.
                                                                                     etc.)
            Rezoning of rural land use follows a public                              Rezoning processes are not public process and rights are ignored or not properly or
2   2   5
            process that safeguards existing rights.                                 promptly compensated in the majority of cases.
            For protected rural land use (forest, pastures,                          The share of land set aside for specific use that is used for a non-specified purpose in
2   2   6   wetlands, national parks etc.) plans correspond                          contravention of existing regulations is less than 10%.
            to actual use.
            PANEL III: URBAN LAND USE, PLANNING,
                      AND DEVELOPMENT
            Restrictions on rights: land rights are not
3   1   0   conditional on adherence to unrealistic                A   B   C   D
            standards.
            Restrictions on urban land ownership/ transfer                           There is a series of regulations that are for the most part serve public purpose but
3   1   1
            effectively serve public policy objectives                               enforcement is deficient.
            Restrictions on urban land ownership/ transfer                           There are a series of regulations that are for the most part serve public purpose but that
3   1   2
            effectively serve public policy objectives. .                            are not enforced.
            Transparency of land use restrictions: changes in
            land use and management regulations are made
3   2   0   in a transparent fashion and provide significant
            benefits for society in general rather than just for
            specific groups.
            Process of urban expansion/ infrastructure                               Information on planned urban expansion and infrastructure development is not
3   2   1   development process is transparent and respects                          publicly available.
            existing rights.


                                                                               172
            Changes in urban land use plans are based on a             Public input is sought while preparing and amending land use plans but the public
3   2   2
            clear public process and input by all stakeholders         comments are largely ignored in the finalization of land use plans.
            Changes in assigned urban land use are swiftly             Less than 30% of the land that has had a change in land use assignment in the past 3
3   2   3
            followed by actual land use change                         years has changed to the destined use.
            Efficiency in the urban land use planning
            process: land use plans and regulations are
            justified, effectively implemented, do not
3   3   0
            drive large parts of the population into
            informality, and are able to cope with
            population growth.
            Policy to ensure delivery of low-cost housing              There is a policy for low cost housing and services but implementation has major gaps
3   3   1   and services exists and is progressively                   so that the number of those with inadequate shelter actually increases.
            implemented
                                                                       In the largest city, while a hierarchy of regional/detailed land use plans is specified by
            Land use planning effectively guides urban
3   3   2                                                              law, in practice urban spatial expansion occurs in an ad hoc manner with infrastructure
            spatial expansion in the largest city.
                                                                       provided some time after urbanization.
                                                                       In the four major cities in the country, while a hierarchy of regional/detailed land use
            Land use planning effectively guides urban
3   3   3                                                              plans is specified by law, in practice urban development occurs in an ad hoc manner
            development in the four next largest cities.
                                                                       with infrastructure provided some time after urbanization.
                                                                       In the largest city, the urban planning process/authority is struggling to cope with the
            Planning processes are able to cope with urban
3   3   4                                                              increasing demand for serviced units/land as evidenced by the fact that most new
            growth.
                                                                       dwellings are informal.
            Speed and predictability of enforcement of
3   4   0   restricted land uses: development permits are
            granted promptly and predictably.
            Provisions for residential building permits are            Requirements to obtain a building permit are technically justified but not affordable
3   4   1
            appropriate, affordable and complied with                  for (and not complied by) the majority of those affected.
            A building permit for a residential dwelling can           All applications for building permits receive a decision within 12 months.
3   4   2
            be obtained quickly and at a low cost.
3   5   0   Tenure regularization schemes in urban areas
3   5   1   Formalization of urban residential housing is              The requirements for formalizing housing in urban areas are neither clear, straight-

                                                                 173
                        feasible and affordable.                                              forward, or affordable but many applicants from informal areas are managing to
                                                                                              satisfy the requirements.
                        In cities with informal tenure, a viable strategy                     Strategies to deal with urban informality exist but focus only on either land or services
    3       5       2   exists for tenure security, infrastructure, and                       but not both.
                        housing.
                        A condominium regime allows effective                                 Common property under condominiums is recognized and the law has clear provisions
    3       5       3
                        management and recording of urban property.                           for management and publicity of relevant records that are followed in practice.


4                       PANEL IV: PUBLIC LAND MANAGEMENT
                        Identification of public land and clear
                        management: public land ownership is clearly
                        defined, effectively serves the public purpose, is
4       1       0                                                               A   B     C        D
                        inventoried,      under     clear     management
                        responsibilities, and relevant information is
                        publicly accessible
                        Criteria for public land ownership are clearly                                 Public land ownership is justified by provision of public goods and
4       1       1       defined and assigned to the right level of                                     effectively and transparently managed at the appropriate level of government.
                        government.
                                                                                                       Between 30% and 60% of public land is clearly identified on the ground and
4       1       2       There is a complete recording of public land.
                                                                                                       on maps.
                                                                                                       All the information in the public land inventory is only available for a limited
4       1       3       Information on public land is publicly accessible.                             set of public property and there is little or no justification why records are not
                                                                                                       accessible.
                                                                                                       The management responsibility for different types of public land is
                        The management responsibility for different types of                           unambiguously assigned but this is not always consistent with objectives of
4       1       4
                        public land is unambiguously assigned..                                        equity and efficiency or institutions are not always properly equipped so that
                                                                                                       sometimes these are not achieved.
                                                                                                       There are significant constraints in the financial and/or human resource
                        Responsible public institutions have sufficient
4       1       5                                                                                      capacity but the system makes effective use of limited available resources,
                        resources for their land management responsibilities.
                                                                                                       with limited impact on managing public land.
                                                                                                       Key information for public land allocations (the locality and area of the land
                        All essential information on public land allocations
4       1       6                                                                                      allocations, the parties involved and the financial terms of the allocation) is
                        to private interests is publicly accessible.
                                                                                                       recorded or partially recorded but is not publicly accessible.
                        Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition
4       2       0
                        processes: the state expropriates land only for
                                                                                        174
                        overall public interest and this is done efficiently
                        There is minimal transfer of acquired land to private                   Less than 10% of land acquired in the past 3 years is used for private
4       2       1
                        interests.                                                              purposes.
                        Acquired land is transferred to destined use in a                       Between 50% and 70% of the land that has been acquired in the past 3 years
4       2       2
                        timely manner.                                                          has been transferred to its destined use.
                        The threat of land acquisition does not lead to pre-                    Some.
4       2       3
                        emptive action by private parties.
                        Transparency and fairness of expropriation
                        procedures: expropriation procedures are clear
4       3       0
                        and transparent and fair compensation is paid
                        expeditiously
                        Compensation is provided for the acquisition of all                     No compensation is paid to those with unrecorded rights of use, occupancy or
4       3       1
                        rights regardless of their recording status.                            otherwise.
                        Land use change resulting in selective loss of rights                   Where people lose rights as a result of land use change outside the acquisition
4       3       2
                        there is compensated for.                                               process, compensation is not paid.
                                                                                                Between 50% and 70% of acquired land owners receive compensation within
4       3       3       Acquired owners are compensated promptly.
                                                                                                one year.
                        There are independent and accessible avenues for                        Independent avenues to lodge a complaint against acquisition exist but there
4       3       4
                        appeal against acquisition.                                             are access restrictions (i.e. only accessible by mid-income and wealthy).
                        Timely decisions are made regarding complaints                          A first instance decision has been reached for between 50% and 80% of the
4       3       5       about acquisition.                                                      complaints about acquisition lodged during the last 3 years.


                        PANEL V: TRANSPARENT PROCESS AND
                        ECONOMIC BENEFIT OF TRANSFER OF PUBLIC
5                       LAND TO PRIVATE USE
                        Transfer of public land to private use follows a clear,
                        transparent, and competitive process and payments
    5       1       0   are collected and audited (with the exception of          A    B    C     D
                        transfers to improve equity such as land distribution
                        and land for social housing).
                                                                                                       The share of public land disposed of in the past 3 years through sale or
                        Public land transactions are conducted in an open
    5       1       1                                                                                  lease through public auction or open tender process is between 70%
                        transparent manner
                                                                                                       and 90%. (Except for equity transfers).
                                                                                                       More than 90% of the total agreed payments are collected from private
    5       1       2   Payments for public leases are collected
                                                                                                       parties on the lease of public land.

                                                                                      175
                                                                                 All types of public land are generally divested at market prices in a
            Public land is transacted at market prices unless guided
5   1   3                                                                        transparent process irrespective of the investor’s status (e.g. domestic
            by equity objectives
                                                                                 or foreign).
            The public captures benefits arising from changes in                 Mechanisms to allow the public to capture significant share of the
5   1   4
            permitted land use.                                                  gains from changing land use are not used.
            Policy to improve equity in asset access and use by the              No policy in place to improve access to and productive use of assets
5   1   5
            poor exists, is implemented effectively and monitored                by poor and marginalized groups.
5   2   0   Private investment strategy
            Land to be made available to investors is identified                 A policy to identify land that can be made available to investors exists,
            transparently and publicly, in agreement with right                  based on ad hoc assessment of land potential but with community
5   2   1
            holders.available to investors, in agreement with land               consultation and agreement, and is applied in more than 90% of
            rights holders.                                                      identified cases.
            Investments are selected based on economic, socio-                   Process is in place that considers only national benefits, but that is
5   2   2
            cultural and environmental impacts in an open process                adhered to. No local benefit sharing in place
                                                                                 Institutions to make decisions are clearly identified and have the
            Public institutions transferring land to investors are               necessary capacity (incl. resources for field verification) and strong
5   2   3
            clearly identified and regularly audited                             incentives in ensuring socially beneficial outcomes but processes may
                                                                                 be complex and difficult for investors.
            Public bodies transferring land to investors share                   A policy is in place for effective inter-ministerial and coordination to
5   2   4   information and coordinate to minimize and resolve                   ensure that decisions on land use and land rights are well coordinated
            overlaps (including sub-soil).                                       across sectors, and is applied effectively.
            Compliance with contractual obligations is regularly                 Monitoring of compliance is limited or only part of the results
5   2   5
            monitored and remedial action taken if needed.                       accessible to the public
            Safeguards effectively reduce the risk of negative effects           Substantive application of safeguards (EIA, SIA, etc.) is in line with
5   2   6
            from large scale land-related investments..                          global best practice but only part of the information is disclosed.
            The scope for resettlement is clearly circumscribed and              Resettlement policy exists, but is only in part of the cases applied.
5   2   7
            procedures exist to deal with it in line with best practice.
            Policy implementation is effective consistent and
5   3   0
            transparent and involves local stakeholders
                                                                                 Investors' business plans (application materials) require some evidence
            Investors provide sufficient information to allow rigorous
5   3   1                                                                        of technical viability, community consultation, and availability of
            evaluation of proposed investments.
                                                                                 resources but this is only sufficient to identify project risk ex ante.
                                                                                 All investment application related documents are reviewed according
            Approval of investment plans follows a clear process with
5   3   2                                                                        to a uniform process and receive a response within 6 months of date of
            reasonable timelines.
                                                                                 submission
            Right holders and investors negotiate freely and directly            Those holding rights to land with potential for investment have
5   3   3
            with full access to relevant information.                            incentives to properly negotiate but their rights are unclear or
                                                                           176
                                                                                                    opportunities to obtain relevant information or assistance do not exist.
                     Contractual provisions regarding benefit sharing are                           The majority of contractual arrangements do not include information
5       3       4
                     publicly disclosed.                                                            on benefit sharing
                     Contracts are made public, easily accessible and
5       4       0
                     agreements are monitored and enforced
                                                                                                    Spatial information and temporal information is available to relevant
                     Information on spatial extent and duration of approved
5       4       1                                                                                   government institutions but not accessible on a routine basis by private
                     concessions is publicly available.
                                                                                                    parties.
                                                                                                    There is little third-party monitoring of investors' compliance with
                     Compliance with safeguards on concessions is monitored
5       4       2                                                                                   safeguards and mechanisms to quickly and effectively ensure
                     and enforced effectively and consistently.
                                                                                                    adherence are difficult to access for affected communities.
                                                                                                    There is little third-party monitoring of investors' compliance with
                     Avenues to deal with non-compliance exist and obtain
5       4       3                                                                                   contractual provisions and mechanisms to quickly and effectively
                     timely and fair decisions.
                                                                                                    reach arbitration are virtually non-existent.



                      Panel 6: Public provision of land information: registry
    6                 and cadastre
    6       1       0 Mechanisms for recognition of rights                        A    B    C   D
                                                                                                    There is a clear, practical process for the formal recognition of
                     Land possession by the poor can be formalized in line
6       1       1                                                                                   possession but this process is not implemented effectively,
                     with local norms in an efficient and transparent process.
                                                                                                    consistently or transparently.
                                                                                                    Non-documentary forms of evidence are used to obtain recognition of
                     Non-documentary evidence is effectively used to help                           a claim to property along with other documents (e.g. tax receipts or
6       1       2
                     establish rights.                                                              informal purchase notes) when other forms of evidence are not
                                                                                                    available. They have less strength than the documents provided.
                                                                                                    Legislation exists to formally recognize long-term, unchallenged
                     Long-term unchallenged possession is formally                                  possession but due to the way this legislation is implemented, formal
6       1       3
                     recognized.                                                                    recognition is granted to very few or no applicants for recognition on
                                                                                                    either public or private land.
                     First-time recording of rights on demand includes proper                       On-demand recording of rights includes proper safeguards to prevent
6       1       4
                     safeguards and access is not restricted by high fees.                          abuse and costs do not exceed 5% of the property value.
6       2       0    Completeness of the land registry
                                                                                                    The total cost for recording a property transfer is equal to or greater
6       2       1    Total cost of recording a property transfer is low.
                                                                                                    than 5% of the property value.
6       2       2    Information held in records is linked to maps that reflect                     More than 90% of records for privately held land recorded in the
                                                                                      177
            current reality                                                    registry are readily identifiable in maps (spatial records).
                                                                               Relevant private encumbrances are recorded but this is not done in a
6   2   3   All relevant private encumbrances are recorded
                                                                               consistent and reliable manner.
                                                                               Relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded but this is not
6   2   4   All relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded.
                                                                               done in a consistent and reliable manner.
            There is a timely response to requests for accessing               Copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property can
6   2   5
            registry records                                                   generally be obtained within 1 week of request.
                                                                               The records in the registry can be searched by both right holder name
6   2   6   The registry is searchable.
                                                                               and parcel.
                                                                               Copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property can only
                                                                               be obtained by intermediaries and those who can demonstrate an
6   2   7   Land information records are easily accessed.
                                                                               interest in the property upon payment of the necessary formal fee, if
                                                                               any.
            Reliability: registry information is updated and
6   3   0
            sufficient to make meaningful inferences on ownership
                                                                               Links are in place for all types of public land information registries but
            Information in public registries is synchronized to ensure
6   3   1                                                                      checks on the legitimacy of transactions that affects certain parties'
            integrity of rights and reduce transaction cost.
                                                                               land rights are only performed ex post.
            Registry information is up-to-date and reflects ground             Between 70% and 90% of the ownership information in
6   3   2
            reality.                                                           registry/cadastre is up-to-date and reflects ground reality..
            Cost-effectiveness and sustainability: land
6   3   0   administration services are provided in a cost-effective
            manner.
                                                                               The total fees collected by the registry exceed the total registry
            The registry is financially sustainable through fee                operating costs. (Total operating costs include all non-capital
6   4   1
            collection to finance its operations.                              investment costs (i.e. salaries and wages, materials, transportation,
                                                                               etc.) associated with registry operating costs.)
                                                                               Investment in human and physical is sufficient to maintain high
            Investment in land admin. is sufficient to cope with
6   4   2                                                                      service standards but does not allow for proactively responding to
            demand for high quality services.
                                                                               future needs and new developments in the sector.
            Fees are determined transparently to cover the cost of
6   5   0
            service provision
            Fees have a clear rationale, their schedule is public, and         A clear rationale and schedule of fees for different services is publicly
6   5   1
            all payments are accounted for.                                    accessible and receipts are issued for all transactions.
                                                                               Mechanisms to detect and deal with illegal staff behavior exist in all
6   5   2   Informal payments are discouraged.
                                                                               registry offices but cases are not systematically or promptly dealt with.

                                                                         178
                                                                                                                 There are published service standards (including dealing with illegal
    6       5       3   Service standards are published and regularly monitored.                                 staff behavior), the registry actively monitors its performance against
                                                                                                                 these standards and results are public.

7                       PANEL VII: LAND VALUATION AND TAXATION
                        Transparency of valuations: valuations for tax and
                        compensation purposes are based on clear principles,
7       1       0                                                            A           B       C       D
                        applied uniformly, updated regularly, and publicly
                        accessible
                                                                                                                 The assessment of land/property for tax or compensation purposes
                                                                                                                 reflects market prices, but there are significant differences between
7       1       1       There is a clear process of property valuation.
                                                                                                                 recorded values and market prices across different uses and types of
                                                                                                                 users; valuation rolls are updated regularly
                                                                                                                 There is a policy that valuation rolls be publicly accessible and this
7       1       2       Valuation rolls are publicly accessible                                                  policy is effective for most of the properties that are considered for
                                                                                                                 taxation.
                                                                                                                 There are limited exemptions to the payment of land/property taxes,
                        Exemptions from property taxes payment are justified and
7       2       1                                                                                                and the exemptions that exist are clearly based on equity or efficiency
                        transparent.
                                                                                                                 grounds and applied in a transparent and consistent manner.
                        All property holders liable to pay property tax are listed                               Between 50% and 70% of property holder liable for land/property tax
7       2       2
                        on the tax roll.                                                                         are listed on the tax roll.
7       2       3       Assessed property taxes are collected.                                                   Between 70% and 80% of assessed land/ property taxes are collected.
                                                                                                                 The amount of property taxes collected is between 1 and 3 times cost
7       2       4       Receipts from property tax exceed the cost of collection
                                                                                                                 of staff in charge of collection.

8                       PANEL VIII: DISPUTE RESOLUTION
                        Assignment of responsibility: responsibility for conflict
                        management at different levels is clearly assigned, in
8       1       0       line with actual practice, relevant bodies are competent     A       B       C       D
                        in applicable legal matters, and decisions can be
                        appealed against
                                                                                                                 There are no parallel avenues for conflict resolution or, if parallel
                        There is clear assignment of responsibility for conflict                                 avenues exist, responsibilities are clearly assigned and widely known
8       1       1
                        resolution.                                                                              and explicit rules for shifting from one to the other are in place to
                                                                                                                 minimize the scope for forum shopping.
8       1       2       Conflict resolution mechanisms are accessible to the                                     Institutions for providing a first instance of conflict resolution are
                                                                                         179
            public.                                                                         accessible at the local level in the majority of communities.
                                                                                            There is a local, informal dispute resolution system that resolves a
            Mutually accepted agreements reached through informal                           significant number of conflicts in an effective and equitable manner
8   1   3
            dispute resolution systems are encouraged                                       and which is recognized in the formal judicial or administrative
                                                                                            dispute resolution system.
                                                                                            A process exists to appeal rulings on land cases at high cost and the
            There is an accessible, affordable and timely process for
8   1   4                                                                                   process takes a long time/ the costs are low but the process takes a
            appealing disputed rulings.
                                                                                            long time.
            The share of land affected by pending conflicts is low
8   2   0
            and decreasing
            Land disputes constitute a small proportion of cases in the                     Land disputes in the formal court system are between 10% and 30% of
8   2   1
            formal legal system.                                                            the total court cases.
            Conflicts in the formal system are resolved in a timely
                                                                                            A decision in a land-related conflict is reached in the first instance
8   2   2   manner.
                                                                                            court within 1 year for 90% of cases.
                                                                                            The share of long-standing land conflicts is greater than 20% of the
8   2   3   There are few long-standing (> 5 years) land conflicts..
                                                                                            total pending land dispute court cases.

            PANEL IX: REVIEW OF INSTITUTIONAL
9
            ARRANGEMENTS AND POLICIES
            Clarity of mandates and practice: institutional mandates
            concerning the regulation and management of the land
9   1   0                                                                 A    B    C   D
            sector are clearly defined, duplication of responsibilities
            is avoided and information is shared as needed.
                                                                                            In situations that can entail conflicts of interest or are sensitive to
            Land policy formulation, implementation and arbitration
9   1   1                                                                                   abuse (e.g. transfers of land rights) there is some separation in the
            are separated to avoid conflict of interest.
                                                                                            roles of policy formulation, implementation and arbitration.
                                                                                            The mandated responsibilities of the various authorities dealing with
            Responsibilities of the ministries and agencies dealing                         land administration issues are defined with a limited amount of
9   1   2
            with land do not overlap (horizontal overlap).                                  overlap with those of other land sector agencies but there are few
                                                                                            problems.
                                                                                            Assignment of land-related responsibilities between the different
9   1   3   Administrative (vertical) overlap is avoided.
                                                                                            levels of administration and government is clear and non-overlapping.
            Land right and use information is shared by public                              Information related to rights in land is available to interested
9   1   4   bodies; key parts are regularly reported on and publicly                        institutions but this information is not readily accessible or not
            accessible.                                                                     available at a reasonable cost.

                                                                              180
                                                                              The Legal framework and procedures for land-related matters (incl.
            Overlaps of rights (based on tenure typology) are minimal         renewable and subsoil resources) deal with land-related matters very
9   1   5
            and do not cause friction or dispute.                             differently but have functioning mechanisms for redressing overlap in
                                                                              place.
            Ambiguity in institutional mandates (based on
                                                                              With minor exceptions, the processes applied by public institutions
9   1   6   institutional map) does not cause problems.
                                                                              dealing with land are fully integrated and consistent.
            Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making
            process: policies are formulated through a decision-
            making process that draws on inputs from all
9   2   0
            concerned. The legal framework is non-discriminatory
            and institutions to enforce property rights are equally
            accessible to all
                                                                              A comprehensive land policy exists or can be inferred by the existing
            Land policies and regulations are developed in a                  legislation, and sections of the community affected by these decisions
9   2   1
            participatory manner involving all relevant stakeholders.         are informed, but feedback is usually not sought or not used in
                                                                              making decisions
                                                                              Land policies incorporate clearly formulated equity and poverty
            Land policies address equity and poverty reduction goals;         objectives that are regularly and meaningfully monitored but their
9   2   2
            progress towards these are publicly monitored.                    impact on equity and poverty issues is not compared to that of other
                                                                              policy instruments.
                                                                              Land policies incorporate clearly formulated ecology and
            Land policies address ecological and environmental                environmental sustainability objectives that are regularly and
9   2   3
            goals; progress towards these are publicly monitored.             meaningfully monitored but their impact is not compared to that of
                                                                              other policy instruments.
                                                                              The implementation of land policy is not costed and there is
            The implementation of land policy is costed, matched
9   2   4                                                                     inadequate budget, resources and capacity to implement the land
            with benefits and adequately resourced.
                                                                              policy.
            There is regular and public reporting indicating progress         Formal land institutions report on land policy implementation in a
9   2   5
            in policy implementation.                                         regular and meaningful way but reports are not made public.
                                                                              Policy is in place to improve access to and productive use of assets by
            Land policies help to improve land use by low-income
9   2   6                                                                     poor and marginalized groups, is applied in practice, but is not
            groups and those who experienced injustice.
                                                                              effective
            Land policies proactively and effectively reduce future           Policy is in place to prevent settlement in high risks areas but which is
9   2   7
            disaster risk.                                                    not enforced.



                                                                        181
                              BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.    Bihar Industrial Area Development Authority (2013) Unit Details of Different
      allotment order of Land, Government of Bihar.

2.    Business Today (2013) Land Acquisition Act to Come into force from Jan 1, 2014,
      Business Today, October 15, 2013

3.    Gomez, M and Tran D. H (2012) Women’s Land and Property Rights and The Post -
      2015 Development Agenda, Landesa Rural Development Institute

4.    Government of Bihar (1885) The Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885, Government of Bihar

5.    Government of Bihar (1908) The Registration Act, 1908, Government of Bihar

6.    Government of Bihar (1947) The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead tenancy Act,
      1947, Government of Bihar

7.    Government of Bihar (1950) The Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, Government of
      Bihar

8.    Government of Bihar (1953) The Bihar Government Estates (Khas-Mahal) Manual,
      1953.

9.    Government of Bihar (1954) The Bihar Bhoodan Yagna Act, 1954, Government of
      Bihar

10.   Government of Bihar (1956) The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of
      Fragmentation Act, 1956, Government of Bihar

11.   Government of Bihar (1956) The Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act, 1956,
      Government of Bihar

12.   Government of Bihar (1959) The Bihar Survey and Settlement Manual, 1959,
      Government of Bihar

13.   Government of Bihar (1961) Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and
      Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961, Government of Bihar

14.   Government of Bihar (1973) The Bihar Tenant’s Holding (Maintenance of Records)
      Act, 1973, Government of Bihar

15.   Government of Bihar (2006) Bihar Apartment Ownership Act, 2006 (Amended in
      2011), Government of Bihar




                                         182
16.   Government of Bihar (2006) City Development Plan for Patna under JNNURM, Bihar
      Urban Development Agency, Urban Development and Housing Department,
      Government of Bihar

17.   Government of Bihar (2007) The Bihar Gram Kachchari Conduct Rules, 2007, The
      Bihar Gazette, Government of Bihar.

18.   Government of Bihar (2007) The Bihar Municipal Act, 2007, Government of Bihar

19.   Government of Bihar (2009) The Bihar Land Dispute Resolution Act, 2009, The
      Bihar Gazette, Government of Bihar.

20.   Government of Bihar (2009) The Bihar Land Tribal Acquisition Act, 2009,
      Government of Bihar

21.   Government of Bihar (2010) Draft Slum Policy, Urban Development and Housing
      Department, Government of Bihar

22.   Government of Bihar (2010) The Bihar Fish Jalkar Management (Amendment) Act,
      2010, Government of Bihar

23.   Government of Bihar (2011) The Bihar Agriculture Land (Conversion for Non-
      Agriculture Purpose) Rules, 2011, Government of Bihar

24.   Government of Bihar (2011) The Bihar Land Mutation Act, 2011, Government of
      Bihar

25.   Government of Bihar (2011) The Bihar Right to Public Services Act, 2011,
      Government of Bihar

26.   Government of Bihar (2011) The Bihar Special Survey and Settlement Act, 2011,
      Government of Bihar

27.   Government of Bihar (2012) Aranyashri: Quarterly Magazine, December, 2012,
      Department of Environment and Forest, Government of Bihar

28.   Government of Bihar (2013) Administrative Report 2012-13: Registration, Excise and
      Prohibition Department, Government of Bihar.

29.   Government of Bihar (2013) Annual Report 2012-13: Department of Revenue and
      Land Reforms, Government of Bihar

30.   Government of Bihar (2013) Annual Report: Hariyali Mission, 2013-14, Department
      of Environment and Forest, Government of Bihar

31.   Government of Bihar (2013) Annual Report: Urban Development and Housing
      Department, Government of Bihar


                                         183
32.   Government of Bihar (2013) Basic Services for Urban Poor, Progress Report of
      Different Month, Urban Development and Housing Department, Government of Bihar

33.   Government of Bihar (2013) Draft Building Bye-Laws, 2013, Urban Development
      and Housing Department, Government of Bihar

34.   Government of Bihar (2013) National Ganga River Basin Authority Progress Report
      of Different Month, Urban Development and Housing Department, Government of
      Bihar

35.   Government of Bihar (2013) Newsletter of October, 2013, Bihar State Building
      Construction Department, Government of Bihar

36.   Government of Bihar (2013) Report of 2012-2013 on Land Acquisition for Press
      Release, Department of Revenue and Land Reform, Government of Bihar

37.   Government of Bihar (2013)Annual Work Plan 2013-14, Department of Environment
      and Forest, Government of Bihar.

38.   Government of Bihar (different year) Different Notification of Bihar Industrial Area
      Development Authority, Government of Bihar

39.   Government of Bihar (Different Years) Different Reports, Bihar State Legal Service
      Authority, Government of Bihar

40.   Government of Bihar (Year Unknown): Generic Environmental Management Plan:
      Support Programme for Urban reforms in Bihar, Urban Development and Housing
      Department, Government of Bihar

41.   Government of India () The Report of the Committee on State Agrarian Relations and
      the Unfinished Task in Land Reforms, Department of Land Resource, Ministry of
      Rural Development, Government of India.

42.   Government of India (1899) The Indian Stamp Act, 1899, Government of India

43.   Government of India (1927) The Indian Forest Act, 1927, Government of India

44.   Government of India (1956) The Hindu Succession Act, 1956, Government of India

45.   Government of India (2006) The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest
      Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, Government of India

46.   Government of India (2008) Notification of Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 1 st January,
      2008, The Gazette of India, Government of India

47.   Government of India (2010) The Land Titling Bill, 2010, Department of Land
      Resource, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India.


                                           184
48.   Government of India (2012) Agriculture Census 2010-11, National Informatics
      Centre, Government of India

49.   Government of India (2013) Annual Progress Report of 2012-13, Department of
      Revenue and Land Reforms, Government of Bihar

50.   Government of India (2013) Draft National Land Reforms Policy, Department of
      Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India.

51.   Government of India (2013) The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
      Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, Government of India

52.   Haq, T (2013) Agricultural Land Leasing in India-Policy, Practice and Impact,
      Yojana, 2013.

53.   Jha, G (2013) Land Acquisition Bill Spoils Nitish’s Dream, casts a shadow on IIT
      Patna, Mail Today, September, 2013.

54.   Kumar, S and Singh, P.D (2013) Bihar me basbhumi aur abaas ka adhikaar: sthiti,
      mudde aur chunoutiyan (Right to Homestead Land and Shelter in Bihar: Status, Issues
      and Challenges), Deshkaal Society, New Delhi

55.   Rajagopal, P.V (2013) Implementing the National Land Reform Agenda: The Way
      Forward for Eradicating Poverty, Yojana, November 2013.

56.   Raju, K.D (2007) Alternative Dispute Resolution System: Prident Mechanism of
      Speedy Redress in India, Paper Presented at the Seminar organised by the USEFI,
      Law College Orissa, 15 December, 2007.

57.   Shabnam, M (2011) Bihar Unfolds New Land Acquisition Policy, iGoverment,




                                          185
ANNEXURE




   186
                                   Annexure – 4.1.1
  Distribution of operational holding and area amongst various categories of farmer

SI. No.   Size Class (in ha)      No. of       % Holding Area operated     % Area
                               Operational                  (in ha.)
                                Holdings
                                  Total
   1. Marginal                  14744098         91.06     3668727.64       57.44
   2. Small                      948016           5.86     1185695.24       18.56
   3. Semi Medium                414664           2.56     1072969.00       16.80
   4. Medium                      81484           0.50      414941.12        6.50
   5. Large                        3129           0.02       45227.71        0.71
   6. All Classes               16191391        100.00     6387560.71      100.00
(Source: Agriculture Census 2010-11)




                                         187
                                   Annexure – 4.1.2
               Distribution of ceiling surplus land as on 31st March, 2013

Total number of Beneficiaries to whom the surplus land                 Numbers
acquired under Land Ceiling Act, has been distributed till date        3,50,374
(Sources: Department of Revenue and Land Reforms, Govt. of Bihar)




                                          188
                                                                                   Annexure – 4.1.3
                                Status of pending cases in different courts under Land Ceiling Act (2012-13) March, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                        (Area in acres)
Land Reforms Deputy             SDO                Additional          Collector         Divisional          Board of      High Court         Supreme     State Level     Total Pending
           Collector                               Collector                            Commissioner         Revenue                           Court
     No.         Area     No.         Area     No.        Area    No.       Area     No.       Area     No.       Area    No.     Area    No.     Area   No.    Area     No.     Area
48           4414.71    108     11158.11     186        26881.41 183      17131.41 21      1143.58     104       9644.86 422    27992.54 15      593.17 120    2924.05 1207 101883.84
(Source: Progress Report of the Department of Revenue and Land Reforms, Govt. of Bihar)




                                                                                           189
                                                                 Annexure – 4.1.4
                                              Status of LPC issued from 16/08/2011 to 16/08/2013
 SI.      District      Received                Service Given                     Total     Disposed Not disposed till now     Percentage
 No.                   Application      Within        After        Total         Service   Application     Not    Expired Service Application
                                       Stipulated Stipulated                     Denial                 expired stipulated denial    expired
                                          Time        Time                                             stipulated  time
                                                                                                          time
  1          2             3               4             5          6              7           8            9       10       11        12
  1.    38 districts    1099643         647074        397217     1044291         40798      1085089       9413     5141     3.71      0.47
(Source: Progress Report prepared by the Department of Revenue and Land Reforms, Govt. of Bihar)




                                                                           190
                                    Annexure - 4.1.5
       Sanctioned strength of the survey and settlement wing of revenue department
Posts                                              Sanctioned number
Settlement Officer                                          13
Charge Officer                                              13
Assistant Settlement Officer                               547
Kanungo                                                    547
Head Clerk/Clerk                                            70
Moharrir                                                   294
Draftsman                                                  560
Amin/Surveyor                                              600
Driver                                                      16
Office Attendant                                           800
Computer Operator                                           26
                            Total:-                       3486
(Source: Director, Land Records and Survey)




                                          191
                                 Annexure – 4.3.1
                    State Profile – Bihar as on 31st March, 2011

1. PHYSICAL FEATURE
Total Geographical Area (km2)         94163
Total Population (in crore)           10.381
Total Urban Population                1.172 (11.29%)
2. ADMINISTRATIVE FEATURE
No. of Districts                      38
No. of Sub Divisions                  101
No. of Blocks                         534
No. of Revenue Villages               45103
No. of Panchayat                      8463
Nagar Nigam (Number)                  11
Nagar Parishad (Number)               42
Nagar Panchayat (Number)              86
3. LAND UTILISATION as on 30/6/2010 (area in hectare)
Geographical Area                     9359568
Forest Land                           621635
Area Not Available for Cultivation
       Land Area                      1332514
       Perennial Water Area           207392
       Temporary Water Area           149818
Total Area put to non agriculture use 1689724
Barren and un culturable land         431715
Permanent Pasture and Grazing Land    15782
Land under Miscellaneous Tree Crops 243979
Cultivable Wasteland                  45375
Current Fallow                        857627
Other Fallow                          121998
Net Sown Area                         5331733
Total or Gross Cropped Area           7295805
Area Cultivated More than Once        1964072
Cropping Intensity (GCA/NSA)          137%
4. RAINFALL & GROUND WATER
                                                                      Actual
                                   Normal               2009        2010     2011
Rainfall (in mm)                   1176                 869         814      884
                                   Variation from       -207        -362     -292
                                   Normal
                                   Net groundwater             gross draft   Balance
Availability of Ground Water (Ham)
                                   availability
(31st March 2009)
                                   2620576                     1135604       1384877
5. POPULATION – As per census 2011 (in crore)
Male                               5.419
Female                             4.962
                                        192
Total population                        10.381
Rural                                   9.208
Urban                                   1.172
Total population                        10.381
Decadal growth (%)                      25.1
Density of population                   1102
Sex-Ratio                               916
Literacy (%) total                      63.9
Literacy (%) Male                       73.4
Literacy (%) of female                  53.3
6. WORKERS PROFILE (IN ‘000) As per Census 2001
Total workers                           27975
Cultivators                             8194
Agricultural Labourers                  13418
Workers engaged in Household            1100
Industries
Other workers                           5263
7. HOUSEHOLDS (in ‘000)
Total Households (Census of India 2011) 18940
Rural Households (Census of India,      16927
2011)
Urban Households (Census of India,      2013
2011)
BPL Households (NSSO Survey, 2004- 7670
05)
(Source: Economic Survey 2010-11, Govt. of Bihar; Census of India 2001 & 2011, District
Statistical Hand Book)




                                         193
                                    Annexure – 4.3.2
                                Details of ULBs in Bihar
   Particular          No. of      Number of    Total population    Total population
                      ULBs in        Ward      covered as per 2001 covered as per 2011
                        Bihar                        census              census
        1                  2            3               4                   5
Nagar Nigam               11           545          3940019             4984256
Nagar Parishad            42          1276          3105424             3927157
Nagar Panchayat           86          1351          2228688             2815604
Total                    139          3172          9274131            1,17,27,016
(Source: District Statistical Hand Book)




                                           194
                                  Annexure – 4.3.3
         Details of slums identified in major towns as on 31st December, 2013
City / Town                                                 Number
Patna                                                         110
Bhagalpur                                                     165
Darbhanga                                                     138
Muzaffarpur                                                   105
Gaya                                                           40
(Source: Urban Development & Housing Department, Govt. of Bihar)




                                         195
                                   Annexure – 4.3.4
     Progress Report on National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA) as on 30th
                                   November, 2013
                                                                 Financial Progress
SI. Name of                            Implementing   Project
                    Project Name                                   (Expenditure)
No.  Town                                Agency        Cost
                                                                    (Rs. in lakh)
 1        2               3                    4         5                6
                    Construction of
 1    Begusarai   Sewerage Treatment      BUIDCO      6540.00         1114.00
                        Plant
                    Construction of
 2     Hajipur    Sewerage Treatment      BUIDCO      11362.00        2117.25
                        Plant
                    Construction of
 3      Buxar     Sewerage Treatment      BUIDCO      7495.00         929.00
                        Plant
                    Construction of
 4     Munger     Sewerage Treatment      BUIDCO      18789.00        3105.38
                        Plant
                                         Total =      44186.00        7265.63
(Source: Urban Development & Housing Department, Government of Bihar)




                                         196
                                  Annexure – 4.3.5
 Progress on Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Town
                         (UIDSSMT) as 30th November, 2013
                                                                    Financial Progress
Sr.    Name of                        Implementing      Total
                   Type of Scheme                                      Expenditure
No.     Towns                           Agency       Project cost
                                                                       (Rs. in lakh)
 1        2              3                 4               5                 6
 1     Fathuha     Road With Drains      DUDA           759.82            358.94
 2     Murliganj   Road With Drains     BUIDCo         1143.99            716.00
                                                         4712
 3    Narkatiaganj Road with Drains     BUIDCo                           2125.00
                                                          .54
  4      Rosera    Road with Drains   BUIDCo           2921.32           1786.00
  5     Barbigha Road with Drains      DUDA            1573.00            786.50
  6      Bhabua    Road with Drains    DUDA            1088.00            494.00
  7 Bakhtiyarpur Road With Drains     BUIDCo            511.00            313.00
  8      Lalganj   Road with Drains    DUDA            1263.00            564.00
  9      Chaklia   Road with Drains    DUDA            1285.00            612.28
 10 Muzaffarpur Water Supply          BUIDCo           9872.25           1369.00
                     Solid Waste
 11        Ara                        BUIDCo          983.99             431.00
                     Management
          Total                                      26113.91            9555.72
(Source: Urban Development & Housing Department, Government of Bihar)




                                         197
                                  Annexure – 4.3.6
 Progress on Urban Infrastructure and Governance (UIG) as on 30th November, 2013
                                                                          Financial
                                                     Total
 Sr. Name of                                                Implementing Progress
                               Scheme               Project
 No. Towns                                                    Agency     Expenditure
                                                      Cost
                                                                         (Rs. in lakh)
  1      2                        3                    4         5             6
                                                               Patna
                Municipal Solid Waste Management
  1    Patna                                        3695.70 Municipal
                           for Patna town
                                                             Corporation
  2    Patna       Integrated SWM in Patna UA       1155.81 #BUIDCo          337.00
  3    Patna      Khagaul Water Supply Scheme       1315.43 #BUIDCo          770.00
  4    Patna    Pulwarisharif Water Supply Scheme 2470.26 #BUIDCo           1101.00
  5 Bodhgaya           Water Supply Scheme          3355.72 #BUIDCo         1373.00
                    Purchase of Buses for Urban
                 Transport as Part of 2nd Stimulus
  6    Patna                                        3990.00 #PPP Basis         -
                Package, approved by CSMC in its
                            69th meeting
                    Purchase of Buses for Urban
                 Transport as Part of 2nd Stimulus
  7 `Bodhgaya                                        675.00 #PPP Basis       270.00
                Package, approved by CSMC in its
                            69th meeting
                  Augmentation for Water Supply
  8    Patna                                        6896.45 #BUIDCo         1763.00
                        Scheme for Danapur
  9 Bodhgaya             Sewerage Scheme            9594.34 #BUIDCo         3788.00
 10    Patna           Water Supply Scheme         42698.00 #BUIDCo         8370.00
                               Total =             75846.71                17772.00
(Source: Urban Development & Housing Department, Government of Bihar)




                                         198
                                            Annexure – 4.3.7
     Progress of Basic Services for Urban Poor (BSUP) as on 30th November, 2013
                                                           No. of                   Completed     Financial
 Sr.                                        Total         Dwelling    Site – wise     No. of    achievement /
     Name of Towns      Site Name
 No                                      Project cost      Units         DUs         Dwelling    Expenditure
                                                         Sanctioned                   Units      (Rs. in lakh)
 1          2                 3               4              5            6             7              8
                           Isopur                                        224
                        Indira Nagar                                     96
      Phulwarisharif     Mehta Toli                                      48
 1                                        1157.04             496                     192          512.84
         Phase-I        Garib Nawaj
                                                                          48
                           Colony
                       Fedral Colony                                      80
                          Saidpura                                        64           64          170.32
 2   Khagaul Phase-I Adampur (Gari         228.65              96
                                                                          32
                           Khana)
                        Sarifaganj,
                                                                         208          144
                         PMC Plot
                      Bhitri Begumpur                                     48
                          Sadiqpur
                                                                         160
                         Gulzarbagh
                         Bahadarpur
                      Housing Colony                                     256
                            Road
     Patna City Phase     Kumhrar                                        32
 3                                        6403.10             2736                                 637.93
           -III         Murtujiganj                                      480
                      Bahari Begumpur                                    224
                      Sarifaganj Govt.
                                                                          48
                            Land
                      Math Laxmanpur                                      32
                       Mangal Talab                                       80           32
                          Sadiqpur
                                                                         608
                          Kurapur
                         Chauharml                                       560
         Total =                          7788.79             3328      3328          432         1321.09
(Source: Urban Development & Housing Department, Government of Bihar)




                                                        199
                                  Annexure – 4.3.8
Progress of Integrated Housing for Slum Development Programme (IHSDP) as on 30th
                                  November, 2013
                                          No. of        Completed    No. of
                              Total                                            Financial   Sanctioned
SI.                                      Dwelling         No. of    Dwelling
         Name of Towns       Project                                         Achievement /   in year
No.                                       Units          Dwelling   Units in
                              cost                                            Expenditure (Rs. in lakh)
                                        Sanctioned        Units     Progress
1               2                3          4               5          6           7            8
1             Kanti            319.71      143             137        138       191.44
2          Aurangabad          307.94      247              51        175       184.42
3            Motipur           543.89      520             445        450       630.15
                                                                                            2006-07
4          Sheikhpura          237.67      207              52        180       195.78
5           Bhagalpur         1655.00     1188             817       1027      1620.00
6        Kishanganj Ph-1      1202.40      552             522        522       771.75
         Subtotal (A) =       4266.61     2857            2024       2492      3593.54
7         Narkatiaganj         383.88      300              0          0         0.00
                                                                                            2006-07
8            Rosera           1432.34     1562              0          0         0.00
          Subtotal (B)=       1816.22     1862              0          0         0.00
9         Bahadurganj          499.57      294             170        171       195.55
                                                                                            2007-08
10           Purnea           1489.66     1487             242        342       438.39
          Subtotal (C)=       1989.23     1781             412        513       633.94
11         Biharsharif        2454.27      810              0         364       571.43
12          Begusarai         2449.60      853             259        415       847.88
13             Ara            3121.66      754              0         532       904.11
                                                                                            2008-09
14         Madhepura          1243.09      319             140        300       701.33
15           Jogbani          1271.10      321              0         321       605.36
16           Supaul            799.00      207              0         207       504.49
          Subtotal (D)=      11338.72     3264             399       2139      4134.60
17           Munger           2019.02      784              0          0         0.00
18            Araria          2126.28      728              0          0         0.00
                                                                                            2009-10
19     Madhepura Phase –II    2032.44      776              0          0         0.00
20           Saharsa          1932.58      820              0          0         0.00
          Subtotal (E)=       8110.32     3108              0          0           0
21          Barh Ph-I         3466.46      890              0          0           0
22        Kishanganj-II       3055.16     1255              0          0           0
23            Jamui           2530.18      960              0          0           0
                                                                                            2010-11
24         Farbesganj         2152.81      870              0          0           0
25            Gaya            4458.79     1747              0          0           0
          Subtotal (F)=      15663.40     5722              0          0         0.00
26          Barh Ph-II        2029.64      500              0          0           0
27           Belsand          5054.55     1487              0          0           0
28           Mokama           6954.23     1950              0          0           0
29          Nabinagar         4366.91     1277              0          0           0
                                                                                            2011-12
30         Purnia Ph-II       5086.74     1615              0          0           0
31          Naubatpur         4907.37     1500              0          0           0
32         Thakurganj         4204.15     1332              0          0           0
          Subtotal (G)=      32603.59     9661             0.00        0         0.00
          Grand Total
                             75788.09     28255           2835       5144       8362.08
      (A+B+C+D+E+F+G)=

                                                  200
(Source: Urban Development & Housing Department, Government of Bihar)
                                     Annexure – 4.3.9
           Details of project completed by the BSHB as on 31st October, 2013
Name of Division                             Scheme Completed
Patna Division 1     MIG Plot Bahadurpur, MIG Plot Lohia Nagar, LIG Plot Bahadurpur,
                     288 MIG at Bahadurpur, 480 EWS at Bahadurpur, 576 LIG at
                     Bahadurpur, 288 EWS at Bahadurpur, 80+16 MIG Plan Scheme at
                     Lohiya Nagar, 600 LIG Flat at Lohiya Nagar, 250 MIG House at
                     Hanuman Nagar, 24 MIG Plan, Lohia Nagar, 100 MIG Plan, Lohia
                     Nagar, 24+129 MIG Plan, Lohia Nagar and 144 HIG at Bahadurpur
Patna Division 2     MIG Plot Digha, LIG Plot Digha, HIG Plot Digha, 144 HIG at
                     Bahadurpur, 384 MIG, 480 LIG, 192 MIG and 96+144 LIG
Patna Division 3     56-C- SFS, 64-A3- KFS, 48-A-SFS, 72-B- SFS, 48 MIG Plan and 192
                     MIG HUDCO
Patna Public Health 206 EWS Plot, Bahadurpur, 184 LIG Plot, 17 MIG House, 41 LIG
Division             House, SFS, MIG FLAT, 7 HIG FLAT, 126 LIG (HUDCO), 126 LIG,
                     Dalpatpur, Arrah, 106 MIG , Dalpatpur, Arrah, 48 LH3 Type at
                     Dalpatpur, Arrah, 184 LIG Plot Self at Bahadurpur and LH1 Type,
                     Arrah,
Gaya Division        376 LIG House at M. Bad, 266 LIG Plot, Ashikpur, 84 HIG Plot at
                     Ashikpur, Sasaram, 154 MIG Plot at Ashikpur, Sasaram, 44 HIG Plot
                     at A.P. Colony, 100 MIG House at A.P. Colony, 50 LIG at A.P.
                     Colony, 168 Janta Flat (EWS) at A.P. Colony, 95 MIG Plots at A.P.
                     Colony and 166 MIG House at M.Bad, 50 LIG House (Plan) at
                     M.Bad,
Darbhanga Division 96 LIG (Plan), 48 MIG (Plan), LIG Plot at Samastipur, 110 LIG
                     (HUDCO), 96 MIG (HUDCO) and 48 EWS Plan
Bhagalpur Division LIG Row House, Barari, 36 LIG Flat, 24+48 MIG House, HIG Plot,
                     LIG House, Purnea, Janta House, 50 MIG House (Plan), Barari, IG
                     Plots, R/C Plots, 30 MIG House and MIG Plots
Muzaffarpur Division HIG Plot at Damodarpur, MIG Plot at Damodarpur, LIG Plot at
                     Damodarpur, EWS at Damodarpur, 93 LIG at Damodarpur, 62 MIG at
                     Damodarpur, 40 MIG at Damodarpur, Plot Scheme at Damodarpur,
                     HIG Plots at Sada, LIG Plots at Sada, MIG Plots at Sada, Chhapra,
                     EWS Plots at Sada, Chhapra, LIG and Plot at Prabhunath Nagar,
(Source: Website of BSHB)




                                            201
                                 Annexure – 4.3.10
            Height of building and FAR as per present and proposed norms
    Road Width                                   FAR
                              Present norms         Proposed norms in draft bye-
                                                               laws
       6 metre                      2                          0.75
      6-9 metre                    2.5                         1.25
     9-12 metre                    2.5                         1.50
     12-15 metre                   2.5                         1.75
     15-18 metre                   2.5                         2.00
     18-30 metre                   2.5                         2.25
  30 metre or more                 2.5                         3.00
(Source: Building Bye-laws)




                                         202
                                   Annexure – 4.3.11
  Minimum size of plots for different categories of building as per proposed bye-laws

                Category                Min. road width(m)   Min. size of plot in Sq. m.
Marriage Halls                                  12                     1000
Cinema, game centers, Multiplex,                18                     2000
convention centers
Social clubs and amenities                      12                      1000
Multi storey car parking                        12                      1000
Office buildings                                12                       300
Primary/Upper Primary school                    12                      2000
High School , Residential school                12                      6000
+2 College / Junior college                     12                      4000
Degree College                                  12                      6000
Technical educational institution               12                     10000
Petrol pumps / Filling stations                 12                       500
Restaurant                                      12                       500
LPG storages                                    12                       500
Places of congregation                          12                       500
Public libraries                                12                       300
Conference hall                                 15                      1000
Community hall                                  12                       500
Nursing homes/polyclinics                       12                       300
Hotel                                           18                      2000
R and D Lab                                     15                      1500
(Source: Draft Building Bye-laws, 2013)




                                          203
                                        Annexure – 4.3.12
 Plot Size wise Permissible Set Backs and Height of Buildings as per proposed bye-laws

                                                                                    Minimum
                                   Minimum Front setback (in Mts) Abutting
                                                                                 setbacks other
                 Maximum                       road width
                                                                                  sides(in Mts)
                  height of
 Plot size (in                                     12 Mts
                  building               9 Mts               18 Mts
  Sq. Mts)                      Less                 and
                 permissible              and                and less Above 30   Rear     Other
                               than 9                less
                  (in Mts)              below                than 30    Mts.     Side      side
                                Mts                than 18
                                        12 Mts                 Mts.
                                                     Mts
      1              2          3(a)      3(b)       3(c)      3(d)      3(e)     4          5
  Less than
                     7                                                           1.0         -
    100
 100 &upto
                     10         2.0       2.0          2.5     3.0       4.5     1.5        1.0
    200
 Above 200
                     10                                                          2.0        1.0
 &upto 300
 Above 300
                     12                                                          3.0        1.5
 &upto 400
                                3.0       3.0          3.5     4.5       6.0
 Above 400
                     12                                                          3.0        3.0
 &upto 500
 Above 500
                     15                                                          3.5        3.5
 &upto 750                      4.5       4.5          4.5     4.5       6.0
 Above 750           15                                                          3.5        3.5
(Source: Draft Building Bye-laws, 2013)




                                                 204
                                   Annexure – 4.3.13
    Provision of exterior open spaces around the buildings as per proposed bye-laws

 SI. No.    Height of the Building Upto (m.)    Exterior open spaces to be left out on
                                                all sides in m. (front rear and sides in
                                                               each plot)
    1     More than15 and upto 18                                    6
    2     More than 18 and upto 21                                   7
    3     More than 21and upto 24                                    8
    4     More than 24 and upto 27                                   9
    5     More than 27 and upto 30                                  10
    6     More than 30 and upto 35                                  11
    7     More than 35 and upto 40                                  12
    8     More than 40 and upto 45                                  13
    9     More than 45 and upto 50                                  14
   10     More than 50                                              15
(Source: Draft Building Bye-laws, 2013)




                                          205
                                   Annexure – 4.3.14
              Far as per road width as per existing and proposed bye-laws

                                                                    Proposed FAR as
Road width in m.                                   Existing FAR     per draft building
                                                                         bye-laws
Up to 6                                                  2                 0.75
6 or more & less than 9                                 2.5                1.25
9 or more & less than 12                                2.5                1.50
12 or more & less than 15                               2.5                1.75
15 or more & less than 18                               2.5                2.00
18 or more & less than 30                               2.5                2.25
30 or more                                              2.5                3.00
(Source: Draft Building Bye-laws, 2013)




                                          206
                                   Annexure – 4.3.15
     Height restriction with respect to approach funnels as per proposed bye-laws

  Distance from nearest runway end (in      Maximum Permissible height above the
                metres)                     elevation of the nearest runway end (in
                                                             metres)
                  Up to 360                                     0
                  361 to 510                                    6
                  511 to 660                                    9
                  661 to 810                                   12
                  811 to 960                                   15
                 961 to 1110                                   18
                1111 to 1260                                   21
                1261 to 1410                                   24
                1411 to 1560                                   27
               More than 1560                                  30
(Source: Draft Building Bye-laws, 2013)




                                          207
                                  Annexure – 4.3.16
     Height restriction with respect to transitional area as per proposed bye-laws

   Distance of the Inner Boundary of the       Maximum Permissible height above
 Transitional Area (Outer Boundary of the      the elevation of the airport reference
                  Air Port)                                point [metres]
                  [Metres]
                  Up to 21                                       0
                   22 to 42                                      3
                   43 to 63                                      6
                   64 to 84                                      9
                  85 to 105                                     12
                 106 to 126                                     15
                 127 to 147                                     18
                 148 to 168                                     21
                 169 to 189                                     24
                 190 to 210                                     27
              More than 210 M                                   30
(Source: Draft Building Bye-laws, 2013)




                                         208
                                   Annexure – 4.3.17
                  Off Street Parking Space as per proposed bye-laws

   SI.          Category of building/ activity          Parking area to be provided as
   No.                                                 per centage of total built up area
   (1)                          (2)                                   (3)
    1     Shopping malls, Shopping malls with                          50
          Multiplexes/ Cineplex’s, Cinemas, Retail
          shopping centre, IT / ITES complexes and
          hotels, marriage halls and banquet halls
    2     Restaurants, Lodges, Other commercial,                      40
          Assembly buildings, Offices and High-rise
          buildings/ complexes
    3     Residential apartment buildings, Group                      30
          Housing, Clinics, Nursing Homes,
          Hospitals, Institutional and Industrial
          buildings.
(Source: Draft Building Bye-laws, 2013)




                                          209
                                  Annexure – 4.3.18
 Land Use Classification and Permissible Uses as per modified building bye-laws 1996

                                                              Uses permissible if allowed by
              Zone                  Uses permitted               the Authority after special
                                                                            appeal
               1                             2                                3
Residential                 1. Residence, Hostels and 1. Places of worship
                            Boarding Houses with density
                            Limitations.
                            2. Nursery, Kinder garden and 2. Professional, Commercial
                            High Schools,                     and Government Offices,
                            3. Clinics, Social and cultural 3. Service uses and retail
                            institution     with    adequate shops of a neighbourhood
                            parking facilities.               character when located in local
                                                              shopping centres or in
                                                              concentrated locations or as
                                                              shown        in    the     Zonal
                                                              Development plan of the areas
                                                              when prepared.
                            4. Retail shopping and 4. Hotels, hospitals and
                            community facilities with sanatoria               not      treating
                            adequate parking facilities.      contagious diseases or mental
                                                              patients, provided the set back
                                                              and coverage of plots are such
                                                              as not to constitute nuisance to
                                                              the residential area.
                            5. Neighbourhood recreational 5. Non-commercial poultry
                            use including clubs and others and cattle farms provided that
                            such       public    recreational a part of such building is not
                            facilities     with     adequate such that 50 ft. away from a
                            parking facilities.               dwelling or property line.
                                                              6. Institutions of higher
                                                              learning.
                                                              7. Bus depots, railway
                                                              passenger and freight station.
                                                              8. Petrol filling Stations on
                                                              road of 90 ft. width and above.
                                                              9. Service and storage Yard,
                                                              taxi and scooter stands.
B. Commercial (Retail)      1. Retail shops and markets. 1.          Social    and     welfare
                                                              institutions
                            2. Business and professional 2. Petrol filling stations and
                            Offices.                          garages with adequate set back
                                                              and coverage so that there is
                                                              no nuisance created to the
                                          210
                                                                locality.
                            3. Service uses shops like 3. Coal, Wood or Timber yard.
                            barbers,      tailors,     laundry
                            cleaners etc.
                            4. Restaurants and places of 4. Light manufacturing units
                            entertainment with adequate employing not more than 4
                            parking places.                     persons with or without power
                                                                provided         the      goods
                                                                manufactured are sold on the
                                                                premises in retail and that does
                                                                not create nuisance or hazard.
                            5. Residences, Hostels and 5. Taxi and Scooter stand, Bus
                            Boarding Houses and social Terminal               (Parking     areas
                            and       welfare      institutions requirements for all the above
                            provided they are located in uses must be approved.)
                            the first and higher floors.
                            6. Meat, Fish, Vegetables and
                            fruit markets.
                            7. Roofed storage for
                            legitimate retail business.
                            8. Public and semi-public
                            recreational discos.
                            9. Public utilities and buildings
                            (Parking area requirements for
                            all these uses must be
                            approved)
C. Commercial (Wholesale)   1. Wholesale and retail shops. 1. Truck terminals and
                                                                parking.
                            2. Storage for wholesale uses 2. Market, Clinic, Social and
                            except when specifically            Cultural institutions.
                            prohibited.
                            3. Commercial and                   3. Dwelling for watch-and-
                            Government Offices.                 ward Parking, loading &
                                                                unloading requirements must
                                                                be approved for all the above
                                                                uses).
                            4. Restaurants, and residences
                            provided they are located in
                            first and higher floors.
                            5. Public utilities and buildings
                            (Parking, loading and
                            unloading requirements must
                            be approved for all the above
                            uses.)
D. Industrial               1. Industries which do not          1. Bus and Truck Terminal.
                            cause excessive, injurious or
                            obnoxious noise, vibration,
                            smokes, gas, flames, odour,

                                           211
                            dust, effluent or other
                            objectionable conditions and
                            do not employ more than 100
                            workers. (Parking, loading and
                            unloading requirements must
                            be approved for all uses.
                                                             2. Railway passenger and
                                                             freight terminal.
                                                             3. Petrol filling Station, Taxis
                                                             and Scooter stands, junk yards.
                                                             4. Dwellings for watch and
                                                             ward staff, canteen and
                                                             recreational facilities for the
                                                             employees.
E. Public and semi-Public   1. Local, State and Central      1. Residences and other uses
uses.                       Government Offices and use incidental to main use in no
                            of land for defence purposes. way causing any nuisance or
                                                             hazard.
                            2. Social and cultural           2. Outdoor theatres and drive-
                            institutions.                    in-cinemas.
                            3. Radio Transmitters and        3. Restaurants and selling of
                            Wireless Stations subject to     eatables.
                            height and density restrictions.
                            4. Educational, Medical and 4. Uses clearly incidental to
                            research institution.            recreational use which will not
                                                             create nuisance or hazard.
                            5. Social and cultural           5. Dwelling for watch and
                            institutions.                    ward staff. (Parking area
                                                             requirements for all uses must
                                                             be approved).
                            6. Moments and religious
                            institutions.
                            7. Public utilities and
                            buildings.
                            8. Cremation grounds and
                            cemeteries.
                            9. Bus and Railways passenger
                            terminals.
                            10. Parks, play-grounds and
                            special recreational areas.
                            (Parking area requirements for
                            all these uses must be
                            approved).
Agricultural                1. Agricultural and              1. Places of worship.
                            horticulture.
                            2. Dairy and Poultry farming. 2. Special educational and
                                                             cultural buildings.
                            3. Farm houses and accessory 3. Parks and non-commercial

                                          212
                               buildings of appropriate        and semi-public, recreational
                               specification.                  uses.
                               4. Brick Kilns.                 4. Storage and processing &
                               (Parking area requirement for   sale of farm product.
                               all these uses must be
                               approved).
                                                               5. Service and repair of farm
                                                               implements.
                                                               6. Public utility and building
                                                               (Parking area requirement for
                                                               all these uses must be
                                                               approved).
(Source: Urban Development and Housing Department, Govt. of Bihar)




                                             213
                                        Annexure – 4.3.19
    Land Uses Permitted / Prohibited in Different Use Zones in Proposed Building Bye-
                                             Laws 2013
                                                        Uses / Activities
                              Uses / Activities                                    Uses/Activities
SN         Use Zone                                     Permissible on
                                Permitted                                           Prohibited
                                                     approval by Authority
1              2                        3                       4                           5
    1 Residential     Use 1. Residence                                         1. Heavy, large and
      Zone                plotted (detached,                                   extensive
                          semi-detached and                                    industries, noxious,
                          row housing),             1. Places of worship       obnoxious and
                          apartment, group                                     hazardous
                          housing,        work-cum-
                          residential
                          2. Hostels,               2. Shopping centres 2. Warehousing,
                          boarding and              (only for medicines and storage godowns of
                          lodging houses            associated goods)          perishables,
                                                                               hazardous,
                                                                               inflammable goods,
                                                                               wholesale mandis,
                                                                               junk yards
                          3. Night shelters,11      3. Municipal, state and 3. Workshops for
                          dharamshalas,             central government         buses
                          guest houses              offices
                          4. Educational            4. Colleges and            4. Slaughter houses
                          buildings (nursery,       research institutions
                          primary, high
                          school)
                          5. Neighborhood           5. Petrol filling stations 5. Hospitals
                          level social,             convenient shopping or treating contagious
                          cultural and              tabagie                    diseases
                          recreational
                          facilities with
                          adequate parking
                          provisions
                          6. Marriage and           6. Places of               6. Sewage
                          community halls           entertainment, cinema treatment plants
                                                    halls, restaurants and     and disposal sites
                                                    hotels
                          7. Convenience            7. Markets for retail      7. Water treatment
                          shopping, local           Goods                      plants, solid waste

11 But essentially not on main artery, such as Ashok Raj Path and on career building institutions.

                                                  214
                                               Uses / Activities
                    Uses / Activities                                       Uses/Activities
SN   Use Zone                                  Permissible on
                      Permitted                                              Prohibited
                                            approval by Authority
                (retail) shopping                                       dumping grounds
                8. Community               8. IT and IT enabled         8. Outdoor and
                centers, clubs,            Services                     indoor games
                auditoriums                                             stadiums, shooting
                                                                        range
                9. Exhibition and          9. Tourism related           9. Bird Sanctuary
                art galleries;             Services
                Zoological garden,
                botanical garden,
                10.      Libraries      and 10.     Motor     vehicle 10.          International
                gymnasiums                  repairing workshop,       conference centers
                                            garages, storage of
                                            LPG cylinders
                11. Health clinics,         11. Burial grounds        11. District
                yoga centers,                                         battalion offices,
                dispensaries,                                         forensic science
                nursing homes and                                     laboratory
                health centers (20
                beds)
                12. Public utilities       12. Printing presses         12. All uses not
                and buildings              employing not more           specifically
                except service and         than 10 persons              permitted in
                storage yards,                                          column (2) and (3)
                electrical
                distribution depots
                and water
                pumping stations
                13. Nursery and            13. Godowns
                green houses               /warehousing          of
                                           nonperishables
                14. Services for           14. Bus depots without
                households (salon,         Workshop
                parlours, bakeries,
                sweet shops, dry
                cleaning, internet
                kiosks etc.)
                15. Banks and              15. Household
                professional               industries if the area for
                offices not                such use does not
                exceeding one              exceed one floor and
                floor                      there shall be no public
                                           display of the goods
                16. Bus stops, taxi        16. Consulates
                stands, 3
                wheeler/auto
                stands, rickshaw
                stands
                17. Police posts
                and post offices
                18. Parks and tot–
                                        215
                                                Uses / Activities
                       Uses / Activities                                  Uses/Activities
SN     Use Zone                                 Permissible on
                         Permitted                                         Prohibited
                                             approval by Authority
                   Lots
2 Retail           1. Retail business,       1. Associated           1. Polluting
  Commercial and   Mercantile                residential uses        industries
  Business Use     2. Commercial             2. Wholesale storage    2. Heavy,
  Zone             Centers                   Yards                   extensive, noxious,
                                                                     obnoxious,
                                                                     hazardous and
                                                                     extractive
                                                                     industrial units
                   3. Banks, financial       3. Service garages      3. Hospitals,
                   services      and   stock provided they do not    research laboratories
                   exchanges                 directly about the main treating contagious
                                             road, Stock exchanges diseases
                   4. Perishable             4. Printing presses     4. Poultry farms,
                   goods markets             employing not more      dairy farms,
                                             than 10 persons         slaughter houses
                   5. Business and           5. 20 bedded hospitals 5. Sewage
                   professional              not treating contagious treatment plants
                   offices                   diseases and mental     and disposal sites,
                                             patients                solid waste
                                                                     treatment plants
                                                                     and dumping
                                                                     grounds
                   6. Private                6. Weigh bridges        6. Agricultural
                   institutional                                     uses, storage of
                   offices and semi                                  perishable and
                   government                                        inflammable
                   offices                                           commodities
                   7. Shops and              7. Colleges,            7.Quarrying of
                   shopping malls            polytechnics and higher gravel, sand, clay
                                             technical institutes    and stone
                   8. Commercial             8. Sports complex and 8. Bird sanctuary
                   Services                  stadiums. Zoological
                                             gardens, botanical
                                             gardens
                   9. Restaurants and        9. Transient visitor’s  9. Sports training
                   Hotels                    Homes                   centers
                   10. Hostels,              10. Places of           10. District
                   boarding houses,          entertainment,          battalion offices
                   social and welfare        recreational uses and
                   institutions, guest       museums
                   houses
                   11. Convenience           11. Convention centers 11. Forensic
                   and neighborhood                                  science laboratory
                   shopping centers,                                 and all other
                   local shopping                                    related activities
                   centers, weekly                                   which may cause
                   and formal                                        nuisance
                   markets, bakeries
                   and
                                           216
                                                 Uses / Activities
                        Uses / Activities                                  Uses/Activities
SN       Use Zone                                Permissible on
                          Permitted                                         Prohibited
                                              approval by Authority
                    confectionaries
                    12. Cinema halls,         12. Religious places     12. Court
                    theaters, banquet
                    halls, auditoriums
                    13. Marriage and          13. Public utilities,    13. All uses not
                    community halls,          telephone exchanges      specifically
                    night shelters                                     permitted in the
                                                                       column (2) and (3)
                    14. Clinics and           14. Police posts and
                    nursing homes             post offices
                    15. Petrol Pumps          15. Residential,
                                              apartment, group
                                              housing
                    16. IT and IT             16. Picnic Hut
                    enabled services
                    17. Commercial
                    institutes, research
                    and training
                    institutes
                    18. Parking lots
                    19. Taxi stands, 3
                    wheeler/auto
                    stands, rickshaw
                    stands
3    Wholesale      1. Wholesale and          1. Truck terminal, bus   1. Polluting
     Commercial     retail business           depots and parking       Industries
     Use Zone       2. Wholesale and          2. Freight terminal      2. Large scale
                    storage buildings                                  storage of
                                                                       hazardous and
                                                                       other inflammable
                                                                       materials except in
                                                                       areas, specifically
                                                                       earmarked for the
                                                                       purpose
                    3. Commercial and         3. Warehousing,          3. All uses not
                    business offices          storage godowns of       specifically
                    and work places           perishable,              permitted in
                                              inflammable goods,       columns (2) and (3)
                                              coal, wood, timber
                                              yards
                    4. Petrol pumps           4. Service centers,
                    and service               garages, workshops
                    stations on roads
                    of 12 meter or
                    more ROW
                    5. Godowns,               5. Non- polluting,
                    covered storage           nonobnoxious
                    and warehousing           light
                                              industries
                    6. Weigh bridges          6. Junk-yards
                                            217
                                                  Uses / Activities
                        Uses / Activities                                    Uses/Activities
SN      Use Zone                                  Permissible on
                          Permitted                                           Prohibited
                                              approval by Authority
                   7. Bus stops, taxi         7. Gas installation and
                   stands, 3                  gas works
                   wheeler/auto
                   stands, rickshaw
                   stands
                   8. Parking spaces          8. Railway yards and
                                              stations, road freight
                                              stations
                   9. Restaurants             9. Banks and financial
                                              Services
                   10. Public utilities       10. Associated
                                              residential uses,
                                              residential, apartment,
                                              group housing
                   11. Police station/        11. Government and
                   posts, post offices        Semi-government
                                              Offices
                                              12. Water treatment
                                              Plants
4 Industrial Use   1. All kind of             1. Heavy, extensive        1. General business
  Zone             nonpolluting               and other obnoxious,       unless incidental to
                   industries                 hazardous industries       and on the same
                                              subject to the approval    site with industry
                                              of the Bihar Pollution
                                              Control Board
                   2. IT and ITES             2. Industrial Research     2. Schools and
                                              Institute                  Colleges
                   3. SEZs notified           3. Technical               3. Hotels, motels
                   by government of           Educational Institutions   and caravan parks
                   India
                   4. Loading,                4. Junkyards, sports/      4. Recreational
                   unloading spaces           stadiums/ playgrounds      spots or centers
                   5. Warehousing,            5. Sewage disposal         5. Other nonindustrial
                   storage and depots         works, electric power      related
                   of nonperishable           plants, service stations   activities
                   and noninflammable
                   commodities
                   6. Cold storage            6. Govt. semi-govt.,       6. Religious
                   and ice factory            private business offices   Buildings
                   7. Gas godowns             7. Banks, financial        7. Irrigated and
                                              institutions and other     sewage farms
                                              commercial offices
                   8. Wholesale               8. Agro-based              8. Major oil depot
                   business                   industries, dairy and      and LPG refilling
                   establishments             farming                    plants
                   9. Petrol filling          9. Gas installations and   9. Social buildings
                   station with               gas works
                   garages and
                   service stations
                   10. Bus terminals          10. Workshops garages 10. All uses not
                                            218
                                                  Uses / Activities
                         Uses / Activities                                   Uses/Activities
SN     Use Zone                                   Permissible on
                           Permitted                                          Prohibited
                                               approval by Authority
                    and bus depots and                                   specifically
                    workshops                                            permitted in
                                                                         columns (2) and (3)
                    11. Parking, taxi          11. Residential,
                    stands, 3                  apartment , group
                    wheeler/auto               housing, hotels and
                    stands, rickshaw           guest houses
                    stands
                    12. Residential            12. Museum
                    buildings for
                    essential staff and
                    for watch and ward
                    13. Public utilities       13. Helipads
                                               14. Hospitals and
                                               medical centers
5 Public and Semi   1. Government              1. Residential flats,     1. Heavy, extensive
  public            offices, central ,         residential plots for     and other
  Use Zone          state, local and           group housing and staff   obnoxious,
                    semi-government,           housing, Residential,     hazardous
                    public undertaking         apartment, group          industries
                    offices                    housing
                    2. Universities and        2. IT services            2. Slaughterhouses
                    specialized
                    educational
                    institutions,
                    colleges, schools,
                    research and
                    development
                    centers
                    3. Social and              3. Defense quarters       3. Junkyard
                    welfare centers
                    4. Libraries               4. Hostels, transit       4. Wholesale
                                               Accommodation             mandies
                    5. Hospitals,              5. Entertainment and      5. Dairy and
                    health centers,            recreational complexes    poultry farms,
                    dispensaries and                                     farmhouses
                    clinics
                    6. Social and              6. Nursery and            6. Workshops for
                    cultural institutes        kindergarten, welfare     servicing and
                                               center                    repairs
                    7. Religious               7. Open air theater,      7. Processing and
                    Buildings                  Playground                sale of farm
                                                                         products
                    8. Conference              8. Residential club,      8. All uses not
                    Halls                      guest house               specifically
                                                                         permitted in
                                                                         columns (2) and (3)
                    9. Community               9. Bus and Truck
                    halls, marriage            terminals, helipads
                    halls,
                                             219
                                               Uses / Activities
                      Uses / Activities                                   Uses/Activities
SN     Use Zone                                Permissible on
                        Permitted                                          Prohibited
                                            approval by Authority
                  dharamashala
                  10. Museums, art          10. Parking areas, taxi
                  galleries,                stands, 3 wheeler/auto
                  exhibition halls,         stands, rickshaw stands
                  auditoriums
                  11. Police stations,
                  police lines, jails
                  12. Local state and
                  central govt.
                  offices uses for
                  defense purpose
                  13. Educational and
                  research
                  Institutions
                  14. Social and
                  cultural and
                  religious
                  institutions
                  15. Local
                  municipal
                  facilities
                  16. Uses incidental
                  to govt. offices
                  and for their use
                  17. Monuments
                  18. Post offices,
                  Telegraph offices,
                  public – utilities
                  and buildings
                  19. Radio and
                  television station
6 Utility and     1. Post offices,          1. Service industry       1. Any building or
  Services Use    Telegraph offices,                                  structure which is
  Zone            public – utilities                                  not required for
                  and building                                        uses related to
                                                                      public utilities and
                                                                      activities is not
                                                                      permitted therein.
                  2. Water                  2. Warehouse/storage      2. Heavy, extensive
                  Treatment Plant,          Godowns                   and other
                  Sewage Treatment                                    obnoxious,
                  Plant, Solid waste                                  hazardous
                  Treatment Plant                                     industries
                  solid waste
                  dumping grounds
                  3. Radio                  3. Health center for      3. All uses not
                  transmitter and           public and staff or any   specifically
                  wireless stations,        other use incidental to   permitted in
                  telecommunication         public utilities and      column (2) and (3)
                  centers, telephone        services
                                          220
                                                Uses / Activities
                       Uses / Activities                                    Uses/Activities
SN     Use Zone                                 Permissible on
                         Permitted                                           Prohibited
                                             approval by Authority
                   exchange
                   4. Water supply           4. Information/Payment
                   Installations             Kiosk
                   5. Sewage disposal        5. Incidental/ancillary
                   Works                     residential use
                   6. Service stations       6. Truck terminals,
                                             Helipads
                   7. Cremation              7. Commercial use
                   grounds and               Center
                   cemeteries/burial
                   ground
                   8. Power plants/
                   Electrical substation
                   9. Radio and
                   television station
                   10. Fire stations
7 Open Space Use   1. Specialized            1. Building and           1. Any building or
  Zone             parks/ maidans for        structure ancillary to    structure, which is
                   multipurpose use          use permitted in open     not required for
                                             spaces and parks such     open air recreation,
                                             as stands for vehicles    dwelling unit
                                             on hire, taxis and        except for watch
                                             scooters                  and ward, and uses
                                                                       not specifically
                                                                       permitted therein.
                   2. Regional parks,        2. Commercial use of      2. All uses not
                   district parks,           transit nature like       specifically
                   playgrounds,              cinemas, circus and       permitted in
                   children’s parks          other shows               column (2) and (3)
                   3. Clubs                  3. Public assembly
                                             Halls
                   4. Stadiums, picnic       4. Restaurants
                   huts, holiday
                   resorts
                   5. Shooting range,        5. Parking areas,
                   sports training           Caravan parks
                   center
                   6. Swimming               6. Open air cinemas/
                   Pools                     Theatre
                   7. Botanical/             7. Entertainment and
                   zoological garden,        recreational complexes
                   bird sanctuary
                   8. Green belts            8. Community hall,
                                             Library
                   9. Bus and railway        9. Open air theater,
                   passenger                 theme parks,
                   terminals                 amphitheatres
                                             10. Residential club,     10. Public utilities
                                             guest house               and facilities such
                                                                       as police post, fire
                                           221
                                                Uses / Activities
                       Uses / Activities                                   Uses/Activities
SN     Use Zone                                 Permissible on
                         Permitted                                          Prohibited
                                             approval by Authority
                                                                       post, post and
                                                                       telegraph office,
                                                                       health center for
                                                                       players and staff
                                             11. Camping sites         11. Animal racing
                                                                       or riding stables
                                             12. Yoga and
                                             meditation centres
                                             13. Commercial uses
                                             Center
                                             14. Special education
                                             Areas
                                             15. Incidental/ancillary
                                             residential use
8 Transportation   1. All types of           1. Way side shops and 1. Use/activity not
  Use Zone         Roads                     Restaurants              specifically related
                                                                      to transport and
                                                                      communication
                                                                      permitted herein.
                   2. Railway stations       2. Authorised/Planned 2. All uses not
                   and yards                 Vending areas            specifically
                                                                      permitted in
                                                                      column (2) and (3)
                   3. Airport                3. Incidental/ancillary
                                             residential use
                   4. Bus stops and          4. Emergency health
                   Bus and Truck             care centre
                   Terminals
                   5. Taxi stands,           5. Tourism related
                   auto stands,              Activities
                   rickshaw stands
                   6. Ferry ghats            6. All ancillary
                                             (complimentary) uses
                                             for above categories
                                             (subject to decision of
                                             the Authority)
                   7. Parking areas
                   8. Multi level car
                   Parking
                   9. Filling stations
                   10. Transport
                   offices, booking
                   offices
                   11. Night shelter,
                   boarding houses
                   12. Banks
                   13. Restaurants
                   14. Workshops
                   and garages
                   15. Automobile
                                           222
                                                  Uses / Activities
                         Uses / Activities                                  Uses/Activities
SN     Use Zone                                   Permissible on
                           Permitted                                         Prohibited
                                               approval by Authority
                     spares and
                     services, Godowns
                     16. Loading and
                     unloading
                     platforms
                     (with/without cold
                     storage facility),
                     weigh bridges
                     17. Ware houses,
                     Storage depots
                     18. Utility
                     networks
                     (drainage,         sewage,
                     power,
                     telecommunications)
9 Agricultural and   1. Agriculture and         1. Houses incidental to 1. Residential use
  Forest Use Zone    Horticulture               this use                except those
                                                                        ancillary uses
                                                                        permitted in
                                                                        agricultural use
                                                                        zone
                     2. Dairy and               2. Parks and other      2. Heavy,
                     poultry farming,           recreational uses       extensive,
                     milk chilling                                      obnoxious, noxious
                     center                                             and hazardous
                                                                        industries
                     3. Storage,                3. Wayside shops and 3. Any activity
                     processing and             Restaurants             which is creating
                     sale of farm                                       nuisance and is
                     produce                                            obnoxious in nature
                     4. Dwelling for the        4. Hospital for         4. All uses not
                     people engaged in          infectious and          specifically
                     the farm (rural            contagious diseases,    permitted in
                     settlement)                mental hospital after   column (2) and (3)
                                                clearance from the
                                                Authority
                     5. Farm houses             5. Agro serving, agro
                     and accessory              processing, agro
                     buildings                  business
                     6. Aforestation            6. Cottage industries
                                                7. Burial and
                                                cremation grounds
                                                8. Service industries
                                                accessory to obnoxious
                                                and hazardous
                                                industries
                                                9. Ice factory, cold
                                                Storage
                                                10. Godowns and ware
                                                Houses
                                             223
                                                     Uses / Activities
                          Uses / Activities                                    Uses/Activities
SN      Use Zone                                     Permissible on
                            Permitted                                           Prohibited
                                                 approval by Authority
                                                11. Soil testing lab
                                                12. Normal expansion
                                                of land uses only in the
                                                existing homestead
                                                land
                                                13. Solid waste
                                                management sites,
                                                Sewage disposal works
                                                14. Electric sub station
                                                15. Quarrying of
                                                gravel, sand, clay or
                                                stone
                                                16. Building
                                                construction over plots
                                                covered under town
                                                planning scheme and
                                                conforming uses
                                                17. Brick kilns and
                                                extractive areas

                                                18. Eco-tourism,           5. For notified
                                                camping sites, eco         forest land only
                                                parks,                     aforestation is
                                                eco-lodges                 permitted and Item
                                                19. Special outdoor        nos. 18 and 19 from
                                                Recreations                column (3) are
                                                                           permissible by the
                                                                           competent
                                                                           authority
10 Water Bodies       1. Rivers, canals         1. Fisheries               1. Use/activity not
   Use Zone                                                                specifically related
                                                                           to Water bodies
                                                                           Use not permitted
                                                                           herein.
                      2. Streams, water         2. Boating, water          2. All uses not
                      Spring                    theme parks, water         specifically
                                                sports, lagoons            permitted in
                                                                           column (2) and (3)
                      3. Ponds, lakes           3. Water based resort
                                                with special bye-laws
                      4. Wetland, aqua          4. Any other
                      culture pond              use/activity incidental
                                                to Water bodies Use
                                                Zone is permitted.
                      5. Reservoir
                      6. Water
                      logged/marshy
                      area
11 Special Heritage
   Zone               1. Heritage               1. Residential.            1. Use/activity not
                                              224
                                                   Uses / Activities
                          Uses / Activities                                    Uses/Activities
SN      Use Zone                                   Permissible on
                            Permitted                                           Prohibited
                                                approval by Authority
                     interpretation                                        specifically related
                     center, art galleries                                 to Special Heritage
                     and sculpture                                         Use Zone not
                     complex                                               permitted herein.
                     2. Public –semi            2. Educational and         2. Multi-storeyed
                     public.                    research institutions      building
                     3 Recreational.            3. Social and cultural     3. Multiplex,
                                                Institutions               Shopping Mall
                     4. Theme Parks,            4. Commercial.             4. Dumping ground
                     Archaeological
                     Parks / Gardens.
                     5. Amphitheaters.          5. Commercial              5. Sewerage
                                                Activities                 Treatment
                     6. Open Air                6. Craft based cottage     6. All uses not
                     Museums.                   Industries                 specifically permitted in
                                                                           column (2) and (3)
                     7. Restoration of          7. Hotels, guest
                     protected and              houses, lodges , resorts
                     enlisted
                     monuments and
                     precincts by the
                     concerned
                     authority only
                     (ASI / State
                     Archaeology)
                     8. Recreational.           8. Auditorium
                     9. Theme Parks,            9. camping sites ,
                     Archaeological             special training camps
                     Parks / Gardens.
                                                10. Hospitals and health
                                                Centers
                                                11. Multi-storeyed
                                                Parking
12 Environmentally
   Sensitive Zone    1. River front             1. Apartment            1. Plotted housing
                     Developments               Buildings, corporate
                                                type housing adopting
                                                modern technology.
                     2. Scenic value            2. Hospitals and health 2. Small industries
                     areas. Theme               Institutions            or small institutions
                     parks, yoga parks,
                     sports centres and
                     community
                     recreational areas,
                     International
                     convention centre
                     3. River side              3. Educational,            3. Use/activity not
                     green areas                technical, research        specifically related
                                                institutes of higher       to Environmentally
                                                order                      Sensitive Use Zone
                                              225
                                                  Uses / Activities
                         Uses / Activities                                  Uses/Activities
SN      Use Zone                                  Permissible on
                           Permitted                                         Prohibited
                                               approval by Authority
                                                                        not permitted
                                                                        herein
                     4. Existing village       4. Water Treatment       4. No development
                     Settlements               Plant, Sewage            of any kind is
                                               Treatment Plant, Solid   permitted between
                                               waste Treatment Plant    the
                                               solid waste dumping      River/Canal/Stream
                                               grounds                  and the
                                                                        embankment
                     5. Art academy,                                    5. All uses not
                     media centres,                                     specifically
                     food courts, music                                 permitted in column (2)
                     pavilions                                          and (3)
                     6. Parking areas,
                     visitor facilities
                     7. Boating , Picnic
                     huts, Camping
                     sites Special
                     Training camps
                     8. Existing
                     residential or other
                     uses.
                     9. Resorts,
                     sculpture complex,
                     lagoons and lagoon
                     resort, water
                     sports.
                     10. Tourist and
                     pilgrim related
                     commercial
                     activities, hotels
                     and lodges
                     11. Non-polluting,
                     agro-based and
                     processing
                     industries, Storage
                     or Godowns for
                     food grains
13 Urban             1. Independent            1. Sewage treatment      1. Heavy, large and
   Agriculture use   residence, guest          plants and disposal      extensive
   Zone              houses                    sites                    industries, noxious,
                                                                        obnoxious and
                                                                        hazardous
                                                                        industries
                     2. Educational            2. Water treatment       2. Warehousing,
                     buildings                 plants, solid waste      storage godowns of
                     (nursery,                 dumping grounds          perishables,
                     primary, high                                      hazardous,
                     school)                                            inflammable goods,
                                                                        wholesale mandis,
                                             226
                                                       Uses / Activities
                              Uses / Activities                                   Uses/Activities
SN        Use Zone                                     Permissible on
                                Permitted                                          Prohibited
                                                    approval by Authority
                                                                             junk yards
                         3. Neighborhood            3. Outdoor and indoor    3. Workshops for
                         level social,              games stadiums,          Buses
                         cultural and               shooting range
                         recreational
                         facilities with
                         adequate parking
                         provisions
                         4. Marriage and            4. Zoological garden,    4. Slaughter houses
                         community halls            botanical garden, bird
                                                    sanctuary
                         5. Community               5. Planned Township      5. Hospitals
                         centers, clubs,            Development              treating contagious
                         auditoriums                                         diseases
                         6. Exhibition                                       6. International
                         and art galleries                                   conference centers
                         7. Public utilities                                 7. District battalion
                         and buildings                                       offices, forensic
                         except service                                      science laboratory
                         and storage
                         yards, electrical
                         distribution
                         depots and water
                         pumping
                         stations
                         8. Nursery and                                      8. All uses not
                         green houses                                        specifically
                                                                             permitted in
                                                                             column (2) and (3)
                         9. Parks and tot–
                         Lots
                         10. All
                         permitted
                         activities in
                         ‘Agriculture Use
                         Zone’
(Source: Draft Building Bye-laws, 2013)




                                                  227
                                   Annexure - 4.4.1
            Details of Khas Mahal Land in the state as on 31st March, 2013

Particulars             Area in acre                        Percentage
Total land              5036.03 acres
Land given on lease     1437.78 acres to 6308 beneficiaries 28.5%
Balance land available 3598 acres                           71.5%
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reforms, Govt. of Bihar)




                                         228
                                   Annexure – 4.4.2
         Details of Gairmazruha Malik land in the state as on 31st March, 2013

             Particulars                    Area in acre             Percentage
Total land                                  17,96,229.59
Unsuitable land                              9,21,909.40                51.3%
Suitable land for distribution               8,74,320.19                48.7%
Land distributed                             7,83,591.25                43.6%
Balance Suitable land available for           90,728.94                  5.1%
distribution
Balance Gairmazruha land (suitable +        10,12,638.35                56.3%
unsuitable) available
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reforms, Govt. of Bihar)




                                          229
                                   Annexure – 4.4.3
          Details of Gairmazruha Aam land in the state as on 31st March, 2013

               Particulars                        Area in acre           Percentage
Total land                                        9,07,809.99
Suitable land for distribution                     78503.20                 8.6%
Unsuitable land                                   8,29,306.79              91.3%
Land distributed                                   30968.93                 3.4%
Balance suitable land available for                47534.27                 5.2%
distribution
Total balance land available (suitable +  8,76,841.06 acres           96.5%
unsuitable)
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reforms, Govt. of Bihar)




                                          230
                                   Annexure – 4.4.4
           Details of Ceiling surplus land in the state as on 31st March, 2013

                 Particulars                      Area in acre             Percentage
Total surplus land acquired               3,63,415.71
Land distributed                          273251.64                     75.1%
Balance land available                    48654.77                      13.3%
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reforms, Govt. of Bihar)




                                          231
                                  Annexure – 4.4.5
              Details of Bhoodan land in the state as on 31st March, 2013

               Particulars                        Area in acre              Percentage
Total land                                        6,48,593.14
Confirmed land                                    3,45,349.02                 53.2%
Unconfirmed land                                  3,03,244.12                 46.8%
Unsuitable for distribution                       3,85,793.79                 59.5%
Confirmed land distributed                        2,56,092.64                 39.5%
Balance confirmed (suitable) land available         1264.22                    0.2%
Balance Bhoodan Land Available                     392500.5                   60.5%
(Confirmed + Unconfirmed)
Land distributed to beneficiaries            351284 beneficiaries
(Source: Concept Paper of Chairman Bhoodan Yagna Committee, Bihar)




                                         232
                                             Annexure – 4.5.1
 Land Acquired by Govt. for various Central / State Government’s Projects since the
                                             year 2005-2006.
                                                                                                   (Area in Acre)
SI.                                                                         Year
                     Name of Project                                                                           Total
No.                                                2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2011-12 2012-13
 1.   Railway Projects.                             973.00 2421.93 1067.14 464.93 448.53 514.13 140.89 6030.55
 2.   Kanti Thermal Power Station, Muzaffarpur.                                              369.3    31.24 400.54
 3.   Pirpaiti Thermal Power Station, Bhagalpur.                                            988.33 11.75 1000.08
 4.   Barauni Thermal Power Station, Begusarai.                                                        3.75     3.75
 5.   Chausa Tharmal Power, Bauxar.                                                        1078.98 14.72 1093.70
 6.   Kajra Thermal Power, Lakhisarai.                                                     1102.66 36.35 1139.01
 7.   N.P.G.C. Aurangabad.                                                                  922.51 319.56 1242.07
 8.   Power Grid Corporation of India.                7      11.5    4.50    9.43   39.06    33.37    40.52 145.38
 9.   Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)                             571.55 83.15    99.98   59.80 208.12 190.94 1213.54
10.   Bihta- Sarmera National Highway, Patna.                                               490.24 136.84 627.08
11.   Chandi-Sarmera National Highway, Nalanda.                                             389.72 76.12 465.84
12.   National Highway No. - 28,88, & 83                                                             128.51 128.51
13.   National Highway No.- 87 (Runnisaidpur –
                                                                                              4.5     74.77    79.27
      Vishawa) Sitamarhi.
14.   National Highway No. - 86 (Saraiya –
                                                                                              15.5    16.81    32.31
      Motipur) Muzaffarpur.
15.   Mega Industrial Park, Bihta, Patna.                                                              2.42     2.42
16.   National Highway (Mohammadpur –
                                                                                                       53.7    53.70
      Chapra), Saran.
17.   National Highway (Sakaddi – Nasariganj),
                                                                                            110.54 87.14 197.68
      Bhojpur.
18.   Kanwariya Path, Munger / Banka.                                                         8.45     23.3    31.75
19.   Infrastructure Development, Nalanda.                                                  463.99 262.26 726.25
20.   For bridges and approach roads (Ganga and
                                                                                           1037.41 804.31 1841.72
      other rivers.
21.   Bhagmati Tatband                                                                       103.8    81.19 184.99
22.   B.R.B.C.L, Aurangabad                                                                  23.33 126.59 149.92
23.   National Highway (Sakaddi – Nasariganj),
                                                                                             10.22             10.22
      Rohtas.
24.   N.T.P.C. Barh                                 353.62 962.3    22.73   18.28                            1356.93
25.   Super Tharmal Power, Nabinagar                10.51   45.04 393.70 695.48 68.53                        1213.26
26.   Joint Coordination Checkpoint                         10.71   333.9                                     344.61
27.   Industrial Development Centre                        2207.18 899.7 256.02 209.38                       3572.28
28.   High level bridge on Punpun river                       0.1                                               0.10
29.   Punpun barrage Aurangabad                             125.27 138.03                                     263.30
30.   Western Parallel canal, Rohtas                        11.69                                              11.69
31.   Bhim Dam Tourist Place, Munger                         13.4                                              13.40
32.   Thana Bhawan, Sitamarhi                                4.31                                               4.31
33.   Nalanda University, Nalanda                           26.09                                              26.09
34.   Approach road for HL bridge on tenth mile at
                                                            14.67                                              14.67
      Sitamarhi
35.   Communication Centre at Bagaha Police
                                                              0.6                                               0.60
      District
36.   Approach road on Barkha River Bridge,
                                                             8.87                                               8.87
      Araria
37.   Superintendent of Police Office, Bagaha                 1.1                                               1.10
38.   Control room at Bagaha District Police                 0.72                                               0.72

                                                     233
39. Tourist Complex, Vaishali                          10.05                                10.05
40. Construction of police line in Bagaha District
                                                       45.05                                45.05
    Police
41. ROB at ward No. 7 in Municipal Corporation
                                                           0.24    0.34                      0.58
    Muzaffarpur
42. Jail Building Construction at Jamui                 40                                  40.00
43. Balthar Thana Building                              1.5                                  1.50
44. Construction of Gopalganj Police Line              19.86                                19.86
45. Approach Road Construction in Samatipur
                                                                   3.05                      3.05
    Borage
46. Drinking Water Supply Scheme Aara                             20.70                     20.70
47. Approach Road construction on Dubbaghat                        5.08                      5.08
48. Samastipur Tatbandh                                            2.15                      2.15
49. Aamgola Railway Over Bridge, Muzaffarpur                       0.22                      0.22
50. Construction of Jhugi-Jhopri Fatehpur, Patna                  12.73                     12.73
51. B.N. Mandal University, Madhepura                              99.9                     99.90
52. Reserve Centre, Araria                                          30                      30.00
53. Thana Bhawan, Bhagwanpur                                        0.9                      0.90
54. Maanpur Thana Bhawan (West Champaran)                          1.49                      1.49
55. Kangali Thana Bhawan                                            1.5                      1.50
56. Angotha Hathauji Drainage Scheme Siwan                         3.86     1.5              5.36
57. Nalanda Medical College                                       50.01                     50.01
58. Connecting Road for Jharhi Pul Gopalganj                       0.12                      0.12
59. Approach Road Samastipur Mauza –
                                                                   0.18                      0.18
    Sahbajpur
60. O.P. Construction, Madhubani Mauza –
                                                                    1                        1.00
    Rudrapur
61. Bhagmati Embankment construction,
                                                                  158.84   37.76            196.60
    Muzaffarpur
62. Road Bridge Patna, Moharrampur                                         0.004             0.00
63. Solid Waste Material, Patna                                            46.86            46.86
64. Rehabilitation in Muzaffarpur District                                 17.06            17.06
65. Nala construction in Rajwara diara in
                                                                                             0.00
    Samastipur
66. Construction of high level bridge on Riga
                                                                            0.48             0.48
    River at Sitamarhi District
67. Industrial Training Institute, Kalyan Bigha,
                                                                            9.66             9.66
    Nalanda
68. Reverse Middle School, Kalyan Bigha,
                                                                            0.3              0.30
    Nalanda
69. High School, Kalyan Bigha, Nalanda                                      4.85             4.85
70. Police Training Centre, Nalanda                                        133.28           133.28
71. Approach path river bridge, Nalanda                                     6.25             6.25
72. Kalyan Bigha Path Widening, Mauza-
                                                                            1.70             1.70
    Bamochak, Nalanda
73. Guide dam on Bagmati River, Sitamarhi                                   2.86             2.86
74. Construction of high level bridge, Mauza –
                                                                            3.02             3.02
    Ghat Kusumbha, Sheikhpura
75. Railway over bridge, Bariyarpur, Munger                                 0.39             0.39
76. Construction of BIPARD building, Gaya                                  15.92            15.92
77. High level bridge on Bagmati River in
                                                                                    15.8    15.80
    Sitamarhi District
78. Bharthua Ringhband Muzaffarpur                                                  18.8    18.80
79. Rehabilitation in Vishanpur Umapar in
                                                                                    17.26   17.26
    Muzaffarpur District

                                                     234
 80. Rehabilitation of Rahimpur Md. Gautam of
                                                                                   3.57                    3.57
     Begusarai District
 81. Rehabilitation scheme in Kumarchakki in
                                                                                    5.9                    5.90
     Khagaria District
 82. Scape Regulator Construction at Araria                                        0.18                    0.18
 83. Homeless and home base                                                        1.28                    1.28
 84. Mohania subdivision office, Kaimur                                             15                    15.00
 85. Maner Tourist Place, Patna                                                    0.96                    0.96
 86. Bus Terminal Patna                                                           25.02                   25.02
 87. Gaya Airport                                                                 88.54                   88.54
 88. CRPF Kobara Batalian, Barwadi, Gaya                                          107.48                  107.48
 89. Transforming lane for tourists                                                1.25                    1.25
 90. Construction of Bridge at Kaimur                                              0.15                    0.15
 91. NSTPP Nabinagar, Aurangabad                                                 1871.56                 1871.56
 92. ROB Bridge, Karimganj, Delha                                                  0.35                    0.35
 93. Approach road to Tuniyahi Scrup pipe bridge                                   0.86                    0.86
 94. High Level Bridge, Manjhaulia Bhanaspatti,
                                                                                   0.38                    0.38
     Sitamarhi
 95. Reserve Centre, Sheohar                                                       20.5                   20.50
 96. Reserve Centre, Lakhisarai                                                   25.06                   25.06
 97. Kawaria Path, Banka                                                          10.32                   10.32
 98. High Level Bridge and Connecting path,
                                                                                   0.79                    0.79
     Samastipur
 99. Chirayatand Over Bridge, Patna                                                0.18                    0.18
100. Approach Patna, Bhojpur                                                       0.09                    0.09
101. Bridge Construction, Nalanda                                                  4.34                    4.34
102. Path widening, Nalanda                                                        6.07                    6.07
103. Connecting Road Nalanda                                                       0.16                    0.16
104. Connecting Road Darbhanga                                                     3.56                    3.56
105. Bihta Sarmera and Chandi Sarmera State
                                                                                  12.18                   12.18
     High way
106. Connecting Roads                                                              0.32                    0.32
107. Other Projects.                                                               0.22   540.25 148.95 689.42
     Total: -                                    1344.13 6553.73 3334.92 1826.01 3083.43 8415.35 2812.63 27370.2
(Source: Directorate of Land Acquisition, Department of Revenue and Land Reforms, Govt. of Bihar)




                                                   235
                                                          Annexure – 4.5.2
          Land Allotted / Land Rates & Position of Vacant Land Details (Industrial Area as on
                                                                30.11.2013)

SI. No.    Name of the Industrial   No. of plot   Area allotted (in    No. of      No. of   No. of unit under   Vacant        Max.      BIADA Land
                   Area              allotted         sq. ft.)      working unit   closed     construction      Land (in    Largest       Rate Rs.
                                                                                    unit                        Acres)*      Chunk       (Lac/Acre)
                                                                                                                           (in Acres)     2013-14
   1               2                    3                4                5          6             7               8            9            10
A. Patna Region
   1 PATLIPUTRA (I/E)                  129            3543608           85          29            15              0.00        0.00        236.55
   2 FATUHA                            149            7966416           71          40            38              4.95        1.10         50.60
   3 HAJIPUR                           146            5069404           105         26            15              0.08        0.08        165.83
   4 HAJIPUR (EPIP )                   32             3114001           20           1            11              0.14        0.14         66.91
   5 BIHARSHARIF                       46            324255.40          22          19             5              0.03        0.03        165.91
   6 NAWADA                            34              247252            6           3            25              1.09        0.23         7.80
   7 GAYA                              34              973969           19           3            12              0.00        0.00         17.25
   8 JEHANABAD                         15              223620            3           5             7              0.46        0.06         10.13
   9 AURANGABAD (IA)                   24              613293            7           4            13              0.23        0.10         11.67
  10 AURANGABAD (GC)                   76             7506679           26           1            49             15.99        6.21         31.24
  11 BARUN                             11              332368            2           4             5              1.56        0.32         5.46
  12 VIKRAMGANJ                        10              107024            7                         3              0.00        0.00         9.48
  13 BUXAR                             116            1842460           86          23             7              0.17        0.09         10.40
  14 BIHIYA                            52             2588072            5                        47              0.00        0.00         8.05
  15 GIDHA                             99             8477341           44          1             54              0.00        0.00         11.95
  16 BIHTA (IA)                         3             4583383            1                         2              0.00        0.00         51.83
  17 BIHTA (MIP)                       26            34949059                                                    11.00       11.00         51.83
  18 KOPAKALA                           1            18,29,520                                     1              0.00        0.00           --
  19 BARAUNI                           167            5197887           70          74            23              0.00        0.00         11.50
  20 DEHRI-ON-SON                      48             1416145           22          12            14              8.90        7.00         7.31
B. Muzaffarpur Region
   1 MUZAFFARPUR                       282          12607279.4          149         40             93            12.77       1.00          51.76
   2 BETTIAH                           101           2790312            66          16             19             0.22       0.22          5.56
   3 KUMARBAGH                         44            3428715            15                         29            26.72       1.00          5.55
   4 RAMNAGAR                          21             193730             6                         15             4.32       0.25          7.40
   5 RAXAUL                            28            479731.2            8           3             17             0.00       0.00          7.92
   6 SITAMARHI                         75            1413225            26           8             41             0.08       0.08          22.29
   7 SIWAN                              6             827860             2           4                            0.00       0.00          8.52
C. Darbhanga Region
   1 BELA                              63            492715.4           50           6              7             0.36       0.36          10.47
   2 DHARAMPUR                         43            226042.6           33           6              4             0.36       0.36          6.27
   3 DONAR                             121           2609606            57          12             52            10.82       1.50          5.36
   4 PANDAUL                           64            3314635            27          13             24             4.69       1.25          3.65
   5 JHANJHARPUR                       28             228459            15           5              8             0.83       0.45          5.80
   6 SAMASTIPUR                        47            1729630            32           3             12             0.33       0.13          8.90
   7 SAHARSA                           25            186540.2           18           2              5             0.00       0.00          5.02
   8 MURLIGANJ                         12             80682              8           1              3             1.08       1.00          2.60
   9 UDAKISHANGANJ                      5             114209             1                          4             8.60       2.45          12.38
  10 KHAGARIA                           1            4281948                                        1             0.00       0.00          7.76
D. Bhagalpur Region
   1 BARARI                            104           16,28,145          50          22             32             1.05       0.69          8.82
   2 JAMALPUR                          19             3,59,980           2           7             10             0.35       0.35          7.80
   3 MUNGER                            45             1,76,205          38           5              2             1.02       0.35          3.90
   4 SITAKUND                           4             7,71,580           1                          3             0.00       0.00          10.25
   5 LAKHISARAI                        23             2,24,420          19           2              2             0.00       0.00          4.82

                                                                    236
6    GC KAHALGAON           4        26353800                          4           0.00    0.00   9.52
7    GC MARANGA, PURNEA    145       91,03,016        62      14      69           1.85    0.00   6.72
8    PURNEA CITY           24         4,89,779        16       1       7           0.24    0.24   4.86
9    FORBESGANJ            32        35,98,534        10       2      20           0.30    0.30   3.31
10   KATIHAR               38         6,28,817        20       5      13           0.05    0.05   4.71
11   KHAGARA               Nil           Nil          Nil     Nil     Nil
                                                                                   0.00    0.00   9.52
     (KISHANGANJ)
12   BHEDIADANGI           4         20,85,198            1            3
                                                                                   0.00    0.00   9.52
     (KISHANGANJ)
                                     171330550
          Total           2626                        1333    422     845         120.64
                                   (3933.21 acre)
 (Source: Data compiled from the information available on the website of BIADA)




                                                    237
                                 Annexure – 4.5.3
       Details of Industrial Plots allotted to private investor till 31.03.2014

                      Total                                  No. of units
                                     No. of     No. of units                      No. of
SI.   Name of the   number of                                which have
                                    working        under                          closed
No. Regional office   plots                                  not started
                                      unit      construction                       units
                     allotted                                constructed
1. Patna              1208             607          241          123               237
2. Bhagalpur           439             236           99           59                45
3. Darbhanga           408             254           73           47                34
4. Muzaffarpur         549             303          136           55                55
    Total             2604            1400          549          284               371




                                         238
                                  Annexure – 4.5.4
          Number of industrial plot allotted during last three years in Bihar
         Year            2011            2012              2013             Total
  No. of Allotment        222             273               108              603
(Source: Website of BIADA)




                                         239
                                   Annexure – 4.5.5
   Application Status for allotment of land on 31.10.2013 with Bihar Industrial Area
                                 Development Authority
 SI.                                   Deferred                         Total No. of
             Regional Office                          New Application
 No.                                  Application                       Application
  1                Patna                 167               264              431
  2              Bhagalpur                36                47               83
  3            Muzaffarpur                31                93              124
  4             Darbhanga                 25               190              215
      Total No. of Application           259               594              853
(Source: Website of BIADA)




                                          240
                                    Annexure – 4.5.6
            Schedule of activity and time framework for payment of money

 SI. No. Activity                                                      Time Frame
    a.   Allotment of land                                                  0
         Payment of 30% of land cost as 1st installment &
    b.                                                         Within 15 days of allotment
         submission of bond.
                                                               Within 15 days of payment of
         Physical possession & issuance of provisional
   c.                                                            first installment and the
         memorandum number
                                                               evaluated cost as per para 5.
   d.    Initiation of construction work
         Lease deed after 30% investment of promoter’s
   e.
         contributions including land cost.
   f.    Start of trial production                                Specific to the project.
   g.    Start of full commercial production
                                                                 Between one month after
   h.    Issuance of permanent memorandum number
                                                                 commercial production.
(Source: Bihar Industrial Area Development Authority, Patna)




                                           241
                                    Annexure – 4.5.7
               Sliding scale for deciding minimum compensation of land

   Radial Distance from urban area (km)                    Multiplier Factor
                    0-10                                          1.00
                   10-20                                          1.20
                   20-30                                          1.40
                   30-40                                          1.80
                   40-50                                          2.00
(Source: Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013)




                                           242
                                     Annexure – 4.6.1
      Time limit for services under Right to Public Services Act 2011 for Registration
                                        Department
SI.     Name of     Designated Time Limit Appellate            Time Reviewing         Time
No.     Service        Public     for Service Authority Limit for Authority Limit for
                      Servant                               Appellate              Reviewing
  1 Non-            District Sub From          Inspector of 15        Inspector 21
     Encumbrance Registrar / computerized Registration Working General,            Working
     Certificate Sub             records – 3 Office         days      Registration days
                    Registrar working          (IRO)
                                 days.
                                 Search in the
                                 bound
                                 volumes (up
                                 to 3 years) –
                                 7 working
                                 days.
                                 Search in the
                                 bound
                                 volumes
                                 (more than 3
                                 years) – 14
                                 working days
  2 Delivery of District Sub 5 working Inspector of 15                Inspector 21
     Registered Registrar / days               Registration Working General,       Working
     Documents Sub                             Office       days      Registration days
                    Registrar                  (IRO)
  3 Registration / District Sub Same day of Inspector of 15           Inspector 21
     disposal of Registrar / presentation Registration Working General,            Working
     documents Sub               of documents Office        days      Registration days
     presented      Registrar                  (IRO)
  4 Search &        District Sub 7 Working Inspector of 15            Inspector 21
     Copy Work Registrar / days                Registration Working General,       Working
                    Sub                        Office       days      Registration days
                    Registrar                  (IRO)
  5 Search &        Officer-In- 21 Working Inspector 15               Secretary, 21
     Copy work charge            days          General,     Working Registration Working
     related to                                Registration days                   days
     Societies /
     Firm
  6 Registration Officer-In- 15 Working Inspector 15                  Secretary, 21
     of Societies / charge       days          General,     Working Registration Working
     Firm                                      Registration days                   days
(Source: Department of Registration, Govt. of Bihar)




                                            243
                                     Annexure – 4.6.2
Disposal of applications under right to public service Act in Registration Department as
                                   on 31th March, 2013
   Total number of application      Application disposed of    Percentage of disposal
            received
            2094986                        2090203                    99.77%

(Source: Department of Registration, Govt. of Bihar)




                                            244
                                    Annexure – 4.6.3
  Exemption of stamp duty under Information & Communication Technology Policy
                                           2011

 SI. No.          Type of documents & description               Exemption sanctioned in the
                                                                        Stamp duty
    (i)   The stamp duty for registering deeds related to 100%          (Hundred   percent)
          lease / purchase / transfer of land in the industrial exemption on the effective
          area / shed / IT Park / Industries and outside the rate.
          authority area for the purpose of establishing IT /
          ITES/ EHM Units
   (ii)   The Stamp duty for registering deeds related to 100%          (Hundred   percent)
          lease / purchase / transfer of additional land for exemption on the effective
          expansion or diversification of existing IT / ITES / rate.
          EHM Units which are already established and
          make more than fifty percent (50%) growth in their
          production capacity
(Source: Department of Registration, Govt. of Bihar)




                                           245
                                     Annexure – 4.6.4
Exemption of registration fee under Information & Communication Technology Policy
                                           2011

 SI. No.          Type of documents & description               Exemption sanctioned in the
                                                                     Registration Fee
    (i)   The Registration fee for registering deeds related 100%       (Hundred    percent)
          to lease / purchase / transfer of land in the exemption on the effective
          industrial area / shed / IT Park/Industries and rate.
          outside the authority area for the purpose of
          establishing IT/ITES/EHM Units
   (ii)   The Registration fee for registering deeds related 100%       (Hundred    percent)
          to lease / purchase / transfer of additional land for exemption on the effective
          expansion or diversification of existing rate.
          IT/ITES/EHM units which are already established
          and make more than fifty percent (50%) growth in
          their production capacity
(Source: Department of Registration, Govt. of Bihar)




                                            246
                                     Annexure – 4.6.5
       Exemption of registration fee under Bihar Industrial Incentive Policy 2001

 SI. No.          Type of documents & description               Exemption sanctioned in the
                                                                     Registration Fee
    (i)   The Registration fee for registering deeds related 100%       (Hundred    percent)
          to lease / purchase / transfer of industrial plots / exemption on the effective
          shed of the State and land outside the authority rate.
          area for the purpose of establishing industries by
          the private investors.
   (ii)   The Registration fee for registering deeds related 100%       (Hundred    percent)
          to lease / purchase / transfer of additional land for exemption on the effective
          expansion or diversification of working industrial rate.
          units in which the growth of production capacity is
          50%
(Source: Department of Registration, Govt. of Bihar)




                                            247
                                      Annexure – 4.6.6
      Services under Right to Public Services Act 2011 for Registration Department
SI.     Name of      Designated Time Limit Appellate            Time Reviewing         Time
No.     Service         Public     for Service Authority Limit for Authority Limit for
                       Servant                               Appellate              Reviewing
1     Non-           District Sub From          Inspector of 15        Inspector 21
      Encumbrance Registrar / computerized Registration Working General,            Working
      Certificate Sub             records – 3 Office         days      Registration days
                     Registrar working          (IRO)
                                  days.
                                  Search in the
                                  bound
                                  volumes (up
                                  to 3 years) –
                                  7 working
                                  days.
                                  Search in the
                                  bound
                                  volumes
                                  (more than 3
                                  years) – 14
                                  working days
2     Delivery of District Sub 5 working        Inspector of 15        Inspector 21
      Registered Registrar / days               Registration Working General,       Working
      Documents Sub                             Office       days      Registration days
                     Registrar                  (IRO)
3     Registration / District Sub Same day of Inspector of 15          Inspector 21
      disposal of Registrar / presentation Registration Working General,            Working
      documents Sub               of documents Office        days      Registration days
      presented      Registrar                  (IRO)
4     Search &       District Sub 7 Working Inspector of 15            Inspector 21
      Copy Work Registrar / days                Registration Working General,       Working
                     Sub                        Office       days      Registration days
                     Registrar                  (IRO)
5     Search &       Officer-In- 21 Working Inspector 15               Secretary, 21
      Copy work charge            days          General,     Working Registration Working
      related to                                Registration days                   days
      Societies /
      Firm
6     Registration Officer-In- 15 Working Inspector 15                 Secretary, 21
      of Societies / charge       days          General,     Working Registration Working
      Firm                                      Registration days                   days
                                             248
(Source: Department of Registration, Govt. of Bihar)
                                     Annexure – 4.7.1
              Registration and Stamp Fee on various types of documents

Article                                                    Rates of
                    Types of Deed/Item                                       Stamp duty
 No.                                                    registration fee
 A(1) Other deeds described in Article-A(1) except            2%            6% of the cost +
        Sale & Mortgage                                                       2% additional
                                                                             stamp duty for
                                                                            ULBs (for urban
                                                                                   area)
                                                                           6% of the cost for
                                                                                 rural area
                                                                            Besides Rs.150-
                                                                            500/- is charged
                                                                                per deed as
                                                                               landlord fee.
                                                                              Rs.20 / 25 per
                                                                            page is charged
                                                                             for scanning of
                                                                                document.
A(3)   Lease documents, the period of which is         as the rate under A 6% or 2% of the
(a)    (i) Less than one year                          (1) on 2% of the    market value of
                                                       market value of the the leased
                                                       leased property     property
      (ii) One year & above but the period is not      as the rate under A 6% or 5% of the
      more than 10 years                               (1) on 5% of the    market value of
                                                       market value of the the leased
                                                       leased property.    property
      (iii) More than ten years but less than thirty   as the rate under A 6% or 15% of the
      years                                            (1) on 15% of the   market value of
                                                       market value of the the learned
                                                       leased property.    property
      (iv) Thirty years or more or perpetual or for an as the rate under   6% or 5% of the
      infinite period                                  A(1) on 50% of the  market value of
                                                       market value of the the learned
                                                       leased property.    property
 C(i) Open will or cancellation of will or an          Rs.2000/- (Rupees   NIL
      authority to adopt                               two thousand)
 DD Partnership                                        Rs. 1000/- (Rupees 10000 (Rupees
                                                       one thousand)       ten thousand)
  E (i) Development Agreement: -
              When market value of property is upto Rs. 20,000/-           2% of the market
      five crores                                      (Rupees twenty      value
                                                       thousand)
     58.     When market value of property is more Rs. 40,000/-            2% of the market
             than five crores but upto ten crores      (Rupees forty       value
                                                       thousand)
                                           249
Article                                                        Rates of
                    Types of Deed/Item                                         Stamp duty
 No.                                                      registration fee
      59.     When market value of property is more Rs. 60,000/-            2% of the market
              than ten crores but upto twenty five      (Rupees sixty       value
              crores                                    thousand)
     60.      When market value of property is more Rs. 1,00,000/-          2% of the market
              than twenty five crores                   (Rupees One lakh) value
      (ii) If power of attorney is given for the        Rs. 1000/- (Rupees 6% of the market
      purpose of selling land / property situated in one thousand)          value of the
      the State of Bihar to the person other than                           property
      family members (Family means Father,                                  described in the
      Mother, Wife or Husband, Son, Daughter,                               document of
      Brother / Sister (Children of executants                              power of attorney
      parents), Daughter in law, Grandson,
      Granddaughter (Children of executants
      son/daughter).
      (iii) Other deeds coming under article-E & in Rs. 1000/- (Rupees Rs. 1000/-
      case of other power of attorney except power one thousand)            (Rupees one
      of attorney and development agreement                                 thousand)
      mentioned above in (ii) & (i)
 F(1) (i) Searching fee of first year for every name Rs. 40/- (Rupees
                                                        forty)
      (ii) Searching fee for subsequent year per year Rs. 20/- (Rupees
                                                        twenty)
      (iii) for inspection of copy of each document in Rs. 30/- (Rupees
      register book 1, 3, 4 or for inspection of any thirty)
      other book or register or of a document or
      paper in a file relating to one year
      (iv) for inspection of the document or paper      Rs. 40/- (Rupees
                                                        forty)
               Provided that no fee for the searching
      of       the indexes of any one office in respect
      of       any one name shall exceed Rupees
      500/- (Rupees five hundred).
  I an extra fee for registering in delegated or        Rs. 5,000/- (Rupees
      original capacity by District-Sub-Registrar of five thousand)
      any document of sub ordinate offices
      jurisdiction
 J(1) The fee for attendance under section-31 of an Rs. 5,000/- (Rupees
      officer at private residence for acceptance for five thousand)
      registration or for deposit of any will
 K(1) (a) for every pardanashin lady exempted by        Rs. 200/- (Rupees
      law from personal appearance                      two hundred)
      (b) (1) for every person exempted on account Rs. 400/- (Rupees
      of bodily infirmity                               for hundred)
         (2) for every person confined in jail          Rs. 400/- (Rupees
                                                        four hundred)
      (c) for every person other than a paradanashin Rs. 1,000/- (Rupees

                                            250
Article                                                    Rates of
                    Types of Deed/Item                                     Stamp duty
 No.                                                   registration fee
       lady who is exempted by law from personal     one thousand)
       appearance in Court
   O for the return of registered document after the Rs. 100/- (Rupees
       period of more than one month from the date one hundred) per
       of registration                                month, Maximum
                                                      Rs. 1000/- (Rupees
                                                      one thousand)
   P for the return of refused document for           Rs. 100/- (Rupees
       registration after the period of more than one one hundred) per
       month from the date of refusal                 month, Maximum
                                                      Rs. 1000/- (Rupees
                                                      one thousand)
(Source: Department of Registration, Govt. of Bihar)




                                           251
                                      Annexure – 4.7.2
                        Multiplying factors for deciding holding tax

S.N.   Type of non-residential holdings                                 Multiplying Factor
I.     Hotels, bars, clubs, health club and marriage halls                        3
II.    Shops (with less than 250 sq feet area)                                    1
III.   Shops (Other than II), show room, shopping malls, cinema                  1.5
       houses, multiplexes, dispensaries, laboratories, restaurants,
       guest houses,
IV.    Commercial offices, financial institutions, banks, insurance               3
       offices, private hospitals and nursing homes
V.     Industries, workshops, storage, godowns, warehouses                        2
VI.    Commercial establishments and undertakings of State and                    2
       Central government
VII.   Coaching Classes, guidance and training centres and their                 1.5
       hostels
VIII. State and central government offices other than their                       1
       commercial establishments and undertakings
IX.    Private Schools, Private colleges, Private research institutes,           1.5
       other Private educational institutions and their hostels
X.     Places, centres and institutions of spiritual and religious                0
       nature
XI.    Educational and social institutions run by charitable trusts               1
       on no-profit no-loss basis for benefit of poor, physically
       challenged, social security of women and children
XII.   Any other holdings not covered under (1) to (10)                Multiplying factor shall
                                                                               be 1.5
(Source: Bihar Municipal Property Tax Rules 2013)




                                              252
                                   Annexure – 4.7.3
                     Structure of ARV for Tax Calculation – Patna

                   Holdings on the     Holding on the Main Holding on other Roads
              Principal Main Roads              Roads
 Type of       Fully Other Fully       Fully Other Fully     Fully Other Fully
Constructi   commerci s Residenti commerci s Residenti commerci s Residenti
   on           al or            al    al or           al    al or           al
             Industrial              Industrial            Industrial
   Pucca       @ Rs. 36/-       18/-    36/-     24/- 12/-    18/-    12/-   6/-
  Building     54/sqr
 with RCC       foot
    Roof
   Pucca @Rs. 36/- 24/-       12/-      24/-    16/-   8/-     12/-   8/-   4/-
  Building per sq.
    with       foot
  Asbestos
      or
 corrugated
    sheet
   Other     @Rs. 18/ 12/-     6/-      12/-    8/-    4/-      6/-   4/-   2/-
 Buildings per sq.
  which do     foot
 not fall in
 the above
     two
(Source: Patna Municipal Corporation)




                                          253
                                   Annexure – 4.7.4
                   Tax Structure for Vacant Land in ULBs of Bihar
                                                         (Rate Rupees per square Meter)
  S.N.     Type of Municipality Principal Main Road          Main Road       Others
   1.      Municipal Corporation               5                   4             3
   2.        Municipal Council                 4                   3             2
   3.         Nagar Panchayat                  3                   2             1
(Source: Data collected from Urban Development & Housing Department, Govt. of Bihar)




                                         254
           Annexure - 4.8.1
Interdependency of land conflict causes




                 255
                                                              Annexure – 4.8.2
                                            Dispute resolution mechanism under various acts

                                                                                     Revisional /
SI.                                          Authority at        Appellate             Second
    Name of the Act Type of Dispute                                                                     Tribunal    High Court        Supreme Court
No.                                          first instance      Authority            Appellate
                                                                                      Authority
1.   Bihar Tenancy     61.    Threatened  Collector under     Collector of the   -                  BLT in all     High Court        Supreme Court
     Act, 1885           ejectment        the Act             district                              matters        under Article     under Article 136
                       62.    Occupancy   Collector under     Sub Divisional     -                                 226 of the        of the Constitution
                         rights           the Act             Officer                                              Constitution of   of India
                                          Collector under                        -                                 India
                       63.    Revision of the Act
                         rent             Revenue Officer                        -

                       64.      Record of                                        -
                          rights dispute                     Special Judges
                       65.      Division of Collector
                          produce
2.   The Indian Forest Offences related to Divisional Forest District            The Secretary      -              High Court        Supreme Court
     Act, 1927         forest / produce     Officer          Magistrate in first Forest and                        under Article     under Article 136
                                                             appeal              Environment                       226 of the        of the Constitution
                                                                                 Department,                       Constitution of   of India
                                                                                 Bihar                             India
3.   The Bihar         Unlawful             Circle Officer   Collector of the -                     BLT            High Court        Supreme Court
     Privileged        ejectment etc.                        District                                              under Article     under Article 136
     Persons                                                                                                       226 of the        of the Constitution
     Homestead                                                                                                     Constitution of   of India
     Tenancy Act,                                                                                                  India
     1947
                                                                     256
                                                                                      Revisional /
SI.                                          Authority at           Appellate           Second
    Name of the Act Type of Dispute                                                                      Tribunal    High Court        Supreme Court
No.                                          first instance         Authority          Appellate
                                                                                       Authority
4.   Bihar Land       66. Dispute          Collector of the     The Collector not -                  -              High Court        Supreme Court
     Reforms Act,       relating to        district not below   below the rank of                                   under Article     under Article 136
     1950               vesting of         the rank of sub      Additional                                          226 of the        of the Constitution
                        rights, estate,    divisional           Collector in                                        Constitution of   of India
                        homestead          collector under      appeal                                              India
                        intermediaries     the Act.
                        interest, lease,
                        terms of
                        holdings etc.
                      67. Claims
                                           Claims Officer Board
                      68. Interest of      State Government Mines Tribunal
                         lease of mines
                         or minerals
5.   The Bihar       69.      Lease and    Collector of the     -                 -                  BLT            High Court        Supreme Court
     Government         sales of           District                                                                 under Article     under Article 136
     Estates (Khas-     Government                                                                                  226 of the        of the Constitution
     Mahal) Manual      Estates                                                                                     Constitution of   of India
     1953            70.      Payment of                                                                            India
                        Salami etc.
6.   Bihar Bhoodan Unlawful                Revenue Officer Collector              -                  BLT            High Court        Supreme Court
     Yagna Act, 1954 ejectment                                                                                      under Article     under Article 136
                                                                                                                    226 of the        of the Constitution
                                                                                                                    Constitution of   of India
                                                                                                                    India
7.   Bihar            Land                 Consolidation        Deputy Director, Director            BLT            High Court        Supreme Court
     Consolidation of Consolidation        Officer              Consolidation    Consolidation                      under Article     under Article 136
                                                                       257
                                                                                   Revisional /
SI.                                        Authority at        Appellate             Second
    Name of the Act Type of Dispute                                                                   Tribunal    High Court        Supreme Court
No.                                        first instance      Authority            Appellate
                                                                                    Authority
     Holdings and     Disputes                                                                                   226 of the      of the Constitution
     Prevention of                                                                                               Constitution of of India
     fragmentation                                                                                               India
     Act, 1956
8.   Bihar Public     Encroachment over Circle Officer      District           -                  -              High Court        Supreme Court
     Land             public land                           Magistrate                                           under Article     under Article 136
     Encroachment                                                                                                226 of the        of the Constitution
     Act, 1956                                                                                                   Constitution of   of India
                                                                                                                 India
9.   National         Land Acquisition Land Acquisition -                      -                  -              High Court        Supreme Court
     Highways         for highways     Officer                                                                   under Article     under Article 136
     Authority Act,                                                                                              226 of the        of the Constitution
     1956                                                                                                        Constitution of   of India
                                                                                                                 India
10. Mines &            Termination of    State Government Central              -                  -              High Court        Supreme Court
    Minerals           prospecting       or an authority Government                                              under Article     under Article 136
    (Development & licences or mining    authorised by the                                                       226 of the        of the Constitution
    Regulation) Act, leases              state government                                                        Constitution of   of India
    1957                                                                                                         India
11. Bihar Land         Ceiling surplus   Collector under    Collector of the   Board of           BLT            High Court        Supreme Court
    Reforms            land disputes     the Act            district           Revenue                           under Article     under Article 136
    (Fixation of                                                                                                 226 of the        of the Constitution
    ceiling area and                                                                                             Constitution of   of India
    acquisition of                                                                                               India
    surplus land) Act,
    1961
12. Bihar Tenant’s Dispute regarding     Circle Officer     Deputy Collector -                    BLT            High Court        Supreme Court
                                                                   258
                                                                                  Revisional /
SI.                                        Authority at        Appellate            Second
    Name of the Act Type of Dispute                                                                  Tribunal    High Court        Supreme Court
No.                                        first instance      Authority           Appellate
                                                                                   Authority
    Holdings          holdings of raiyats                    Land Reforms                                       under Article     under Article 136
    (Maintenance of                                                                                             226 of the        of the Constitution
    Records) Act,                                                                                               Constitution of   of India
    1973                                                                                                        India
13. Bihar Building Rent fixation &        Rent controller Collector           Commissioner       -              High Court        Supreme Court
    (Lease, Rent and eviction disputes i.e. the sub                                                             under Article     under Article 136
    Eviction) Control                     divisional officer                                                    226 of the        of the Constitution
    Act, 1982                                                                                                   Constitution of   of India
                                                                                                                India
14. Bihar Apartment Disputes relating to Chief Municipal Municipal         -                     -              High Court        Supreme Court
    Ownership Act, construction of       Commissioner    Building Tribunal                                      under Article     under Article 136
    2006            buildings /                                                                                 226 of the        of the Constitution
                    apartment                                                                                   Constitution of   of India
                                                                                                                India
15. Bihar Municipal 71.     Taxation Court of               Municipal         -                  -              High Court        Supreme Court
    Act, 2007        72.    Assessment municipal            building tribunal                                   under Article     under Article 136
                       of property tax commissioner         at Municipal                                        226 of the        of the Constitution
                     73.    Other taxes                     Corporation                                         Constitution of   of India
                       and tolls                                                                                India
                     74.    Payment &
                       recovery of
                       taxes
16. Bihar Land      Dispossession,      Deputy Collector    Divisional        -                  BLT            High Court        Supreme Court
    Dispute         partition of land, Land Reforms         Commissioner                                        under Article     under Article 136
    Resolution Act, correction of                           Land Reforms                                        226 of the        of the Constitution
    2009            wrong entries in                                                                            Constitution of   of India
                    the record of                                                                               India
                                                                   259
                                                                                 Revisional /
SI.                                        Authority at         Appellate          Second
    Name of the Act Type of Dispute                                                                 Tribunal    High Court        Supreme Court
No.                                        first instance       Authority         Appellate
                                                                                  Authority
                      rights, declaration
                      of rights, boundary
                      disputes etc.
17. Bihar Land        All disputes arising                  -                -                  BLT            High Court        Supreme Court
    Tribunal Act,     under the                                                                                under Article     under Article 136
    2009              enactments as                                                                            226 of the        of the Constitution
                      defined under the                                                                        Constitution of   of India
                      Act                                                                                      India
18. Bihar Mutation    Mutation of land Circle Officer       Deputy Collector Collector of the   BLT            High Court        Supreme Court
    Act, 2011         dispute                               Land Reforms     district                          under Article     under Article 136
                                                                                                               226 of the        of the Constitution
                                                                                                               Constitution of   of India
                                                                                                               India
19. Bihar Special     Dispute relating to Competent         Notified Officer -                  BLT            High Court        Supreme Court
    Survey and        survey and          Authority not                                                        under Article     under Article 136
    Settlement Act,   settlement          below the rank of                                                    226 of the        of the Constitution
    2011                                  Deputy Collector                                                     Constitution of   of India
                                          Land Reforms                                                         India
20. Right to Fair     Land Acquisition Collector            Land Acquisition -                  -              High Court        Supreme Court
    Compensation &                                          Rehabilitation &                                   under Article     under Article 136
    Transparency in                                         Resettlement                                       226 of the        of the Constitution
    Land                                                    Authority                                          Constitution of   of India
    Acquisition,                                                                                               India
    Rehabilitation &
    Resettlement Act,
    2013

                                                                   260
261
                                  Annexure – 4.8.3
             Institution and disposed of cases in Revenue Court in Bihar


Nature of dispute Cases instituted Cases disposed    Pending cases      % of cases
                   till 31st March,      off                           disposed off
                         2013
Dispossession            3126           604               2522             19.32
Mutation               21,23,562     20,23,335          1,00,227           95.28
Land ceiling cases        NA            NA                1207
Public land              8089          2870               5219             35.48
encroachment
Share croppers           1176           181               995              15.39
Land
consolidation
cases




                                        262
                                                            Annexure – 4.8.4
                              Number and description of civil suits instituted in various year in the state.
                                                  Classification of civil cases
                                   Other suits not
                         Suit for                                                                        Total land     Percentage of
            Total                   falling under    Suit         Suit for       Suit for
  Year                  money or                                                                        related cases    land related
         civil cases                  any of the under the immovable             specific Mortgage suit
                        movable                                                                          (5+6+7+8)          cases
                                      preceding rent land         property         relief
                        property
                                         heads
    1         2              3             4           5               6             7            8            9            10
  2005     21848            813          3216         289           15181          1426          923        17819          81.56
  2006     21989            694          3050         249           15622          1900          474        18245          82.97
  2007     24862            692          6956         263           15344          1113          494        17214          69.24
  2008     24653            681          6380         276           15432          1315          569        17592          71.36
  2009     27646            626          7838         252           17072          1270          588        19182          69.38
  2010     29911            592          8503         264           18540          1481          531        20816          69.59
  2011     18097           1212         13052         406            1773          1263          391         3833          21.18
(Source: Bihar Statistical Hand Book 2012 – Information received from the Registrar, Patna High Court).




                                                                   263
                                     Annexure – 4.8.5
                  Cases instituted in Patna District / Subordinate Courts

                                                   2007    2008    2009    2010    2012 2013
1. Suit for money or movable property               152     147     142     138
2. Other suits                                      252     240     242     212
3. Suit under the rent land                         149     132     129     121
4. Title and other suit for immovable property     1627    1432    1383    1228
5. Title and other suit for specific relief          72      68      67      64
6. Mortgage suit                                     42      40      38      36
Total                                              2294    2059    2001    1799    2012 2015
Out of which land related cases (3+4+5+6)          1890    1672    1617    1449     830 823
% of land related case                             82.39   81.20   80.81   80.54   41.25 40.84
(Source: Bihar Statistical Hand Book, 2012)




                                             264
                                    Annexure – 4.8.6
               Number of cases decided in the Sub-ordinate courts of Bihar

        Year                                        Civil
                                  Original                       Appellate
           1                          2                              3
         2005                      26305                           3482
         2006                      32875                           3017
         2007                      30131                           3478
         2008                      31386                           5370
         2009                      32817                           5651
         2010                      38405                           6847
         2011                      37030                           7479
(Source: Bihar Statistical Hand Book 2012)




                                             265
                                   Annexure - 4.8.7
              Civil cases decided in District / Subordinate Court in Patna
                                           Civil
                                        Original                    Appellate
2007                                       2171                       198
2008                                       1794                       183
2009                                       2001                       186
2010                                       1799                       244
2011                                        NA                        NA
(Source: Bihar Statistical Hand Book 2012)




                                          266
                                              Annexure – 4.8.8
                        Disposal by various type of Lok Adalat during various year

  Year       Lok      Special    Mega      Pension Labour Awareness MANRE Persons Legal Aid
            Adalat     Lok        Lok        Lok     Lok Programme    GA    Benefited Provided
              (I)     Adalat     Adalat     Adalat Adalat     (VI)   (VII)   by Legal   (IX)
                       (II)       (III)      (IV)    (V)                       Aid /
                                                                            Awareness
                                                                              (VIII)
1998 to 4,53,077 -             -          -        -      4963             64,798     -
2008
2009       45,964   -          -          -         -        495                       54,929       -
2010-      11,365   34,707     1,02,335 163         7,330    381                       22,135       142
2011       10,136   16,379     49,435     34        -        794                       51,083       261
2012       6,911    49,425     18,309     15        1237     828                       68,533       337
2013 (Till 6,962    5,0963     32,733     18        -        819            8256       66,470       207
Dec.)
Total      5,34,415 1,51,474 2,02,812 230           8,567    8,280          8256       2,63,150     947
National 2,23,306
Lok                 Grand Total- (I (534415) + ( II + ( 151474) + ( III ( 202812) + ( IV ( 230) + ( V (8567) +
Adalat              (VII (8256) + (X (223306) = 11,29,060
(X)
        (Source: Bihar State Legal Services Authority)




                                                     267
                                     Annexure – 4.8.9
   Details of Disposal & Legal Awareness Programme by Mobile Lok Adalat during
                                       various year

                                            No. of Legal     No. of Persons benefited
                   Number of Cases
     Year                               Awareness Conducted    during Mobile Lok
                      Disposed
                                        by Mobile Lok Adalat       Adalat work
   Year,2005                38                   01                    1,003
   Year 2006             75,780                  82                    3,312
   Year 2007             83,669                  93                    4302
   Year 2008             82,331                 107                    5,301
   Year 2009             48,628                  95                    4,312
   Year 2010             37,432                 108                   12,153
   Year 2011             28,043                 117                    5,698
   Year 2012             32,927                 115                    8,131
 Year 2013 (Till         18332                   73                    6014
    Dec,13
  Grand Total           4,07,180                  792                 50,226
(Source: Bihar State Legal Service Authority)




                                            268
                                      Annexure – 4.9.1A
  Organizational Structure of Department of Revenue and Land Reforms


                                              Minister


                                         Principal Secretary


                                              Secretary




                                                          Head Quarter           Regional



                                                          Joint Secretary        Divisional
                        Directorate
                                                                               Commissioner

State Editor                                               Dy. Secretary
  Gazetier                                                                         Collector
                                      Director
                                        Land
                                     Acquisition          Under Secretary
          Director                                                           Additional Collector
        Consolidation

                                                           Section Officer
                                                                             Sub Divisional Officer
                         Director                                            Land Reforms Deputy
                           Land                                                    Collector
                          Record
                        and Survey                  Asst. Director
                                                   Land Acquisition             Circle Officer


                                                      District Land            Circle Inspector
                                                   Acquisition Officer at
                                                      District Level
                                                                             Revenue Karmchari
                                                                                  / Amin




                                                   269
                                          Annexure – 4.9.1B
    Organizational structure of office of the Director, Land Records Survey and
                                            Settlements.


                                           Director Land Records
                                          Survey and Settlements




Head Quarter            Regional                   Bihar Survey          Revenue Survey
                                                 Office Gulzarbagh      Training Institute,
                                                                            Bodhgaya
  Director           Settlement Officer
                                                 Deputy Director
                                                                           Principle
Assistant Director      Charge Officer
                                                  Assistant Director
                                                     (Technical)
                                                                           Instructor
                          Assistant
                         Settlement
                           Officer
                                                   Assistant Director
                                                   (Administration)

                           Kanungo


                          Draft Man


                        Surveyor (Amin)




                                                 270
                        Annexure – 4.9.1C
     Organizational structure of Directorate of Consolidation


                    Directorate of Consolidation



                            Director




 Head Quarter                                        Regional



 Joint Director                                    Deputy Director



Deputy Director                                     Consolidation
                                                       Officer



                                                      Assistant
                                                    Consolidation
                                                       Officer



                                                      Assistant
                                                    Consolidation
                                                       Officer


                                                      Draft Man



                                                       Surveyor
                                                        (AMIN)




                                 271
                   Annexure – 4.9.1D
Organization Structure of Forest & Environment Department




                           272
                             Annexure – 4.9.1E
Organizational Structure of Principal Chief Conservator of Forest Level Setup




                                    273
FIELD-LEVEL SETUP



      PCCF


     APCCF


      CCF


       CF


       DFO


       ACF


     RANGE
     OFFICER

    FORESTER


  FOREST GUARD




       274
                            Annexure – 4.9.1F
          Organizational Structure of Department of Registration



                                   Minister


                                  Secretary


                                IG Registration




    DIG                           Additional                       AIG Registration
Registration                      Secretary                        (Divisional Level)

    (2)
                                                                     District Sub
    AIG                            Deputy                             Registrar
Registration                      Secretary                              (38)
                                     (2)
    (4)

  Section                           Under            Sub                   Joint Sub
  Officer                          Secretary       Registrar               Registrar
                                      (2)            (38)                     (26)
    (7)

Secretarial
 Assistant
   (20)




                                   275
                                  Annexure – 4.9.1G
             Organizational Structure of Urban Development Department




                                             Minister


                                        Principal Secretary




  Special           Special           Director          MD
 Secretary-                                                                          Executive
                   Secretary          UD & HD
cum-Director                                            BSHB                           Officer
                   UD & HD
  B.U.D.A                                                                              Nagar
                                                                                      Parishad
                                                                                    (42) / Nagar
                     Dy                                                              Panchayat
  Deputy          Secretary                                                             (86)
  Director           (2)
     (2)


                                                                Deputy               Municipal
                                MD                 Joint                           Commissioner
                                                               Secretary
                               BUIDCo            Secretary                          Corporation
                                                                  (1)
                                                                                       (11)


                                                                    Chief Town
                                                   Under              Planner
                             Dy                  Secretary-        Town Planning
                          Secretary               cum-PIO           Organization
                             (1)




                                             276
                                Annexure – 4.9.1H
                        Organizational Structure of BIADA



                                    Industries Department,
                                        Govt. of Bihar


                                     BIADA Head Office at
                                            Patna




   Regional                       Regional                    Regional                 Regional
 Office, Patna                     Office,                     Office,                  Office,
Headed by Executive              Darbhanga                                            Bhagalpur
   Director and
                                                             Muzaffarpur
                              Headed by Executive           Headed by Executive    Headed by Executive
   supported by
                                 Director and                  Director and           Director and
Development Officer
                                 supported by                  supported by           supported by
     and Asst.
                              Development Officer           Development Officer    Development Officer
Development Officer
                                   and Asst.                     and Asst.              and Asst.



 Area Office –                 Area Office –                 Area Office –          Area Office –
 Barauni, Hajipur,              Bela, (Darbhanga),          Muzaffarpur, Betiah,    Barari (Bhagalpur),
 Patliputra, Fatuha            Dharampur, Donar,            Ramnagar, Raxaul,      Kahalgaon, Munger,
                              Pandaul, Jhanjharpur,          Sitamarhi, Chapra,         (Sitakund),
                               Samastipur, Barauni               Kumarbag              Farbishganj,
                                                                                   Kishanganj, Katihar,
                                                                                    Purnea, Lakhisarai



Growth Centre-                Growth Centre-
Gidha, Buxar, Bihiya,          Begusarai, Saharsa                                  Growth Centre-
  Bikramganj, Dehri,             and Muriliganj                                          Purena
 Barun, Aurangabad,
Jahanabad, Bihta and
        Gaya




                                            277
                                     Annexure – 4.9.2
              Mapping of Institutional Activities related to Land in Bihar

S. Department /     Type of Land /     Responsibility / Mandate       Overlap Occurs with
No. Office          Resources                                         which other
                                                                      Department / Office
1. Department of All rainfed /          75. Increase productivity 79.    In case of land
   Land Resources, degraded land in       of rainfed / degraded land     acquisition; the
   Ministry of Rural rural areas          through the process of         overlaps are
   Development                            integrated       watershed     majorly
   Govt. of India                         management.                    complimentary as
                                        76. Support the States /         the majority of
                                          UTs for implementation of      acts are
                                          National Land Records          concurrent in
                                          Modernization.                 nature.
                                          Programme (NLRMP) 80.          Ministry of
                                        77. Develop an effective         Environment and
                                          land use system based on       Forests.
                                                                  81.
                                          efficient land information     State Department
                                          system (LIS).                  of Panchayati
                                        78. Provides          policy     Raj.
                                          support      and        82.
                                                              guides     Town and
                                          departments              of    Country Planning
                                          Government of India and        Organization,
                                          States and Government          Ministry of Urban
                                          organizations           for    Development.
                                          Rehabilitation         and
                                          Resettlement Policy, Land
                                          Acquisition Act, and Land
                                          Registration Act.

2. Ministry of      Urban Land          83. Implementing           of 84.   Local governance
   Urban                                   security of title in urban       structure in urban
   Development,                            areas of the country.            areas.
   Govt. of India                                                     85.   The overlaps are
                                                                            complimentary in
                                                                            nature as the
                                                                            Centre can only
                                                                            provide
                                                                            guidelines to the
                                                                            local government
                                                                            structures.
3. Central Public   Urban Land          86. Responsible             for
   Works                                   planning          designing,
   Department,                             estimation, evaluation of
   Govt. of India                          bids,     finalization    of
                                           contracts,        defending
                                           arbitration and court cases
                                           278
S. Department /      Type of Land /   Responsibility / Mandate      Overlap Occurs with
No. Office           Resources                                      which other
                                                                    Department / Office
                                         for their road and
                                         building.
4. Ministry of       Forest land,     87. Advisory role in 90.          Ministry of
   Environment and ecologically          management of forest           commerce and
   Forests, Govt. of sensitive land      land, implementation of        industry.
   India                                 forest acts, rights for 91.    Overlaps usually
                                         indigenous population.         lie in giving
                                      88. Providing guidelines          clearances and
                                         for land use restriction –     can be termed as
                                         forests     and       other    conflicting in
                                         ecologically      sensitive    nature.
                                         areas.                      92.Survey of India:
                                      89. Environment                   the data is used
                                         clearance     like     EIA     by the ministry
                                         clearances,           CRZ      for mapping of
                                         clearances etc.                the forests area
                                                                        and the data
                                                                        sharing is
                                                                        complimentary in
                                                                        nature.
                                                                    93. There is a conflict
                                                                        between
                                                                        department of
                                                                        environment and
                                                                        forest and SC, ST
                                                                        Welfare
                                                                        Department
                                                                        regarding
                                                                        implementation of
                                                                        FRA.
5. Ministry of       Tribal land      94. Protection of forest 97. National
   Tribal Affairs,                       rights for indigenous          Environment
   Govt. of India                        population.                    Appellate
                                      95. Development of forest         Authority.
                                         land through Integrated 98. Ministry of
                                         Tribal         Development     Environment and
                                         Agency.                        Forests.
                                      96. Advocacy of land
                                         rights for tribals.
6. Department of Land resource        99. Computerization of
   Electronics and information           all land records including
   IT, Govt. of India                    mutations, digitization of
                                         maps and integration of
                                         textual and spatial data.
                                      100. Updation of all survey
                                         and settlement records
                                         279
S. Department /         Type of Land /     Responsibility / Mandate      Overlap Occurs with
No. Office              Resources                                        which other
                                                                         Department / Office
                                        101. Computerization of
                                          registration     and        its
                                          integration with the land
                                          records        maintenance
                                          system.
                                        102. Development of core
                                          Geospatial      Information
                                          System       (GIS)        and
                                          capacity building.
7.    National                          103. E-Governance                 105. Survey of India.
      Informatics                         support      to      Central 106. National Remote
      Centre, Govt. of                    Government,             State        Sensing Centre.
      India                               Government,               UT
                                          Administrations, Districts
                                          and other Government
                                          bodies.
                                        104. Developing a digital
                                          spatial database, using the
                                          data sets derived from
                                          precise navigation and
                                          imaging            satellites,
                                          aircrafts, digitization of
                                          maps and transactional.
8.    Survey of India All types of land 107. Mapping                and
                       for all uses       Production                  of
                                          Geographical maps and
                                          Aeronautical Charts.
                                        108. Surveys                 for
                                          Developmental Projects.
                                        109. Scrutiny               and
                                          Certification of external
                                          boundaries & coastline on
                                          maps published by the
                                          other agencies including
                                          private publishers.
9.    Archeologically Acquiring those 110. To        preserve       and Ministry of Tourism
      Survey of India land which are of   develop the land of
                       Archeologically    Archaeological
                       character /        importance.
                       importance       111. Construction             of
                                          Museums.
                                        112. Preserving              the
                                          monuments                   of
                                          Archaeological
                                          importance.
10.   National Remote All types of land 113. Carrying out aerial
                                               280
S. Department /        Type of Land /     Responsibility / Mandate     Overlap Occurs with
No. Office             Resources                                       which other
                                                                       Department / Office
      Sensing Centre for all uses              surveys and extending
      (NRSC), Govt. of (Topographical          large     scale     mapping
      India            Surveys)                services        cartographic
                                               mapping and digital data
                                               services to the civilian
                                               sector.
                                            114. Providing geospatial
                                               solutions to various user
                                               agencies.
11.   Town and         Urban Land           115. Provides consultancy 117. Department of
      Country Planning                         works        on        urban   Urban
      Organization,                            development,           urban   Development.
      Ministry of                              design, spatial planning,
      Urban                                    etc.
      Development,                          116. Assists various govt.
      Govt. of India                           departments       on      the
                                               matters pertaining to
                                               urbanisation,           town
                                               planning,              urban
                                               transportation,
                                               metropolitan       planning,
                                               human             settlement
                                               policies,           planning
                                               legislation.
12.   Ministry of      Land acquired for118. Management of railways
      Railways         construction of         land.
                       railway projects,119. Planning, designing and
                       rail track, railway     advisory road regarding
                       stations, offices,      the railway land.
                       damp yard, and120. Providing guidelines for
                       different types of      land use of railway land.
                       factories.
13.   Ministry of      Acquired land for 121. Management of the
      Defence          Army Cantonment defence land.
                       and firing points / 122. Planning, designing
                       suiting range /       and        advisory        road
                       defence related       regarding the defence land.
                       factories           123. Providing guidelines
                                             for land use of defence
                                             land.
14.   Ministry of      Acquiring land to 124. Construction of hotels Archaeological survey
      Tourism          develop the           and other infrastructures to and India.
                       tourism activities. attract tourists.
                                           125. Promoting the tourism
                                             activities.
15.   Ministry of Art Acquiring land to 126. Construction                 of
                                                                         128. Conflict amongst
                                              281
S. Department /         Type of Land /      Responsibility / Mandate        Overlap Occurs with
No. Office              Resources                                           which other
                                                                            Department / Office
      and Culture      develop the arts      building for art colleges.        urban
                       and preserving     127. Construction              of    development
                       cultural heritage.    buildings     for     cultural    department,
                                             activities.                       agrological survey
                                                                               of India regarding
                                                                               land acquisition as
                                                                               per protection to
                                                                               monument Act /
                                                                               Agrological
                                                                               Survey Act.
16.   Department of All land in the       129. Making laws and 131. Urban
      Revenue and      state except those issue of guidelines from              Development and
      Land Reforms, recorded in the         time to time pertaining to          Panchayati Raj.
      Govt. of Bihar name of other          all types of land for the
                       departments of       purpose of land reform and
                       state government revenue administration.
                       and the central     130. Surveying               and
                       government             mapping of all land
                                              within the state and
                                              updating of record of
                                              rights and settlement of
                                              rent payable by tenants.
17.   Bihar Land       All type of land    132. To curb the unlawful 135. Charitable or
      Tribunal                                activity of grabbing of           religious
                                              public      land,       local     institutions.
                                              authority, religious or
                                              Charitable institution or
                                              Endowment         including
                                              waqf or any other private
                                              property,              either
                                              individually or in groups
                                              either by force or decrepit
                                              or otherwise.
                                           133. To       resolve       land
                                              disputes with respect to
                                              various Acts.
                                           134. Statutory        appellate
                                              authority of all disputed
                                              land matters.
18.   Director Land    All land            136. Land Survey.
      Records, Survey                      137. Preparation of Map.
      and Settlements,                     138. Monitoring
      Govt. of Bihar                          preparation      of      land
                                              records.
19.   Director Land    All type of land    139. Acquisition of land
      Acquisition                             for public purposes.
                                                282
S. Department /          Type of Land /   Responsibility / Mandate         Overlap Occurs with
No. Office               Resources                                         which other
                                                                           Department / Office
    Govt. of Bihar
20. IG Registration, All types of land    140. Fixation of stamp
    Govt. of Bihar                          duty and registration fee
                                            for all type of mortgage /
                                            sale / gift etc.
21. Divisional     All type of land       141. Control              and
    Commissioners.                          supervision of all the
                                            revenue officers working
                                            under him.
                                          142. Review of all the
                                            activities related to land
                                            Governance.
                                          143. Review of revenue
                                            collector.
                                          144. Discharging the duties
                                            vested in various Acts /
                                            Rules related to land.
                                          145. To make co-ordinator
                                            between the two or more
                                            District Collectors if it is
                                            required.
22. District Collector                    146. Land assessment, land
    / Additional                            acquisition, collection of
    District Collector                      land revenue.
    at District level                     147. Survey and mapping
                                            of all types of land within
                                            his     jurisdiction    and
                                            preparation of record of
                                            rights.
                                          148. Collection             of
                                            irrigation dues.
                                          149. Safe guard the interest
                                            of all Government land
                                            (including the land of
                                            Central Government).
                                          150. Collection of stamp
                                            duty administering the
                                            Indian Stamp Act.
                                          151. Settlement             of
                                            Government        land    to
                                            weaker        section     of
                                            backward classes.
                                          152. Appropriation        and
                                            validation of documents
                                            under the provisions of
                                            Indian Stamp Act.
                                             283
S. Department /       Type of Land /     Responsibility / Mandate          Overlap Occurs with
No. Office            Resources                                            which other
                                                                           Department / Office
                                         153. Distribution and sale
                                           of stamps through the
                                           treasuries under him.
                                         154. Provide and renew
                                           licenses to document
                                           writers and control their
                                           activities.
                                         155. Issue certified copies
                                           for      the      documents
                                           registered       and     also
                                           encumbrance certificates.
                                         156. Control               and
                                           supervision of all revenue
                                           officers working under
                                           him.
23. SDO / Dy.                            157. Land Revenue.
    Collector Land                       158. Land Disputes.
    Reforms (LRDC)                       159. Land Reforms works.
    at sub-divisional                    160. Land Protection.
    level                                161. Settlement              of
                                           Government Land to
                                           weaker section of SC/ST
                                           classes.
24. Circle Officer at All land           162. Collection            and
    Anchal level                           furnishing basic data for
                                           Land Acquisitions.
                                         163. Collection of land
                                           revenue.
                                         164. Mutation of Land.
                                         165. Function            under
                                           various revenue land
                                           reforms act and revenue
                                           laws.
                                         166. Maintenance             of
                                           revenue records at anchal
                                           level.
                                         167. Measurement of all
                                           land               including
                                           Government Land.
25. Municipal         Urban / Rural land 168. Planning              and
    Corporation and (to the extent of      development in urban and
    Urban             country planning)    rural      areas     through
    Development                            Master Plans.
    Department                           169. Assist the government
                                           in town and country
                                           planning matters.
                                             284
S. Department /      Type of Land /    Responsibility / Mandate    Overlap Occurs with
No. Office           Resources                                     which other
                                                                   Department / Office
                                      170. Coordinate          with
                                        various departments.
                                      171. Advise Government
                                        in the mattes like change
                                        of land use proposals,
                                        alienation of land and
                                        relaxation of rules.
                                      172. Suggest              and
                                        implement layouts and
                                        regulate the development
                                        of industries and other
                                        buildings as per suggested
                                        norms.
                                      173. Approval of building
                                        Maps.
                                      174. Construction of roads,
                                        building schools, bus
                                        stands        and     other
                                        structures for the public
                                        utilities.
26. Chief Town       Urban            175. Planning             and
    Planner                             development in urban and
                                        rural areas.
                                      176. Master Plans prepared
                                        for the urban centers and
                                        rural areas.
                                      177. Indicative Land use
                                        (Mandal Master Plans)
                                        Plans.
                                      178. Approval of layouts.
                                      179. Building rules and
                                        zoning regulations.
                                      180. Approval of industrial
                                        institutions.
27. Welfare          Scheduled Tribes 181. Implementation         of
    Department       Schedule Castes    constitutional safeguards
    Govt. of Bihar                      of all and to safeguard
                                        from exploitation and
                                        strive      for      overall
                                        development.
                                      182. Ensuring              the
                                        protection of tribal and
                                        Scheduled Castes.
28. Department of    To develop the   183. Making                    Revenue Department
    Tourism, Govt.   tourist places     infrastructures at tourist for transfer the
    of Bihar                            places.                      government land and
                                           285
S. Department /      Type of Land /     Responsibility / Mandate     Overlap Occurs with
No. Office           Resources                                       which other
                                                                     Department / Office
                                    184. Construction of hotels acquisition of fresh
                                      / motels etc for the use of land for the
                                      tourists.                      development of tourist
                                                                     places.
29. Department of Rural / Urban     185. Agricultural       farms,
    Agriculture,                      agricultural colleges /
    Govt. of Bihar                    universities / offices etc.
                                    186. Development of waste
                                      land.
                                    187. Conservation of soil
30. Department of Rural Government 188. Policy,        monitoring
    Rural           Land              and evaluation, planning.
    Development,                    189. Building of rural
    Govt. of Bihar                    infrastructures,     offices,
                                      roads etc.
31. Department of                   190. Assisting        revenue
    Panchayati Raj,                   administration at the
    Govt. of Bihar                    village      level       and
                                      identification of landless
                                      poor.
                                    191. Construction            of
                                      Panchayat Raj Bhawan.
                                    192. The Gram Kutchery /
                                      Nyayalay       has      been
                                      authorised to decide the
                                      cases of civil suit of
                                      pretty nature.
32. Panchayati Raj Village land and 193. Assisting             195. To settle
                                                              land
    Institutions    site              administration.                    Gairmazauara
                                    194. Construction            of      Aam land in
                                      infrastructure              at     villages gram
                                      Panchayat level.                   panchayat’s
                                                                         consent is
                                                                         required.
                                                               196. Under right to fair
                                                                         compensation and
                                                                         transparency in
                                                                         land acquisition,
                                                                         rehabilitation and
                                                                         resettlement Act,
                                                                         2013 the
                                                                         panchayat’s
                                                                         consent in
                                                                         acquisition of land
                                                                         is mandatory.
33. Department of                   197. Proposals relating to Ministry of
                                            286
S. Department /         Type of Land /   Responsibility / Mandate        Overlap Occurs with
No. Office              Resources                                        which other
                                                                         Department / Office
    Environment and                        forest                 land, Environment, GoI;
    Forests, Govt. of                      encroachments on forest both have basically
    Bihar                                  land, forest Conservation the same mandate.
                                           Act 1980, use of forest
                                           land      for    non-forest
                                           purposes.
                                         198. Forest       settlement,
                                           forest      survey       and
                                           mapping.
                                         199. Protection of forests
                                           and related notifications.
                                         200. Issues relating to
                                           destruction of forests.
                                         201. Budget planning and
                                           Non-Plan schemes.
                                         202. Research              and
                                           development / monitoring
                                           and evaluation.
                                         203. Social           forestry
                                           programmes.
                                         204. Development of waste
                                           land.
34. Principal Chief Forest Land          205. Protection,
    Conservator of                         conservation             and
    Forests, Govt. of                      management of forests.
    Bihar                                206. Implementation Joint
                                           Forest        Management,
                                           which involves the local
                                           villagers in managing and
                                           protecting forests.
                                         207. Forest rights act.
35. Department of                        208. Developing
    Industries, Govt.                      infrastructure          that
    of Bihar                               facilitates               the
                                           development of industries
                                           and industrial areas.
36. Department of                        209. Promotional         work
    Mines and                              which           constitutes
    Geology                                investigation of Mineral
                                           deposits.
                                         210. Mapping, exploration
                                           and assessment of mines
                                           and minerals.
                                         211. All regulatory work
                                           pertaining to mines.
                                         212. Advising               the
                                            287
S. Department /        Type of Land /   Responsibility / Mandate        Overlap Occurs with
No. Office             Resources                                        which other
                                                                        Department / Office
                                          Government        on   the
                                          desirability of grant of
                                          Mineral Concessions.
37. Bihar Industrial                    213. Development          of
    Area                                  industrial estates, growth
    Development                           centres and industrial
    Authority                             areas.
                                        214. Transfer of land for
                                          industrial development.
                                        215. Development          of
                                          infrastructures         in
                                          industrial areas.
38. Bihar State                         216. Development          of
    Infrastructure                        various        type     of
    Development                           infrastructure.
    Corporation
39. District Land      All land         217. Acquisition of land
    Acquisition                           for the benefit of society.
    Officers
40. District / sub                      218. Registration          of
    registrars                            property and collection of
                                          duties and fees for
                                          transactions in land.
41. Licensed        Urban Buildings     219. Building           plans
    Architects for                        preparation.
    building                            220. Approval of building
    permission and                        map.
    approval of map
42. Religious Trust Temple Land        221. Management of the
                                          land      belonging      to
                                          religious trust.
43. Waqf Board      All type of Waqf 222. To safe guard the
                    land                  interest of Waqf property
                                          and land.
44. District Boards All type of        223. To manage the land RCD              and Rural
                    District Board’s      which belong to District Development
                    Land                  Boards of each District of Department of Govt.
                                          Bihar.                      of Bihar.
45. Bhoodan Yagya Land received on 224. To distribute Bhoodan Department               of
    Samittee        gifts from Ex-       land amongst landless.       Revenue and Land
                    landlord          225. Coordinate             the Reforms, Govt. of
                                         activities        regarding Bihar.
                                         planning, distribution etc.
                                         of Bhoodan Land.
46. Kaisherl Hind   Central        226. It is managed by State
    Land            Government Land       Government, if it is not in
                                           288
S. Department /     Type of Land /   Responsibility / Mandate       Overlap Occurs with
No. Office          Resources                                       which other
                                                                    Department / Office
                                        the possession of Central
                                        Government.
(Source: Primary Data)




                                        289
                                    Annexure – 4.9.3
     Position of Sanctioned and Working Strength in Revenue and Land Reforms
                             Department as on 31.12.2013.
A. At Head Quarter Level
Sl. No Post                             Sanctioned Post Working            Vacant Post
                                                        Strength
1        Principal Secretary                    1                1                 0
2        Secretary                              1                1                 0
3        Additional / Special Secretary         1                1                 0
4        Director Consolidation                 1                1                 0
5        Director Land Acquisition              1                1                 0
6        Director Record and Survey             1                1                 0
7        State editor gazette                   1                0                 1
8        Joint Secretary                        2                0                 2
9        Deputy Secretary                       2                0                 2
10       Under Secretary                       5+1             3+1                 2
11       Section Officers                     20+1          14+1=15                6
12       Assistant                            86+2              40                48
13       Principal Private Secretary            1                1                 0
14       Private Secretary                     2+3               0               2+3
15       Personal Assistant                     7                3                 4
16       Stenographer                         10+6               1               9+6

B. At Filed Level
SI. No.               Designation                Sanctioned Post   Working       Vacant post
                                                                   Strength
(a) Circle Inspector level post
   1. Circle Inspector                                  572
   2. Circle Inspector-Cum-Kanungo, Land                 72
        record and survey
                                                                      325              561
   3. Kanungo, Land-Acquisition                          38
   4. Assistant Consolidation Officer                   170
   5. Leave and Training Reserve                         34
                                        Sub Total       886           325              561
(b) Circle officer and equivalent grade
   1. Circle Officer                                    534           469              65
   2. Executive Magistrate                              147           133              14
   3. Assistant Settlement Officer                       60            37              23
   4. Consolidation Officer                              60            39              21
(c) Land Reforms Deputy Collector and Equivalent Post
   1. LRDC                                              101           99               2
                                          290
  2.    Assistant Director (Agri Census)                03          01    02
  3.    Assistant Director, Survey Officer,             02          02     -
        Gulzarbagh
    4. Instructor, Consolidation training Institute,    03          01    02
        Patna
    5. Instructor, Survey Training Institute, Gaya      07          03    04
    6. Research Officer, Consolidation                  01           -    01
        Directorate
    7. Additional Sub Division Officer, Land            03          -     03
        Ceiling
    8. Additional District Land Acquisition             14          06    08
        Officer
(d) District Land Acquisition and Equivalent Post
    1. District Land Acquisition Officer                38          8     30
    2. Special Land Acquisition Officer (Water          10         NA     NA
        Resource Department)
    3. Assistant Director, Consolidation                14           3    11
    4. Deputy Director (Agriculture Census)             01          01     -
    5. Assistant Director, Land Record and              01          01     -
        Survey Directorate
    6. Deputy Director, Survey Office,                  01          01     -
        Gulzarbagh
(e) Additional Collector and Equivalent Post
    1. Additional Collector                             15         12     03
    2. Charge Officer, Settlement                       09         NA     NA
    3. Deputy Director Consolidation                    15         01     14
    4. Principal, Consolidation Training Institute,     01         01      -
        Patna
    5. Principal, Survey Training Institute, Gaya       01           -    01
    6. Joint Director (Agriculture Census)              01          01     -
(f) Revenue Karamchari
    1. Revenue Karamchari                              8463        4000   4463
    2. Amin

        District Cadre                                 NA          NA     373

        Land Record and Survey                         NA          NA     35

       Director Consolidation                          810          36    774
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reforms, Govt. of Bihar)



                                              291
                                     Annexure – 4.9.4
       Number and description of civil suits instituted in various year in the state

                                Classification of civil cases
                          Other suits
                                        Suit                                Total land Percentage
       Total   Suit for   not falling
                                       under Suit for Suit for                related    of land
Year   civil   money or   under any                                Mortgage
                                         the immovable specific                cases     related
       cases   movable      of the                                   suit
                                        rent property relief                (5+6+7+8)     cases
               property   preceding
                                        land
                            heads
  1      2        3            4          5         6          7      8          9          10
2005   21848     813         3216        289     15181        1426   923       17819      81.56
2006   21989     694         3050        249     15622        1900   474       18245      82.97
2007   24862     692         6956        263     15344        1113   494       17214      69.24
2008   24653     681         6380        276     15432        1315   569       17592      71.36
2009   27646     626         7838        252     17072        1270   588       19182      69.38
2010   29911     592         8503        264     18540        1481   531       20816      69.59
2011   18097     1212       13052        406      1773        1263   391        3833      21.18
(Source: Bihar Statistical Hand Book 2012)




                                             292
                                       Annexure – 4.9.5
     Details of cases with respect to sharecroppers as on 31st March, 2013 in Bihar.

                                                                         No. of cases pending
                          No. of Cases as on     No. of cases disposed
     Particulars                                                          as on 31st March,
                          31st March, 2013         during 2012-13
                                                                                 2013
No. of cases as on 31st         1176                181                           995
March 2013                                       (15.39%)                      (84.61%)
Area involved in acres       5005.7                271.30                        4734
                                                  (5.42%)                      (94.57%)
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reform, Govt. of Bihar)




                                               293
                                   Annexure – 4.9.6
             Encroachment of public land as on 31st March, 2013 in Bihar.
             Particulars                 Number                   Area in acre
Cases as on 31.03.2012                     4587                     1860.72
Cases filed during 2012-13                 3502                      602.25
                    st
Total cases as on 31 March, 2013           8089                     2462.97
Disposal of cases in 2012-13               2870                      749.16
                           st
Pending cases as on 31 March,              5219                     1713.81
2013                                     (64.52%)                  (69.58%)
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reform, Govt. of Bihar)




                                          294
                                   Annexure – 4.9.7
   Category wise distribution of surplus ceiling land in Bihar as on 31st March, 2013.

         Category                 No. of Beneficiaries              Area in acre
           SC                           228700                       170793.63
                                       (64.16%)                       (62.50%)
             ST                          29140                        25350.33
                                        (8.18%)                        (9.28%)
            OBC                          31681                        24844.95
                                        (8.89%)                        (9.09%)
          General                        66910                        52262.73
                                       (18.77%)                       (19.13%)
             Total                      356431                        273251.6
Figures in bracket shows percentage
(Source: Department of Revenue and Land Reform, Govt. of Bihar)




                                          295
                                         Annexure – 5

             Minutes of State Validation Workshop Bihar on 26th June, 2014

Chandragupt Institute of Management Patna organized one day workshop on Land
Governance Assessment Framework –State Validation Workshop on 26th June, 2014 at Hotel
Patliputra Ashok Patna. The officials from World Bank, Revenue Deptt., Forest Deptt.,
Registration Deptt., Industries Deptt., BIADA, Municipality, Urban Development
Department, academicians, representative from the civil societies, Bihar Industries
Association, Bihar Chamber of Commerce and NGOs and persons from Media participated in
the workshop. The list of the participants is attached as annexure 5.1. The key findings and
policy recommendations of the study were discussed in detail amongst the stakeholders.
        The workshop was inaugurated by Shri Hukum Singh Meena, IAS, Secretary,
Revenue and Land Reforms Department, Govt. of Bihar. Shri Meena narrated the various
steps taken by the Government of Bihar in recent years for improving land administration in
the state. He pointed out that creation of revenue cadre and Special Survey and Settlement
Act 2011 introduced in the state will be a step forward in the direction of land administration.
He appreciated the role of CIMP in conducting the study and assured to look into the
recommendations for implementation. In his speech he raised his concern over the following
issues.
      1.   Discrepancies in the spatial data and textual data related to land
      2.   Disputes arise from discrepancies of land data
      3.   Gaps in land transaction and mutations
      4.   Gaps in collection of tax and small amount of land rent
      5.   Pending cases related to land disputes
      6.   Recognition of women rights over land
   Ms. Thea Hilhorst from the World Bank narrated the advantage of the study and
requested the participants to validate the findings and recommendations. She further
requested the government to implement the recommendations to ensure better land
governance.
   Dr. C. Ashok Vardhan, IAS and Ex-Chairman, Board of Revenue and Ex-Principal
Secretary, Department of Revenue and Land Reforms pointed out the efforts done by the
expert investigators and CIMP team in conducting the study. He further pointed out that the
report is a good document which will help in taking policy decisions by the state government.
He pointed out that the policy recommendations are relevant and will help in improving land
governance in the state.
    Dr. V. Mukunda Das, Director, CIMP while welcoming the guests and dignitaries pointed
out the area of top priorities and major recommendations of the study. Dr. Das had given
stress on the following recommendations:
      7.   Completion of Special Survey. Computerization and digitization of record of rights
           and maps based on the Special Survey.

                                               296
     8.   A State Land use Policy based on existing laws and policies should be developed.
          Setting up a Land Use Board in Bihar for making 10-15 years Perspective land use
          plan and monitoring the implementation of land use plan.
     9.   A unified system for collection and collation of data for land possessed by different
          State Government Departments, Central Government Departments and Public
          Sector Corporations. This will help in developing data base for efficient
          management of land in future.
     10. A vigorous special / massive time bound programme should be started, focusing on
         giving possession to dispossessed persons, with proper co-ordination between
         revenue and police officials. A need based system of summary trial may help in
         solving the dispossession cases in rural areas of Bihar.
     11. Set up an effective Grievance Redressal machinery for Land disputes
     12. Enumeration of Common Property Resources and Common Land in each National
         Sample Survey.
     13. E-linking of registry office computer with circle office for automatic mutation and
         updating of land record.
     14. Bringing down stamp duty on registration of sale deed at par with other states i.e. 5
         per cent.
     15. Strengthening of land related department with adequate trained manpower and
         infrastructure.
    Dr. Das further appreciated the efforts put by Expert Investigators, State Co-ordinating
members of CIMP, panel members and Dr. C. Ashok Vardhan in completing this study and
producing a good report. He also thanked the land reforms and revenue department and other
land related departments for providing various information / data for conducting this study.
    Sri Bidhanesh Mishra presented the background of the study and methodology adopted
for conducting the study. Theme wise presentations were made by the state LGAF Team
comprising Mr. BL Mishra, Mr. Debabrata Samanta and Mr. Bidhanesh Misra.
Recommendations were discussed in detail. Issues raised by the participants were replied by
Dr. Ashokvardhan, BL Mishra, Mr. JK Jha and Shri S.N. Mishra On the basis of consensus,
some of the recommendations have been dropped and some recommendations have been
added in some of the themes. The entire recommendations for each thematic area have been
validated by the participants in the workshop. The panel wise recommendations deleted
additional recommendations suggested are as under
Panel 1: Land Right Recognition

The participants discussed the recommendations regarding land right recognition and has
given following suggestions.
     1.   The recommendation on “Develop Land Use Policy and Plan” has been proposed
          to sift to Panel 9.
     2.   The recommendation on acquisition of barren and uncultivable land proposed to
          bring to panel 5.
                                             297
     3.   The recommendation on Social and Environment Impact Assessment was proposed
          to drop.
     4.   The recommendation on empowering Gram Panchayat for their role in restricting
          conversion was also dropped.
Panel 2: Forest and Common Land Management:
The participants agreed with the recommendations in toto for forest and common land
management.
Panel 3: Urban Land Use Planning and Development
The following additional recommendations were proposed by the participants in Urban Land
Use Planning and Development
     1.   Demarcation of area for solid waste management and Effective solid waste
          management system.
     2.   Quick survey of slums in all urban areas of Bihar and Effective Slum Area
          Development Plan
     3.   Demarcation of Green Areas in all urban areas
     4.   Arrangement for Parks and recreation ground along with cremation ground
     5.   Provision for street vendors
     6.   Redevelopment/renewal of old urban areas/pocket
Although these aspects have been covered under proposed urban land use plan in draft
building byelaws, the above recommendations were accepted after detailed discussion.
Panel 4: Public Land Management
The participants suggested the following issues in Public Land Management
     1.   Some of the participants disagreed with the recommendation to delegate power of
          settlement of gairmazarhua land to District Magistrate, which was accepted.
     2.   It was proposed that, the Gairmazarhua Aam land should not be distributed rather
          may be utilised for public purposes only. This was accepted after detailed
          discussion.
     3.   Regarding the recommendation of removal of encroachment from public land it
          was proposed that, once the land is removed from encroachment government
          should ensure protection of the same plot of land from encroachment through
          fencing and public notification. This was accepted after deliberation.
     4.   It was also proposed that, government should ensure rehabilitation of needy people
          removed from encroachment. This was accepted after detailed discussion.
Panel 5: Transfer of Large Tract of Land to Investor:
The participants agreed with all the recommendations in Transfer of Large Tract of Land to
Investor. However, they suggested the following recommendation regarding MVR.
     1.   It was pointed out by the participants that the Minimum Value Register rule needs
          to be revised. Due to existing rules the price of land is increasing every year which
          make new business venture non-viable and risky. The formula for calculation of
                                             298
          MVR needs to be revised. It was also proposed that the objection received in
          respect of MVR should be deliberated in detail and genuine observations should be
          considered.
     After detailed discussion, above recommendation was accepted.
Panel 6: Public Provision for Land Information
All recommendations with respect to public provision of land information were accepted by
the participants. The following additional recommendations were also proposed by the
participants
     1.   The draft Land Titling Bill proposed by Government of India may be considered
          for adoption with required modification and fine tuning.
     2.   Regarding recommendation of compulsory registration of all registrable
          documents, it was proposed that the Gram panchayat may be engaged to register all
          registerable documents to make it reflect in encumbrance certificate. This
          recommendation was rejected by the majority of the participants.
Panel 7: Land Valuation and Taxation
The participants agreed with all the recommendations with respect to land valuation and
taxation. However, the following additional recommendation was also suggested by
participants
     1.   It was pointed out in the discussion that, there is a discrepancy in land rent in
          different places of Bihar. Discrepancies in land rent should be removed by
          adopting objective criteria for fixation of land rent viz. land use classification,
          irrigation status, productivity of land etc. This suggestion was accepted.
Panel 8: Dispute Resolution
Participants agreed with all the recommendations regarding dispute resolution and suggested
the following additional recommendation.
     1.   As there are a large number of cases related to giving possession and
          dispossession, it was recommended that before allotment of land government
          should take physical possession of the land and then allot to the beneficiaries.
Panel 9: Institutional Arrangements.
All the recommendations regarding institutional arrangements was accepted by the
participants.
        Mr. S. N Mishra and Thea Hilhorst from the World Bank also discussed the
Dimension Ranking of each thematic area. The participants pointed out that the ranking has
already been discussed in detail in the Panel discussion and the ranking given in the report is
the anonymous decision of the panel members. Participants again reviewed the Dimension
ranking and validated the same. It was also pointed out that the Background Report and
Dimension Ranking/Revised background Report and Dimension Ranking were twice sent to
all the Government Department for perusal and comments. Hence most of the validation parts
were taken care by sharing this report with the Government Department.


                                             299
        Prof. Debabrata Samanta made power point presentation of the Best Practices in all
thematic areas. Detailed discussions were held on the Best practices. Best Practices were
validated by the participants of the workshop. Participants appreciated the efforts made by
team members in compiling the Best Practices of the state in the field of land governance.
        Thea Hilhorst from World Bank presented the next steps ahead and discussed the
same in the workshop. She suggested that some monitorable parameters should be identified
for effective monitoring of the implementation of the policy prescriptions / recommendations.
        The workshop was also attended by Media Persons and they helped us in
disseminating the findings of the study to the wider mass and the stakeholders by publishing
the gist of the recommendation/deliberation of the workshop in print and electronic media.
Some of the media clips are enclosed as annexure 5.2. This was a step forward in
disseminating the findings and policy prescriptions amongst stakeholders.
       Lastly the meeting ended with vote of thanks proposed by Shri S.N Mishra from
World Bank side and Shri Bidhanesh Mishra from CIMP side. While delivering vote of
thanks Shri S.N. Mishra from World Bank expressed his happiness for the way / manner in
which validation of findings and recommendations was done in the workshop. He further
pointed out that validation has been done in true / real sense.




                                            300
                                                         Annexure – 5.1

                          List of Participants of State Validation Workshop held on 26th June, 2014

SI.     Name of the
                           Address           Designation          Organization       Mobile No.               Email-Id
No.     Participants
 1. Hukum Singh Meena Old Secretariat    Secretary Revenue    Revenue and Land      9431038414    hukummeena@yahoo.co.in
                      Patna, Bihar       and Land Reforms     Reforms Department                  hukummeena65@gmail.com
 2. Thea Hilhorst     1818 M Sheet       LGAF Global          World Bank                          thilhorest@worldbank.org
                      Washington         Coordinator
 3. Satya Narayan     Social             Social Development   World Bank            9958200352    sanzhra2@worldbank.org
    Mishra            Development        Specialist
                      Specialist World
                      Bank New Delhi
 4. V. Mukunda Das    Director CIMP      Director             CIMP                  9334832745    director@cimp.ac.in
 5. Dr. C.A.          Member 5th State                                              9471003629
    Ashokvardhan      Finance
                      Commissioner,
                      Bihar
 6. Suresh Paswan     SC / ST Welfare    Special Secretary    SC / ST Welfare       9431468605
                      Department,
                      Govt. of Bihar,
                      Patna
 7. Satya Prakash     AD (Tech)          AD (Tech) Cum        Bihar Survey Office   9431803899
    Sharma                               OSD Revenue and      Gulzarbagh
                                         Land Reforms

                                                               301
SI.      Name of the
                            Address          Designation        Organization       Mobile No.             Email-Id
No.      Participants
                                         Department
8.    Sushil Kumar     Old Secretariat   Assistant Director  Revenue              9431091417
                       Revenue           Land Reforms
                       Department
 9. Pankaj Kumar Singh Consolidation    Assistant            Department of        9430887542
                       Director         Consolidation        Revenue & Land
                       Budhmarg Patna Officer                Reforms, Bihar
10. Binod Kumar Jha    Additional       Additional Secretary Govt. of Bihar       9431633290
                       Secretary
                       Revenue and
                       Land Reforms
                       Department
11. Umesh Singh        Dy Secretary     Deputy Secretary     Government           9431469329
                       Revenue
                       Department
12. A.K. Singh         Revenue & Land OSD                    Revenue and Land     8544412972    ad2vcb@gmail.com
                       Reforms                               Reforms Department
                       Department Patna
                       Secretariat
13. Neel Kamal         Additional       Additional           Govt. of Bihar       9473191199    acpatna1@gmail.com
                       Collector, Patna Collector, Patna
14. Abhimanyu Singh Land                Land Development IDA                      9431413168
                       Development      Officer
                       Officer,
                       Infrastructure
                                                              302
SI.      Name of the
                              Address          Designation          Organization        Mobile No.              Email-Id
No.      Participants
                         Development
                         Authority, Patna
15.   Sudhanshu Kumar Patna Collectorate Land Reforms           Department of Land    8544412369     dclrpatnasadar@gmail.com
      Choubey                                Deputy Collector   Revenue, Govt. of     9931268194
                                             Patna Sadar        Bihar
16.   Shrinarayan Tiwary MIG 149 H.          ASO (Retd.)        Govt. of Bihar        9334044264
                         Nagar Patna – 20
17.   Jitendra Kumar Jha Kankarbagh Patna Dy Director (R)       Govt. of Bihar        9430286376
                                             Bihar Survey
18.   Suman Kumar        Chief               CAO, BIADA         BIADA                 9431615172
                         Administrative
                         Officer, BIADA,
                         Patna
19.   Nisherth Jamsd     V.P. Bihar          VP                 Bihar Industries      9334115441
                         Industries                             Association
                         Association
20.   Nanhay Kumar       Bihar Chamber of Chairman of Urban     Bihar Chamber of        9431020886   kumar_kaushik@yahoo.com
                         Commerce and Sub Committee             Commerce and
                         Industries Patna                       Industries Patna
21.   A.K.P Sinha        Bihar Chamber of Secretary General     Bihar Chamber of        9431020163   bccpatna@gmail.com
                         Commerce and                           Commerce and
                         Industries Patna                       Industries Patna
22.   Awadhesh Kumar     A.N. Sinha          Faculty            A.N. Sinha Institute of 9835889013   awedheshkumar1973@gmail.com
                         Institute of Social                    Social Studies, Patna
                         Studies, Patna
                                                                 303
SI.     Name of the
                             Address            Designation          Organization         Mobile No.              Email-Id
No.     Participants
23. Chinmarg Kumar    IGC/Asian             Economist            IGC/Asian            8804418306       chinmarg.kumar@theigc.org.
                      Development                                Development Research
                      Research                                   Institute, Bihar
                      Institute, Bihar
24. Bakshi Amit Kumar Centre for            Assistant Professor CEPPF, ADRI, Patna 8252329272          Bakshi012@gmail.com
    Sinha             Economic Policy
                      and Public
                      Finance (CEPPF)
                      ADRI, Patna
25. Dr. Barna Ganguli CEPPF, ADRI,          Assistant Professor ADRI, Patna              9973434702    aarnaganguli@gmail.com
                      Patna
26. A.K. Mishra       Ex-Chairman,          FCA                 A.K. Mishra &            9431033434    akmishra_1990@rediffmail.com
                      ICAI, Patna,                              Associates
27. Vidyarthi Vikas   A.N. Sinha            Assistant Professor A.N. Sinha Institute,    7765957289    vidyarthiv@rediffmail.com
                      Institute of Social                       Patna
                      Studies, Patna
28. Dr. S.C. Roy      Associate             Associate Professor Chanakaya National 9431619749          seroy2010@gmail.com
                      Professor,            (Law)               Law University, Patna
                      Chanakaya
                      National Law
                      University, Patna
29. Dr. B.N. Prasad   National Institute    Professor            National Institute of   9835068906
                      of Technology,                             Technology, Patna
                      Patna
30. B.L. Mishra       CIMP                  Principal Research   CIMP                    9431268510
                                                                  304
SI.     Name of the
                            Address             Designation         Organization    Mobile No.              Email-Id
No.     Participants
                                            Coordinator
31. Bidhanesh Misra    CIMP                 Visiting Professor   CIMP              9334116750
32. Dhruva Kumar       NABARD, 4th          AGM                  NABARD            9431443989
                       Block, Mauyalok
                       Complex, Patna
33. Anil Kumar         NABARD, Patna        AM                  NABARD             9471906795    anilpato7@rediffmail.com
34. Dr. Manoj Mishra   Admerit College      Vice Principal      Admerit College    9334692623    manojbashisr@gmail.com
35. Vijaya             Chandragupt          Associate Professor CIMP               7870774523    vijaya@cimp.ac.in
    Bandyopadhayaya    Institute of                                                9386896011
                       Management
                       Patna (CIMP)
36. Manoj Kumar        Patna Municipal      Social Development Patna Municipal     9608747680    Manojkp456@gmail.com
    Pandey             Corporation          Officer             Corporation
37. Atish Kumar Dash   Central              Assistant Professor CUB                9162870065    dashatish@gmail.com
                       University of
                       Bihar
38. Birendra Kumar     Senior Manager       Senior Manager,      Union Bank        9334036333
                       (Rtd.) Union         Retd.
                       Bank of India,
                       Patna
39. Anup Raj           CIMP                 Assistant Professor CIMP               9546726514    anupraj019@gmail.com
40. Shabbir Hasan      Chakbandi            Instructor          Govt. of Bihar     9472059800
                       training Institute
                       Patna
41. Bishnu Shanker     CIMP                 Media-incharge-                        9304897473
                                                                  305
SI.       Name of the
                             Address           Designation            Organization    Mobile No.              Email-Id
No.       Participants
      Prasad                                cum-Manager, SGC
42.   Sibananda Senapati CIMP               Professor             CIMP               9304803290
43.   Sayan Banerjee     CIMP               Assistant Professor   CIMP               9386804818
44.   Debabrata Samanta  CIMP               Assistant Professor   CIMP               9304440983    debabrata@cimp.ac.in
45.   Om Prakash         GPSVS              Project Manager       GPSVS              7631621695    omprakashnis@gmail.com
                         Madhubani
46.   Saroj Kumar        Gafari Chak,                                                9334746695    kumarsaroj86@gmail.com
                         Masaudi, Patna
47.   Sumit Kumar        D.N. College,                                               9570718806
                         Masaudi
48.   Sumita Jaiswal     Dainik Jagran,     Senior Reporter       Dainik Jagran      7783897344    pioneersumita30@gmail.com
                         Kidwaipuri
49.   Ratnesh Anand      Rural Connect                            Rural Connect      9905810064
50.   Saqib Khan         Dainik Bhaskar     Reporter              Dainik Bhaskar     9708211701    saqibkhan366@gmail.com
51.   Bodhisattwa Kundan The Telegraph      Manager               ABP                9771490247    Bodhisattwa.kundan@abp.in
                         Frazer Road,
                         Patna
52.   P. Kumar           Subzibagh, Patna   Reporter              Pindar             9835218851    pindan2010@gmail.com
53.   Awanish Kumar      Patna              Reporter              Darsh News         9771902877    awanishreporter@gamil.com
54.   Sanjay Kumar       Patna              Reporter              Naxatra News       9334083891    sk999775@gmail.com
55.   Vikash Kumar Singh Hindustan News     Reporter                                 9097331114    vikashsinghvaibhav1@gmail.com
                         Paper
56.   Vijay Kumar        Sandhya Times      Reporter                                 9204124383
57.   M.A. Shaban        Qaumi Tanzeem      Correspondent         Qaumi Tanzeem Urdu 9470243046    sbnpatna@gmail.com
                         Urdu Daily                               Daily
                                                                   306
SI.     Name of the
                           Address        Designation       Organization    Mobile No.             Email-Id
No.     Participants
                       Sabzibagh, Patna
58. Anurag Pradhan     Prabhat Khabar Reporter          Prabhat Khabar     9472164204    anuragpradhan.ama@gmail.com




                                                         307
                             Annexure – 5.2

Press Clipping Regarding State Validation Workshop held on 26th June, 2014




                                   308
309
310
311
312
313
314
315
