    Implementation of the Land
Governance Assessment Framework
 (LGAF) in the Republic of Croatia

                       – Final Report –




         University of Zagreb, Faculty of Geodesy




       Country Coordinator: Prof. Miodrag Roić, DSc




                      January 2016
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                        Croatia                                     2


                        Table of Contents
TOC
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                        Croatia                                     3

Acknowledgements
LGAF Implementation in the Republic of Croatia would not be possible without active
participation of the many stakeholders in the land governance system. We would like to thank
numerous institutions and individuals for their contribution to certain implementation stages.
The initiative for the implementation came from the World Bank, which was then
enthusiastically accepted by the key institutions within the system – the Ministry of Justice and
the State Geodetic Administration – which are jointly implementing the Organized Land
(Uređena zemlja) project. They were also joined by other public authorities, NGOs and the
private sector during implementation.
We would like to thank the Faculty of Geodesy of the University of Zagreb, where the project
has been implemented, as well as the World Bank Office in the Republic of Croatia for the
support they have provided regarding organization of workshops and panel discussions. I
would especially like to thank the expert investigators who have prepared high-quality reports
for the panel discussions and assessments, as well as numerous participants from all sectors
of the system.
We would like to thank the Government of Japan for their financial support, and the World
Bank coordinators for their coordination, monitoring and consulting of local experts during the
entire project implementation period.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                        Croatia                                     4

Abbreviations



     ALA           Agricultural Land Agency
     PAAFRD        Paying Agency for Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural Development
     LPIS          Land parcel identification system
     ICZM          Integrated coastal zone management
     GDP           Gross domestic product
     SGA           State Geodetic Administration
     JSC           Joint stock company
     DDP           Detailed development plan
     SPMA          State Property Management Administration
     d.o.o.        Limited liability company
     EU            European Union
     MP            General Urban Plan
     CSF           Croatian State Forests
     PPIS          Physical planning information system
     ICZM          Integrated coastal zone management
     LSGU          Local self-government units (towns/municipalities)
     RSGU          Regional self-government units (counties)
     LGAF          Land Governance Assessment Framework
     RDC           Register of Deposited Contracts
     MFIN          Ministry of Finance
     MJ            Ministry of Justice
     PIN           Personal identification number
     MC            Municipal Court
     TA            Tax Administration
     RCO           Regional Cadastre Office
     IUDP          Implementing urban development plan
     RC            Republic of Croatia
     WB            World Bank
     UN            United Nations
     UDP           Urban development plan
     VGGT          Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of
                   Land, Fisheries and Forests
     JIS           Joint information system
     PCA           Protected coastal zone
     AOORR         Act on Ownership and Other Property Rights
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                        Croatia                                     5

Summary
The World Bank and partner institutions have developed LGAF as a diagnostic tool for the
assessment of the legal framework, policies and practices regarding land governance in
individual countries by way of evaluating 117 criteria grouped into 27 indicators and 9 modules.
LGAF helps establish a consensus on priority activities within the land policy, which are to be
carried out regarding land governance. LGAF also helps establish structure and procedures of
continuous monitoring of the land governance improvement over time.
The most important recommendations derived from the implementation of LGAF in Croatia
have been:
a. To align the land situation recorded in the key registers (the cadastre and the land
register) with the actual situation, to conclude the registration of all lands and legal regimes
and thus enable access to reliable information for everyone, and to eliminate redundant
registers.
b. To develop a comprehensive strategy of land governance which will help define a
comprehensive land and housing policy and establish the spatial planning of land and sea
areas, based on the strategy and development programs that take into account sustainable
development.
c. To develop a monitoring system of the spatial situation, within the framework of the key
registers, unique to all sectors, and to publish information on the area situation while
exchanging data between institutions and services.
d. To improve the land resource management, to consolidate land and simplify public land
use activation procedures.
e. To eliminate over-regulation and over-segmentation of regulations, and to unify the
management of original land data (the cadastre and the land register) by creating a more
efficient management structure by means of reducing the number of institutions in charge of
land.
The prerequisite for the implementation of the aforementioned recommendations is to
functionally link the existing registers and institutions. Key land/real estate registers of land/real
estate should be unified and placed under the jurisdiction of a single institution. It is also
necessary to unify various functions of land/real estate management within the framework of
one institution. This would reduce the number of institutions and registers while simultaneously
focusing on the quality of human resources.
The criteria assessment is the result of the discussions of local experts at workshops organised
according to standard panel topics. Based on the official data gathered from numerous
institutions in charge of land, the assessment was conducted by recognised experts from
public authorities, private sector, academic community and NGOs. This implementation phase
does not include workshops for technical inspection and dialogues regarding the policy.
This summary presents the most important results derived from the implementation. Further
information on the implementation is contained in the following chapters. The First chapter
provides basic introductory remarks on LGAF. The Second chapter presents the standard
LGAF methodology. The Third chapter covers general data on Croatia and the situation in the
land sector. The Fourth chapter presents the assessment and considerations for each
individual module. Aside from the standard nine modules, the additional module Coastal Zone
Management was also developed. The Fifth chapter provides the systematised and analysed
results and recommendations, while the sixth chapter presents the conclusions. An
assessment chart for all criteria is given in the supplement, as well as a list of experts who took
part in the panel discussions, the proposal of recommendations for further discussion, and the
final approval at Workshops for technical inspection and dialogues regarding policies.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                        Croatia                                     6

General Data and Information
The Republic of Croatia is a Central-European and a Mediterranean country, bordering with
Slovenia, Hungary, Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Italy (sea border). The
Croatian territory covers 87,661 km2 in total, out of which 56,594 km2 is land. Croatia disposes
over 31,067 km2 of the Adriatic Sea surface. Out of the overall area, 4.3 million hectares have
the common good status, 3.0 million hectares are state-owned, 0.013 million hectares are
owned by the regional/local self-government units and 2.6 million hectares are privately owned.
The population predominantly lives in real estate located on privately-owned land.
Urban areas (38% of the surface area) account for 70% of the population, and rural areas (62%
of the surface area) account for 30% of the population. Forests and forest land account for
45% (2,7 million hectares) of the overall land area of the Republic of Croatia, and agricultural
land accounts for 45% (2,7 million hectares). The Republic of Croatia owns 33% of the overall
agricultural land and 78% of forests and forest land.
According to the 2011 census, the Republic of Croatia has a population of 4,284,889, out of
which 90.42% are Croats, 7.68% are minorities and 1.90% other nations. Croatia faces
population decline, i.e. it has a negative population growth rate. 3.9% of the workforce are
employed in the primary sector (agriculture, forestry and fisheries), 26.2% of the workforce are
employed in the secondary sector (industry, construction, mining) and 69.9% of the workforce
are employed in the tertiary sector (services) (2009). With the GDP of USD 13.020, the
Republic of Croatia belongs to the countries with a high gross domestic product (the Atlas
method for 2013).
On the administrative level, Croatia is divided into units of regional self-government (20
counties and the City of Zagreb which bears a special status), 127 towns and 429
municipalities as units of local self-government. Each have their own representative bodies
(assemblies and councils) and executive authorities (county prefects, mayors and municipal
mayors). Many local self-government units do not have sufficient capacity to perform all
functions within their competence.
During 1990-s the Croatian socialist and half-market economy was transformed into the
system based on private ownership and open market economy, and legislation was adopted
which protects ownership. Social ownership was abolished by new regulations, followed by the
implementation of property restitution and privatisation. Much of the land became state
property (agricultural land and forests) but this has so far not been recorded in official registers.
Land/real estate is registered in the cadastre, which is administered by the competent State
Geodetic Administration, and land/property rights are recorded in the land register, which is
administered by the land registry offices of the municipal courts.
There are also a number of institutions at the national and regional level which are in charge
of specific tasks concerning land data administration and related land interests, as well as land
management. Numerous institutions are spread across different sectors, which makes it
difficult to conduct integrated land governance and it slows down the activation of land for
investments. Public land defined as a public good may be operated only as a concession.
State-owned agricultural land is assigned into long-term lease, and sold only exceptionally.
Land Governance Assessment
Recognition of land rights
Individual legal land interests and succession rights are protected by regulations with respect
to all citizens of the Republic of Croatia without exception, and there is a number of legal
instruments to put protection rights into practice. There are no special provisions for any
specific group. Customary law is no longer a legal source of regulation of real estate legal
relations and there are no specific indigenous groups in need of the establishment of special
rights. All citizens exercise equal rights to land and they can register their rights under equal
conditions. Gender information is not kept in the registers, and it is difficult to obtain precise
information on the number of properties registered to female owners in relation to those
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                        Croatia                                     7

registered to the male ones.
Joint ownership has been individualized and there are appropriate instruments for the
dissolution of co-ownership. All privately owned land is registered and visible in the cadastral
plan. Even though there have been numerous illegal transactions concerning land-property,
present regulations make such actions almost impossible and it is estimated that the number
of current illegal sales and leases is low.
The number of regulations dealing with land ownership is too great and it needs to be reduced.
Improvements can be achieved by introducing a conciliation possibility for the parties in the
process, especially the state and local self-government units. The number of regulations
restricting ownership rights was deemed too great and it was suggested that the entry of legal
regimes in the cadastre should be intensified, pursuant to the regulations, as well as reviewing
the justification of legal regime proclamation, in order to reduce the amount of restrictions to
ownership rights to a reasonable level.
Community forest and communal land rights and regulations on the use of rural land
Forest land and other types of land are clearly defined by law, and responsibility for their use
is clearly stipulated. Hrvatske šume d.o.o. is responsible for the management of state forests,
while the Agency for Agricultural Land is responsible for the management of state-owned
agricultural land. The State Property Management Administration is in charge of the state-
owned real estate in urban areas. There are no common rules and criteria for land classification
and in practice there are overlaps in the interpretation of the types of land. This then makes
the competence questionable (e.g. the same type of land is classified as agricultural land and
forest land). Rights to key natural resources have been regulated but in practice disputes may
arise due to overlapping interests or legal regimes.
Different rights on land plots and the rights to its resources or other resources under the earth's
surface on the same parcel of land may coexist. Most of the resources located underneath
land surface (earth, stone, ores...) are regulated as common goods or state property, and it is
necessary to obtain a concession for their use. The attempt to prevent illegal use is done by
pre-regulated sanctions but they are rarely enforced in practice.
There is no common national strategy for rural development in all sectors. The rural
development program has been recently approved by the European Union, and its
implementation has started. It is necessary to align public goals with ownership right
restrictions regulated by legal regimes. There is no special system of rural land planning, rather
it is included in the general planning system which is implemented publicly and enables the
protection of existing rights. Purpose achievement is slow, often due to unresolved property
claims or outdated registration entries.
Urban Land Use, Planning and Development
Restrictions related to the ownership and use of urban land serve public policy objectives,
where they exist. Disaster risks are taken into account in the planning, but there are numerous
areas built in the past that are at risk and in need of repair. The process of urban sprawl
respects existing rights, and changes in spatial planning are based on the existing public
procedure. Requests for change are often based on the increase in land value which will be
capitalized in the future. There are currently more planned construction areas than needed
and this ought to be adjusted by future plan amendments.
There is no systematic housing policy or cheaper housing policy, only individual examples. In
the past, large cities "overlooked" zones were left behind, which now causes problems in
infrastructure development. Their activation would benefit the development of cities.
Permit issue is clearly defined in the regulations and it is not too expensive. However, due to
outdated register entries and the involvement of numerous institutions for granting approval,
getting a permit can be a lengthy process. By unifying the institutions in charge of land the
whole process could be significantly accelerated. Past illegal construction was legalized by a
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                        Croatia                                     8

special regulation adopted in 2012.
The formalisation of urban housing is feasible and affordable by the registration of
condominium ownership, and it is implemented for all new real estate. For existing real estate,
the registration of condominium ownership has not been carried out, despite several attempts
to legally enforce the registration. The management of complex real estate is efficient. Co-
ownership shares are defined by co-ownership agreements, but they are usually not recorded
in the land register. Until they need a mortgage loan, or for some other reason, owners have
no interest to register their condominium ownership. Most users are content with the registry
into the Register of Deeds which was set up as a temporary solution.
Real, relevant economic and demographic data for the purposes of spatial planning is missing,
and the insufficient monitoring of the land situation is further reinforced by inadequate
standardization of information and terminology between land management sectors. Poor
communication between stakeholders (formal and expert ones) in the procedures of spatial
planning development, and frequent fundamental changes of the spatial planning and
construction system, generate problems in the implementation of regulations. In order to
overcome deficiencies, a standardized spatial situation monitoring system needs to be set up
and analytical functions in the land data storage systems need to be developed. All spatial
plans are available on the Internet but they are not easily searched.
Public Land Management
The lack of reliable official data on public land impedes effective management. Responsibility
for public land management has been assigned unambiguously but inadequate registration
has caused disputes (e.g. between the state and the units of local self-government).
Regulations stipulate the public land identification process, and the management of various
types of land has been awarded to different institutions. Public land has been only partially
registered. Registration of the maritime demesne has started but only a smaller part of the
process has been completed so far. Legal status entries in the land register, for land plots
visible in the cadastre plan, often do not correspond to the situation on the ground. This
complicates management and creates obstacles for investments. Land information is available
on the Internet but its use is restricted due to it being outdated.
Only land deemed to be in the public interest can be expropriated. Before expropriation, priority
is given to agreement with owners, and only in cases where an agreement cannot be reached
does the expropriation come into play. Purchased or expropriated land is quickly placed in
used, and compensation is paid immediately. There are independent and accessible manners
of filing complaints against expropriation but resolutions of these complaints may take a while.
In order to improve public land management it is necessary to update all register entries,
intensify the lease of state-owned agricultural land, and to offer public goods into concession.
The prerequisite for this is up-to-date information on available public land and public disclosure
of land status information (expropriation, purpose, protected area...).
Allocation of Large Tracts of Land to Investors
Due to the high level of fragmentation of land in the Republic of Croatia there are almost no
"big" plots of land available to investors. For the same reason, agricultural production is weak
and it is necessary to start the process of land consolidation and other appropriate measures.
Public land allocation is carried out at market prices, but society has limited benefits from this.
Making land available to investors has been clearly and transparently stipulated by law, but
the process has been difficult due to outdated register entries. Land identification has been
made difficult and requires the cooperation of numerous institutions for each case. Investments
are selected in an open procedure based on the prescribed criteria. In some cases, investors
do not offer enough information for the required assessment of investments, and contractual
obligations are publicly disclosed but not easily assessed. The current concession register has
an insignificant number of entries.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                        Croatia                                     9

Contracts are usually not publicly available, and the monitoring of compliance to
concessionaire guarantees is lacking. Even though regulations stipulate sanctions for
breaches of contract, these are rarely enforced in practice. The development of the payment
control process, applicable to all sectors, along with the publication of all information on
allocated plots of public land, and the sanctioning of non-compliance with contractual
obligations, are all priority actions which need to be taken.
Provision of Public Information on Land: Land Register and Cadastre
Incomplete and outdated entries are assessed as the biggest drawback of the land
management system. Registers which are not up-to-date make it difficult to obtain information
on the relevant spatial status data, and thereby to render appropriate decisions on priority
activities within the land policy. Even though all private land is visible in the cadastre plan, the
legal relations governing them and registered in the land register often do not correspond to
the actual situation. Public land is in a poor state, with many plots still being registered as
socially-owned. This incompleteness can also be seen in the fact that the cadastral plan does
not include the maritime demesne or other legal regimes, even though regulations make it
possible to do so. Public utilities infrastructure, registered as easement, is sporadically entered
in the land register, and a separated register, the Cadastre of Lines, does not come close to
fulfilling its intended role. The registration of condominium ownership for new buildings has
been completed, but there are cases of older, more complex pieces of real estate where this
has not been done.
Mechanisms of the recognition of rights, such as the formalisation of a property uncontested
for a long time, and the use of unwritten evidence, have been allowed in court proceedings.
First entry fees are not high and do not entail informal payments. However, in the case of
outdated entries, the recognition of rights can be a long and complex process.
Cost-effectiveness and sustainability of the land management system services are
questionable because their organizational format is still the same as at the time of their
inception. Even though all data is electronic and should be consolidated in 2016 under the
Joint Information System, the business, the number of offices and employees are still from the
analogue era. The next step is to develop the JIS as a multi-purpose system, by integrating
land information with other registers. Fees have been established in a transparent manner,
service standards have been publicly disclosed, and informal payments are discouraged.
The efficiency of the land registry and land interest system requires system modernization
which can be achieved by structural changes and functional mergers. This implies a
consolidation of the cadastre and the land register, and if possible of other key registers, into
a single governing institution. It should be aimed at market business which can be achieved
by a quicker introduction of electronic business operations and by the recognition of electronic
documents, and the groundwork for this has already been laid (the e-Citizens system).
The introduction of tax on all real estate would reflect well on the update of the register data.
Apart from replacing the current utility charges, it would also contribute to a more regular
reporting of land changes. The current outdated entries in the cadastre, i.e. the land register,
have no effect on the majority of citizens and they are not motivated to change the situation.
By introducing the principle that ownership entitles responsibility, not just rights, but also such
positions would change. Previous attempts to make the reporting of changes on the land a
legal obligation have yielded no results.
Land valuation and taxation
The process of real estate valuation is stipulated according to sectors, and it differs from land
type to land type involved, causing inadequate implementation in practice and leading to
litigation. Real estate is taxed by taxing income from certain types of real estate, the acquisition
of real estate and the ownership tax imposed on some types of real estate. There is no tax on
all real estate. In addition to tax, utility charges are paid for housing and office facilities, which
can be equated to taxation. Collecting utility charges is the responsibility and the income of
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    10

local self-government units and the accounting is based on surface area. Insufficient capacities
are the cause of low collection rates.
Exemptions are covered by regulations, and all taxpayers have their own personal
identification number (OIB). Estimated taxes are collected, and collection costs are low. Value
lists are not publicly disclosed which needs to be change in the future.
Although the current real property taxes and fees have components partially associated with
market value assessment, there is no mass value assessment system based on the monitoring
of the real estate market and market prices. The establishment of mass value assessment of
real estate based on market prices is a priority. A corresponding act was passed in 2015 but
its implementation has still not begun. The act introduces new comprehensive administrative
procedures and new registers which in practice have not proven to be efficient so far. It would
be more convenient to upgrade the existing registers with the mass value assessment system.
Dispute Resolution
For the resolution of land disputes in the Republic of Croatia there are clearly stipulated,
transparent and objective mechanisms, or clearly defined jurisdictions between courts
competent for dispute resolution and other bodies (administrative bodies) that decide in
specific types of dispute in connection to real estate, i.e. proposals for entry into the land
register. In cases when an administrative body is competent for dispute resolution in the first
instance, the protection is provided for in the first-instance administrative courts as the courts
with full jurisdiction. The right to appeal is ensured, and the proceedings are conducted in due
time. There is the possibility of informal dispute resolution, but it is insufficiently encouraged.
There is a significant number of land disputes as well as a large number of long-standing
disputes in the system. However, a large part of these disputes are due to land register entry
alignment. There is a faster and simpler land register correction procedure for the alignment
of land register entries but it is rarely used and it should be promoted more when appropriate,
instead of resorting to litigation.
Organization of Institutions and Policies
All branches of the government, the legislative, the judicial and the executive, are responsible
for the land and the associated land-related policies in the Republic of Croatia, each within
their own powers and competences. Land policy design, implementation and arbitration have
been set up. There is a great number of institutions responsible for land and different land-
related policies, but each one of them within their own scope of competence, and there is very
little coordination. The scope of activities and competence of the public administration bodies
are clearly regulated by law and there is no vertical and horizontal competence overlapping.
Problems appear when there are different interpretations of land types or outdated entries of
land types in the land registers. Almost every public administration body maintains its own
land/real property databases, which are mostly not connected to the cadastre/land register.
Institutions should use the data from key registers and exchange it more, instead of collecting
and keeping multiple pieces of information.
There is no comprehensive land policy for all sectors. Elements of land policy can be found
across individual sector regulations. They have been developed in a participatory manner and
they aim to establish equality as well as take into account ecology, but in a sector-oriented
manner.
Land institutions frequently report on the implementation of their land policy and these reports
are publicly available. Reporting is present, but it differs from one sector to another, which
makes it difficult to compare due to unharmonised approaches to reporting and the
methodologies used.
There is no land governance strategy or a comprehensive land policy, and individual sector
activities are not coordinated. It is necessary to develop a land governance strategy which will
include all sectors, and align sector land policy according to it.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    11

Coastal Zone Management
Sea fishing rights have been legally recognised and combinations with other types of activities
are regulated by law. Fish stock capacities are being estimated and harvesting licences are
aligned with EU regulations.
Specific maritime spatial plans are not being developed. The development process for
maritime spatial planning has been integrated into general spatial planning. The use of the sea
is defined by county spatial plans which steer coastal urban development. Pressure to expand
construction areas is the same as on land and clearly visible here. Unrealistically planned
construction zones will need to be reduced in size.
Spatial plans are developed and changed by the public procedure. Difficulties in obtaining
licences for the use of the sea are caused by the fact that the maritime demesne has not been
properly registered in the cadastre and the land register, and outdated entries are clearly
evident for coastal areas, which makes land identification for permit issue a lengthy process.
The use of the maritime demesne requires a concession, the procedure for which is regulated
by law, but the investors must prepare the documentation for the area by themselves.
A particular challenge for the future spatial planning will be to integrate the previously illegal
construction legalized in 2012. There is a lack of development programs based on sustainable
development that would serve as the basis for spatial planning development, which is a
necessary prerequisite for the sustainable use of maritime resources.
Policy analysis and recommendations
Summary
Land governance in the Republic of Croatia is functioning but it is divided into sectors and
burdened with past legacies which can be seen mostly from outdated cadastre and land
register entries. Land policies and land management are fragmented between institutions with
weak coordination, a lack of common activities and insufficient data exchange. A long-term
lack of maintenance of the cadastre and land register, and their outdated status, have caused
many institutions to keep and maintain their own registers. These registers have not fulfilled
their purpose, they are mostly incomplete and less up-to-date than the cadastre/land register.
Since they mostly contain data that should be officially registered in the cadastre/land register
this means users feel even more uncertain. The lack of land information of good quality is one
of the reasons why a large amount of land, especially sate-owned land, is not operational.
Land management improvement is required according to almost all LGAF modules. Updating
the cadastre and land register entries with the actual situation is the number one priority.
The estimated mismatch of around 50% of entries is a burden for any future land governance
activities. Supplementing key registers with data which will ensure monitoring of the actual
situation for all sectors is a prerequisite for any serious analyses of the state of land resources
which will serve as the basis for future planning. Public land management needs to be
improved by activating inactive land parcels. In order to achieve this, agricultural land needs
to be consolidated. Excessive fragmentation of the governance framework requires a
functional merger of institutions and the development of a comprehensive strategy for
the land sector.
Analysis and priority-based recommendations
The most important recommendation derived from the implementation of the LGAF is to finish
the cadastre/land register data update with the actual situation information Since all data is
electronic, soon to be part of the Joint Information System, it serves as a good basis for this
process. Outdated information from the socialist period is being updated through many
projects. Cadastral changes are the best form of renewal, but this is a long process which
cannot be achieved soon. The possibility of individual updates is not promoted even though it
has yielded good results in other countries. It is obligatory to register all land changes in the
cadastre, but not in the land register. By introducing mandatory registration of every transaction
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    12

we could accelerate the update process. Public land is the least up-to-date sector. The
registration of all types of state property and legal regimes should be intensified, thus enabling
a quicker activation of land. Special measures need to be put in place in order to oblige
competent institutions to update their cadastre and land register data, and this should be a
priority in cases where social ownership is still registered.
The management and maintenance of land data should be improved by upgrading the JIS and
interoperability should be ensured in order for all sectors to have access to information. Since
the late 19th century, all land plots have been registered in the cadastre and land register of the
Republic of Croatia. Only this information is insufficient for efficient land governance today.
Data on communal public infrastructure, which is being inefficiently kept in the Cadastre of
Lines, needs to be integrated into the cadastre, i.e. implemented in the Joint Information
System, and there is need of technically more advanced maintenance of complex real estate
data (with apartments and office space). Information on real estate value is also important, not
just for tax purposes. The Joint Information System needs to become the centre of
maintenance and management of official land data by physically integrating or logically linking
the existing registers. A clear, single management structure needs to be put in place, and all
factors of land governance must become a part of it. By combining this with other factors of
the national infrastructure of spatial information, we will create a synergy of development
possibilities for the user-oriented geo-portals that will be based on official data, which has not
been the case so far.
Reforming institutions, by reducing their number, along with their adjustment to e-business,
must be implemented. The key land and land rights registers, the cadastre and land register
are all within the competence of different institutions, which causes uncoordinated approaches.
On a technical level, there are attempts to overcome difficulties by implementing the JIS, but
the management structure is ineffective. The land data maintenance (the cadastre, land
register and other registers) needs to be joined in one institution which will have an efficient
management structure. This institution also needs to be in charge of other registers, most of
which are redundant. This will reduce costs at all levels and enable self-financing for the
registers. A reduction in the number of institutions granting land consents would help the
economy and accelerate obtaining of permits. Human resources for land management are
unevenly distributed, which can also be solved by unifying institutions into a single institution
and by internal redistribution. Data from land governance services need to be included in the
basic e-business service for citizens, e-Građani/e-Citizens, run by the public authorities. The
e-Građani/e-Citizens platform includes a One Stop Shop of the Joint Information System, but
for the time being with low functionality. It is especially recommended to encourage data
exchange between institutions in charge of land governance by establishing a data exchange
system and coordinating bodies to discourage keeping of special separate registers.
The integrity of the land governance system needs to be improved by developing a strategy
which will include all sectors. The majority of land governance activities in the Republic of
Croatia are carried out across the sectors. Many sectors have good results, but due to weak
inter-sector cooperation, they do not contribute to common goals. Umbrella institutions are
lacking, as well as basic documentation which would serve as the basis for coordinated
planning of individual activities. This comprehensive strategy should serve as the basis for
sector strategies and for the definition of a comprehensive land and housing policy. These
need to be based on reliable official land data.
Spatial planning, of the land and sea, should be based on a comprehensive strategy and
development programs which were made by taking into account sustainability and
environmental protection. Land development planning has a long tradition and is well
developed. The currently valid generation of all spatial plans has been made recently and their
changes are soon to follow. To develop a new generation of spatial plans, we must ensure
quality and reliable data on the spatial situation, which would accelerate permit issue. The
prescribed criteria need to be applied through the use of development programs which need
to be made beforehand.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    13

Inactive land and real estate, especially under state authority, needs to be activated by
improving the land management system. The many legal regimes restrict owners in use and
management. The number and scope of restrictions is too great and often achieves the
opposite effect. Instead of having the resource preserved, the use of such resource is
abandoned and it is left to deteriorate. We need to review the justification of ownership
limitations by way of legal regimes and protected areas, and reduce limitations where possible.
Competent institutions must cooperate better in cases of overlapping. Much of the arable land
is uncultivated due to the unfavourable ownership structure which discourages its use. Land
allocation procedures are clear but competent institutions need to ensure that interested
investors have all the data on available resources. Family farms and investors are in need of
land, but they get it slowly. It is also necessary to ensure monitoring of the use, the compliance
of contractual obligations, and the collection of charges for public land use.
The suggested activities need to be implemented in the legislation which should be reviewed
in term s of segmentation. The comprehensive land governance legislative framework is
fragmented, it contains many detailed regulations, but it rarely defines state-of-the art
technologies and procedures in the electronic environment. It should be upgraded in that
context. A detailed analysis of cross-sectoral regulatory overlap can help remove excessive
segmentation and over-standardisation. Land types for all sectors should be unified, in order
to ease the identification of types in the regulations and in practice. Misdemeanour sanctions
and oversight inspection have been regulated in detail but sometimes there is a lack of
resources for their implementation, thus it is necessary to re-examine this with the aim to
improve implementation. The maintenance and management of land data, the registers and
the competent institution can be organized more efficiently under one legal act. Also, an
umbrella institution should be established for land management.
A review of property duties and the introduction of real estate tax are also needed. The existing
duties and real estate tax do not stimulate the use of property because as a rule, only real
estate in use is taxed. There are no obligations for real estate use and investment in real estate
is often considered a type of "savings". The introduction of real estate tax, which need not be
significant, should replace the current duties and stimulate the use of land. Furthermore, the
introduction of tax on all real estate would produce a positive effect on the process of updating
the cadastre and the land register, and on the development of the real estate mass valuation
system.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    14

1. Introduction
The Republic of Croatia is a Central-European and a Mediterranean country, an EU member
state with the population of 4,284,889 according to the 2011 census and its territory covers 8.8
million hectares, one third of which is water. Out of the 8.8 million hectares of its total area,
4.3 million hectares have the common good status, 3.0 million hectares are state-owned, 0.013
million hectares are owned by the regional/local self-government units and 2.6 million hectares
are privately owned. Croatia's natural growth rate of the population is negative and amounts
to – 0,22%. 3.9% of the workforce is employed in the primary sector (agriculture, forestry and
fisheries), 26.2% of the workforce is employed in the secondary sector (industry, construction,
mining) and 69.9% of the workforce is employed in the tertiary sector (services). Croatia
belongs to the countries with a high gross domestic product.
Growth of the real estate market in the developing countries and economic needs for land
necessary for development have caused significant pressure on the land governance system
in the Republic of Croatia. Radical changes to the legislation after the country's independence
have posed new demands on the cadastre and the land register as the key parts of the land
governance system. Due to their outdated entries, they represent an obstacle to the market
and the real estate market development on account of their outdated entries. Since 2003, the
Government of the Republic of Croatia, through the Ministry of Justice and the State Geodetic
Administration, has been implementing a program for their improvement, known as Organized
Land (Uređena zemlja).
Projects which are to contribute to the development and modernization of the land
administration are being implemented within the aforementioned program. The use of
adequate technologies and development of business procedures should ensure an efficient
functioning of the system and updating of the recorded data. The implementation of the Joint
Information System (JIS) for Land Registry and Cadastre has ensured a high degree of
cooperation with the aim of stronger correlation and better exchange of real property data.
Even though certain results have already been achieved, the land administration system is still
not at the desired level. Therefore, upon the initial installation and data migration, the system
is constantly being improved so as to support the land governance. In addition to issues related
to land administration, in order to improve the land sector, a wider context of the land
governance has to be taken into account, so the World Bank has initiated implementation of
the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of Croatia.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    15

2. Methodology
The Land Governance Assessment Framework is a diagnostic tool for the evaluation of status
of the land governance at the state level. Participation of a wide range of reliable local experts
and a comprehensive understanding of the assessment objective form the basis for a
successful implementation. Moreover, the assessment is based on data and facts collected
during the preparation process.
The Land Governance Assessment Framework helps compare individual countries' programs
with the global good practice in certain areas important for good land governance, especially
with regard to the manner of defining rights over land and the acquisition and transfer of those
rights, the manner of implementing public control over the use, management and taxation of
the land, the manner of defining state-owned land and the manner of its management by the
state, the manner in which a land becomes state-owned and the manner of selling such land
and of managing and accessing land information, dispute resolution and responsibilities of
officials, as well as procedures related to land investments.
LGAF helps establish a consensus on priority activities within the land policy, which are to be
carried out regarding land governance. LGAF also helps establish structure and procedures of
continuous monitoring of the land governance improvement over time.
The World Bank and partner institutions have developed LGAF as a diagnostic tool for the
assessment of the legal framework, policies and practices regarding land governance in
individual countries by way of evaluating 117 criteria grouped into 27 indicators and 9 modules.
Local experts implement the LGAF during a short period of time, i.e. during a few months,
using the existing official data, surveys, results of their own investigations and other
information.
A Country Coordinator coordinates the implementation and chooses expert investigators
competent for certain modules. In the introductory phase the Country Coordinator establishes
contact with the most important state institutions and provides contact details of a person
providing data and information necessary for implementation. The Country Coordinator
manages land typology development and overview of institutions as the basis for further
activities.
On the basis of their own findings, land typology and institutions overview, experts and
investigators prepare status reports on the modules as a material for panel discussions, using
previously collected data of various institutions dealing with land governance.
The final assessments of individual criteria are presented at panel discussions hosting 4-10
experts. In order for the experts to prepare for the panel, the Country Coordinator provides
them with the LGAF Implementation Manual (the part relating to the panel – definitions), the
Land Typology and Institutions Overview, the Status Report, which are all prepared by expert
investigators, as well as a form of the evaluation table. Prior to each panel discussion, the
participants present their own assessments and submit them to the coordinator.
Following the presentation of each individual criterion by expert investigators and their
proposed assessment, the panel is opened for discussion and the participant harmonize the
final assessment of the criteria. Following the discussion on individual criteria, the participants
discuss the panel findings and present their suggestions for future land policies.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    16

3. The Implementation of LGAF
The Faculty of Geodesy of the University of Zagreb was entrusted with LGAF implementation
in the Republic of Croatia, under the coordination of Prof. Miodrag Roić. The implementation
began in February 2015. A draft final report was completed in October 2015. The Country
Coordinator had organized and monitored translation of all LGAF documents into Croatian,
and the translations were then distributed to all LGAF participants.
A consultation interview was conducted with the Head of the State Geodetic Administration,
who has appointed his deputy, Mr. Vladimir Majetić, as the contact person of the LGAF project
team. The initial presentation of LGAF to government officials in charge of land governance,
as the key participant, was conducted in the World Bank Office in Zagreb on 22 April 2015.
The presentation was held by the Country Coordinator, with the participation of expert
investigators and David Eigashvili, the WB LGAF Coordinator. The collection of data required
for assessment was explained in detail to contact persons of competent institutions, which has
resulted in a timely delivery of quality data used for the assessment. Following the assessment,
the draft final report was prepared in coordination with expert investigators.
This implementation phase does not include workshops for technical inspection and dialogues
regarding the policy.
3.1   General Data and Information
The Republic of Croatia is a Central-European and a Mediterranean country, bordering with
Slovenia, Hungary, Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Italy (sea border).
According to the 2011 census, it has the population of 4,284,889, out of which 90.42% are
Croats, 7.68% are minorities and 1.90% other nations. Croatia's population is shrinking i.e. it
has a negative population rate of –0.2% (2005 – 10) due to its negative natural population
growth rate (–0.22% in 2011).
Life expectancy is 72.9 years for men and 79.6 for women (2009). 3.9% of the workforce are
employed in the primary sector (agriculture, forestry and fisheries), 26.2% of the workforce are
employed in the secondary sector (industry, construction, mining) and 69.9% of the workforce
are employed in the tertiary sector (services) (2009).
With the GDP of USD 13.020, the Republic of Croatia belongs to the countries with a high
gross domestic product (the Atlas method for 2013). The economy has a negative GDP growth
rate and has been in recession since 2009. A quarterly growth in GDP was realized for the first
time in 2015, indicating a possible end of the recession. The Croatian territory covers 87,661
km2 in total, out of which 56,594 km2 is land. Croatia disposes over 31,067 km2 of the Adriatic
Sea surface.
Croatia is predominantly a lowland country. Lowlands (terrain below 200 m of absolute altitude)
cover 53.4% of the territory, hills (200 to 500 m of absolute altitude) cover 25.6% of the territory,
while mountains (above 500 m of absolute altitude) cover 21.0 % of the Croatian territory. Its
horse-shoe shape indicates the importance of the Pannonian and the littoral part, which are
mainly interconnected by the carst mountainous area. The Croatian coast is 5835.3 km long,
out of which 1,777.3 km (30.5% of the total coast) is land coast and 4,058.0 km (69.5%) is
insular coast. Such indented coastline is globally known as the Dalmatian coast (islands,
shoreline and mountains run parallel). Croatia has 718 islands and islets, 389 cliffs (always
above sea level) and 78 reefs (below, al the level with or, during low tide, above sea level).
Around 50 islands are permanently inhabited, with the population of 120,625.
Most of Croatia has a moderate continental climate, the mountainous areas (Velebit, Risnjak,
Snježnik) have the mountain climate, whereas the coast and the hinterland have the
Mediterranean climate. The Northern Adriatic (Istria, the Croatian Littoral) and the wider
Dalmatian Hinterland (Zagora) have the transitional sub-Mediterranean climate. The Croatian
plant life is characterised by great biological diversity or biodiversity, phytogeographical
distinctiveness and phytogeographical diversity, which represent the impact of the today's
  Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                        Croatia                                    17

ecological circumstances and consequences of changes throughout the geological history.
During 1990-s the Croatian socialist and half-market economy was transformed into the
system based on private ownership and open market economy. This transition has been
slowed down and made more difficult since August 1991 because of the Greater-Serbian
aggression and adjustments of the economic policy to the defence needs. The Constitution of
the Republic of Croatia was adopted and entered into force on 22 December 1990. Major
amendments to the Constitution followed on 9 November 2000, on 28 March 2001 and in 2010.
The Constitutional amendments of 2000 replaced the semi-presidential system with the
parliamentary system. The Croatian political system is based on the principle of separation of
powers into legislative, executive and judiciary powers. It is guaranteed by the Constitution
that the people elect their political representatives by vote and direct election. The right to local
and regional self-government is also guaranteed.
On 1 July 2013 Croatia became the 28th full Member State of the European Union.
Geographical position of Zagreb, Rijeka, Split and Osijek, their size and the existence of
various central institutions are the basis for regional division of Croatia into the Zagreb, Osijek,
Rijeka and Split macro-regions. On the administrative level, Croatia is divided into 20 counties
and the City of Zagreb (bearing a special status), 127 towns and 429 municipalities. Local self-
government units are municipalities and towns, and they perform activities regarding direct
fulfilment of citizens' needs in the area of spatial and urban development of communities,
housing, utility activities, social care, primary healthcare, childcare, education and primary
education, culture etc. Counties are units of regional state administration and local self-
government, and they perform activities of regional importance.
3.2    LGAF Adjustment
The applicability of LGAF has been analysed in the preparatory stage of the LGAF
implementation, with regard to specific characteristics of the Republic of Croatia. The
significance of the maritime areas for Croatia was identified, as well as the lack of criteria
relating to specific characteristics of those areas, and it was agreed to prepare an additional
module – coastal zone management. Criteria for assessing the fisheries, which is an integral
part of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries
and Forests (VGGT), are especially lacking, and this module will contribute to harmonizing
LGAF with VGGT. Criteria for the development and fisheries have been developed in the said
module and, subsequently, assessed using the standard LGAF methodology.
Definition analysis has shown that these, too, can fully apply in the Republic of Croatia. The
lack of definition of the “common good“ legal regime has been observed. Land with this status
is public land. However, it is different form public land in as much as it cannot be subject to
ownership rights, so a new term and definition have been proposed:

Term   Definition
Common Lands which, according to their characteristics, cannot be subject to ownership rights and other property rights,
good   but are rather used by everyone, and cannot be subject to ownership right (freehold etc.). The state takes care of
       those areas, is liable for them and manages them mainly through concessions.


A preliminary overview of the criteria has established that all of them can apply in the Republic
of Croatia. However, it was concluded at the panel discussion during the panel 1 that the
criterion: Rights of indigenous people on lands and forests are prescribed and protected in
practice (LGI1, D3) is not relevant and it has remained unassessed.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    18




3.3   Expert Investigators
Once the Country Coordinator had carried out a detailed analysis of the LGAF documentation,
expert investigators were selected and asked to participate in the drafting of the study. A local
expert was identified according to the specificities of each module, as a person with the most
knowledge and experience in that field (Table 1).
Experts independent of political structures were selected in order to make the assessments
independent from the political influence. The selected experts are renowned in their respective
fields and have been investigating and publishing papers for a longer period of time.
Table 1 Expert investigators per module
      Module                                            Expert Researcher
 1    Recognition of land rights
 2    Community forest and communal land rights         Prof. Tatjana Josipović, DSc
      and regulations on the use of rural land
 3    Urban land use, planning and development          Assist. Prof. Silvio Bašić, DSc
 4    Public land management
                                                        Blaženka Mičević, MSc
 5    Allocation of large tracts of land to investors
 6    Provision of public information on land: land
                                                        Ivan Novak
      register and cadastre
 7    Land valuation and taxation                       Assist. Prof. Hrvoje Tomić, DSc
 8    Dispute resolution
                                                        Damir Kontrec
 9    Organization of institutions and policies
 10   Coastal Zone Management                           Ivica Trumbić, MSc


All expert investigators have carefully studied the LGAF documentation and have given
consent for their participation. On 17 February 2015 a workshop was held with the selected
expert investigators at the Faculty of Geodesy, where discussions were held on document
translations, definitions and land typology, as well as the overview of institutions. David
Eigashvili, World Bank consultant, has also participated in the workshop, providing assistance
to local experts regarding LGAF and answering questions.
In the days following the workshop, the World Bank Coordinator presented the modules in
more detail to each expert investigator in individual meetings held with them. In the workshop
week, the World Bank Coordinator and the Country Coordinator held a highly useful meeting
with the Deputy Head of the State Geodetic Administration (Vladimir Majetić). For the
preparation of reports for the panels, expert investigators have used the collected data and
have subsequently held interviews with relevant stakeholders in the land governance system.
3.4   Panels
Panel experts have been selected on the basis of the Country Coordinator experience and in
agreement with individual expert investigators. Experts proposed by the WB Coordinator and
the World Bank Office in the RC have also been invited. Representatives of various
stakeholders in the land governance system (state administration, regional and local self-
government, state-owned companies, civil society associations, private sector and
universities) have also been invited to participate in the panel.
10 experts were invited per each panel. Between June and August 2015, 10 panel meetings
were held in the World Bank office in Zagreb. David Eigashvili, the World Bank Coordinator,
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    19

was present at the first three panel meetings.
Turnout for panel discussions was good (Table 2) and, on average, 6-7 experts participated in
the discussion and assessment. The participants' general impression was that some criteria
are mostly focused on less developed countries, to which Croatia also belongs. Therefore, the
strictness when assessing individual criteria should be considered in the context of the total
development of the assessed country.


The representatives of different groups have all contributed to insightful discussions. Views
and opinions were sometimes very different. Well-argued discussions have achieved
consensus on assessments.
3.5   Land Types
The Croatian territory (Figure 1) can be divided according to ownership rights (Figure 2). Out
of the c. 8.8 million hectares of its total area, 4.3 million hectares have the common good
status, 3.0 million hectares are state-owned, 0.013 million hectares are owned by the
regional/local self-government units and 2.6 million hectares are privately owned. The
population predominantly lives in real estate located on privately-owned land.

                                                    Privatno vlasništvo - 29.21%                Opća dobra -
                                                                                                  36.43%




                                                                                   Zemljišta u državnom
                                                   Zemljišta u vlasništvu
                                                                                    vlasništvu - 34.21%
                                                          jedinica
                                                     regionalne/lokalne
                                                    samouprave - 0.15%


  Figure 1. Lands of the Republic of Croatia      Figure 2. Basic division of lands according
                                                             to ownership rights
According to the LGAF classification, urban areas cover 2.2 million hectares, with the
population of around 3.0 million. Rural areas cover around 3.5 million hectares, with the
population of 1.3 million (Figure 3).
Some of special legal regimes cover a significant area of the RC. Water areas cover 7.0 million
hectares, agricultural land covers 2.7 million hectares, protected areas cover 0.7 million
hectares, protected coastal zone covers 0.8 million hectares, forests and community forests
cover 2.7 million hectares, hunting grounds cover 2.2 million hectares and fishing zones cover
5.5 million hectares (Figure 4). It is evident from the above that many legal regimes overlap,
which sometimes causes difficulties in determining management capacities.
Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                      Croatia                                    20

                                                        mil. hectares                                100%
                                Urbana područja                   10                79.92%
                                     - 38.65%
                                 (Stanovništvo -                   8                            61.91%
                                     70.39%)                       6
                                                                   4        30.6%       30.53%
                                                                                            24.88%
                                                                   2    9.27%   8.19%
                                                                   0

    Ruralna područja - 61.35%
     (Stanovništvo - 29.61%)




   Figure 3. Relationship between                  Figure 4. Lands covered by special legal regimes
urban and rural areas and population
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    21

4. Land Governance Assessment
This chapter describes the assessment of land governance status in Croatia, organized per
modules, indicators and criteria.
4.1   Recognition of land rights
The fundamental regulation governing real property rights is the Constitution of the Republic
of Croatia. The Constitution is followed by general legislation in the field of law of obligations
and property law, as well as many special regulations for individual types of real property or
contractual relationships. Court decisions do not have the power of precedent like in Anglo-
American legal systems. However, court decisions represent an important source for
interpretation of legal provisions governing real property rights, particularly in cases when legal
provisions are unclear, incomplete or contain certain legal standards whose interpretation
requires the definition of specific criteria applicable to individual disputes in practice.
The regulation of real property relations in the Republic of Croatia, including rural land
relations, is based on a principal rule that legal relations are regulated by general and special
laws, while former regulations, case law and legal theory are considered as additional sources
for the regulation of such relations. The customary law in the Republic of Croatia may not be
considered as a separate source of law for regulating real property rights.
Contract and property rights on rural land are regulated by laws in compliance with the
Constitution of the Republic of Croatia and subordinate acts adopted on the basis thereof.
Freehold is considered a constitutional right within the framework of economic, social and
cultural constitutional rights, and ownership right has been declared one of the highest values
of the constitutional order of the Republic of Croatia.
The Croatian property law belongs to the family of continental European legal orders
developed mostly under the influence of Austrian and German law. In the Croatian property
law, there is no system of property rights characteristic for common law orders. In line with the
principle of numerus clausus, all property rights are prescribed by law.
After the Republic of Croatia gained its independence and introduced the market economy,
the regulation of land rights has experienced radical changes. During the period Croatia was
a part of the socialist legal order, land rights have undergone significant changes in both
content and structure. Ownership was based on the concept of collectivism. The regulation of
property rights was segmented. On the one hand, two very different general forms of property
law were established – social ownership and private ownership. On the other hand, a number
of specific property rights were established for particular types of land, such as construction
land, agricultural land and forest land. Many things, in particular real properties, were under
social ownership (e.g. construction land, agricultural land, forests, buildings, flats and the like).
The most important steps in the reform of land rights were the ﬁnal abolition of social ownership
and its transformation into private ownership, as well as the return to traditional principles on
which property laws in continental Europe are based (the principle of superficies solo cedit,
principle of protection of trust in legal transactions, principle of social obligations arising from
ownership rights, etc.). Social ownership underwent transformation immediately after Croatia
gained its independence, and transformation from social into private ownership was carried
out on different legal grounds.
The process of transformation included restitution, whereby property that had been
nationalized and confiscated was returned to its former owners. The process of transformation
formally ended with the adoption of the Act on Ownership and Other Property Rights
(hereinafter: the OA). This Act re-established the legal unity of real estate for all real property
under the former social ownership for which it was abandoned.
In fact, the Act on Ownership and Other Property Rights explicitly prescribes that a real
property consists of the land plot, including everything that is reasonably permanently affixed
to it on the surface or below it. Anything that is erected on, above or below the surface, and
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    22

the purpose of which is to remain there permanently, or anything that is built into the real
property, added to it or built onto it, or joined to the real property in any other way, is part of
such real property until it is separated from it. In that way the legislator eliminated doubts and
different interpretations of the definition of real property in case law and commercial practice,
and real property transactions have become significantly easier. The subject of legal
transactions may be only a single real property because all that is permanently connected with
any land, whether on or underneath its surface, shares its legal destiny.
The abolition of social ownership and establishment of a legal system based on only one type
of ownership (private ownership) and a return to the principle of unity of real property required
special regulation to provide for the transition of existing social ownership to the new property
law system.
The regulation of that transition presented one of the most complex tasks in the property law
reform for which, because of specific rights on socially owned property, no corresponding
model could be found in foreign legal orders. It was necessary to establish a transitory system
with maximum recognition of the principles of acquired subjective rights over socially owned
property, which required very detailed regulation of the transitional system. Rights over socially
owned property were transformed into the right of ownership whereby their holder is known.
However, despite the fact that transformation was carried out ex lege, such an approach could
not remove all problems that existed in the functioning of the land register system. In many
cases, land registers were not aligned with the actual legal status of real property. This was
mostly a result of total marginalization of the role of the land register during the socialist period.
Any legal disposition of real property was at that time mostly performed without registration in
the land register, which was in practice tolerated by the courts which recognized the legal
effects of such disposition.
In the meantime major changes in the legal status of real property due to the transformation of
social ownership occurred. These changes also needed to be registered in the land register.
The unconditional application of the rules on protecting trust immediately after the entry into
force of the OA could have resulted in losing the already acquired rights that were, for various
(more or less justified) reasons, not registered or registered incorrectly in the land register.
Consequently, the legislator decided to postpone application of the rules on protecting trust in
the land register and allow holders of rights on real property to register their rights. The
postponement of the protection of trust surely cannot be viewed as a measure corresponding
with the establishment of efficient real property transactions adjusted to the needs of market
economy. This is unfortunately necessary but it requires further research on unregistered rights
for every transaction.
LGI 1: Continuum of rights guaranteed by regulations
The basic feature of regulating real property rights in Croatia is the multitude of regulations
governing those rights. At this moment, numerous regulations governing real property rights,
which are of different level, different scope and different level of generality, coexist in the
Croatian legal order. Therefore, in each specific case when it is required to regulate a specific
legal relationship involving real property in practice, it is important to identify in what segment
general regulations and in what segment special regulations apply. On the other hand, in some
cases a particular legal relationship related to rural land will fall under the scope of several
special regulations, so in each specific case it is necessary to establish in what way and in
what segment a particular special regulation is applied and what is the mutual relationship
between several special regulations.
The principle of non-discrimination on any grounds applies with regard to acquiring, exercising
and protecting rights on real property. The only exceptions are certain restrictions for foreigners
acquiring ownership over particular types of real property. In principle, foreign natural and legal
persons are equal to domestic persons in their position as holders of property rights.
Foreigners may be owners of movable property and holders of all limited property rights on
immovable and movable property under the same conditions as domestic persons. The only
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    23

difference for domestic holders of property rights is related to acquiring ownership of real
property. In addition to general conditions for acquisition that must also be met by domestic
persons when acquiring real property, citizens and legal persons from non-EU Member States
must fulfil particular special conditions – reciprocity and approval of the Minister of Justice.
Ownership may be restricted or rescinded only subject to compensation of the market value.
In addition, ownership may exceptionally be restricted by law in order to protect the interests
and safety of the Republic of Croatia, nature, human environment and health, whereby each
restriction must be proportional with the needs for limitation in each particular case. Such
restrictions are predominantly used for protection of real property and other things that enjoy
special protection of the Republic of Croatia. In fact, the Constitution proclaims that the sea,
seashore, islands, waters, air space, mineral resources and other natural assets, as well as
land, forests, flora and fauna, other components of the natural environment, real property and
items of particular cultural, historical, economic or ecological significance may be specified by
law to be of interest to the Republic of Croatia and enjoy its special protection. In such cases
a special law regulates the manner in which any assets of interest to the Republic of Croatia
may be used and exploited, while owners are entitled to compensation regulated by law for
any restrictions of ownership.
Nevertheless, with regard to the possibility for certain things to be the subject matter of the
right of ownership, the OA differentiates between things (chattels, real property) that can be
the subject matter of the right of ownership and the so-called common things/goods for which
it is explicitly prescribed that they cannot be subject to ownership or any other property rights
of any person. Common goods are things which in view of their natural characteristics cannot
be in the control of any natural person or legal entity individually, although they can serve for
common purposes i.e. for everyone's use, such as the air and water in rivers, lakes and the
sea, as well as the seashore. Unless provided otherwise by a separate law, the Republic of
Croatia takes care, administers and is responsible for common goods. The economic use of
real property classified as common goods is regulated by concessions on individual common
goods governed by separate laws. Based on a concession, the concessionaire may own
buildings and other structures erected on a common thing, but only for the duration of the
concession concerned.
In the Croatian law, real property owned by public law bodies are called common goods. The
Republic of Croatia and other public law bodies are, as holders of the right of ownership on
common goods, equal to private owners, unless provided otherwise by law. Disposition,
administration and use of real property in public ownership is regulated by special laws (e.g.
on agricultural land, forests, water, etc.).
Considering the specific use of a particular real property, with regard to different legal relations
it is possible that several different special regulations apply simultaneously to that real
property. A whole series of real property legal regimes is regulated by special regulations, such
as the Agricultural Land Act, the Water Act, the Forestry Act, the Nature Protection Act, the
Islands Act, the Environmental Protection Act, the Hunting Act, the Mining Act, the Act on the
Protection and Preservation of Cultural Goods, the Roads Act, the Act on Lease and Sale of
Business Premises, the Apartment Lease Act etc.
The coexistence between those special regulations and the general legislation on property law
(OA) is governed by the principle lex specialis derogat lex generali. For real property rights for
which a special law prescribes a specific legal regime, the provisions of the OA on property
rights, their protection, exercise and termination apply subordinately, if and to the extent that
the special law does not provide otherwise and unless contrary to such special legislation. If a
special law prescribes something specific for a particular type of land, the provisions of that
special law apply.
Regulations relating to legal governance of rural land apply to the entire population of the
Republic of Croatia, i.e. to all land owners, and they represent the basis for the protection of
those rights for all holders of rights on rural land. At a normative or practical level, there are no
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    24

discriminations on any grounds regarding the protection of rights on urban or rural land.
Personal scope of regulations on the rights on land is in no way restricted only to a certain
population, to certain groups of population or only to groups of population living on a certain
area.
Legal land relations in the Republic of Croatia are not governed by customary law. The
Republic of Croatia does not recognize special rules governing rights of indigenous people on
land and forests. All rules apply to all owners and there are not special rules governing rights
on land with regard to certain groups.
LGI 2: Respect and enforcement of rights
Procedures for individualization of rights on land are governed by laws clearly prescribing the
manner of establishing the content of certain right. The procedure of entering data into public
registers is also explicitly prescribed in a transparent manner. Person authorized to initialize
the procedure is clearly prescribed, as well as documents required for the entry, procedure of
public bodies carrying out the entry and legal remedies for the protection in such procedures.
The law makes a clear distinction of competencies for carrying out individual entries into
different public registers. Possible problems arising in practice when carrying out individual
entries are the consequence of outdated data in the land register and the cadastre, as well as
of incomplete documentation serving as the basis for the entries. However, in cases when the
documentation does not fulfil all the formal prerequisites for carrying out a regular procedure
(e.g. for an individual correction procedure), rights can be entered in a specially regulated
procedure by using special procedural rules.
All lands covered by the ownership regime are entered in the cadastre, and land registers have
not been established for only 220 cadastre municipalities (around 5% of the area). However,
data on owners are often not harmonized in the land register with the actual legal status. Entry
of common good lands has only recently begun and a small number of those lands has been
entered in the cadastre. Attempts of a systematic entry have not yielded any results and entries
are being carried out in individual cases of awarding concessions.
Real property ownership cannot be acquired on the basis of an invalid purchase and sales
agreement because validity of the purchase and sales agreement is the only prerequisite for
acquiring ownership on the basis of a legal transaction. Rules have been established in such
a was so as to minimize the possibility of concluding illegal sales and purchases or leases and,
in case of an invalid agreement, there are mechanisms in place for pronouncing such
agreements void or cancelling them, and the number of illegal sales/leases is low.
There is no sex discrimination in the Republic of Croatia for the acquisition of ownership or any
other land right. Such discrimination is prohibited by the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia,
Land rights do not differ depending on the right holder. Rights are entered for the benefit of the
right holder, regardless of their age, sex, gender, ethnicity, religion etc. Data on sex of the
registered persons are not entered in the cadastre and land register, and it is not possible to
give the exact information on entries.
Furthermore, the regulation of land rights is characterized by high segmentation of legislation,
that is, the existence of a whole series of special laws governing specific legal regimes for
individual types of land. The basic reason for that is the legislator's decision to designate a
large number of real properties as properties of interest to the Republic of Croatia and to
regulate a special legal regime for them, from which specific obligations and limitations of
ownership arise for owners of such real property. However, in some cases in practice it is a
problem to establish which of the special regimes is relevant and for which segment of land
rights.
Pursuant to the above, it would be useful to establish an optimal relation between general and
special regulations regarding real property in order to solve problems arising due to
segmentation of legal regimes regarding real property rights. It would also be useful to consider
ways of reforming rules for the harmonization of land register status with the actual legal status
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    25

of real property resulting from the transformation of social ownership and establishment of
legal unity of real property.
In this regard it would be useful to separately regulate prerequisites for entries in cases when
entries are carried out on the basis of old clausula intabulandi not meeting all general and
special prerequisites regulated by land register legislation in force. Those prerequisites should
be regulated in such a way so as to prescribe special procedural rules for the court to act upon
in order to establish the appropriateness of clausula intabulandi for the entry in order to speed
up the procedure.


4.1.1   Findings and recommendations
                 Findings                                      Recommendation
 Segmentation of land regulations              Reduce the number of acts dealing with land
 Slow entry of transformed social              Accelerate the procedures and introduce a
 ownership                                     conciliation possibility for parties in the process,
                                               especially the state and local self-government
                                               units
 All land is entered in the cadastre/land      Enable a faster registration of the actual
 register, but the status often does not       situation using adequate procedures
 correspond to the actual situation
 Special legal regimes often overlap,          Encourage the entry of legal regimes into the
 which is slowing down the decision-           cadastre pursuant to regulations and consider
 making due to the involvement of              the justification of pronouncing legal regimes
 several institutions and inaccessibility of
 legal regimes data
 There are too many legal restrictions of      Deprive restrictions of ownership rights to a
 ownership rights – legal regimes              reasonable level
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    26




4.2   Community forest and communal land rights and regulations on the use of
      rural land
LGI 1: Rights in forest and communal lands
The legal regime of forests and forest land is governed by the Forestry Act, and the provisions
of the OA apply subsidiary to legal regulation of forests and forest land. Special regulation of
forests and forest land is based on the rule that forests are goods of interest to the Republic of
Croatia, which enjoy its special protection. Consequently, for the exercise of forest and forest
land rights, special restrictions with regard to the exercise of these rights have been
established and obligations have been imposed on forest owners to act in a certain way with
a view of protecting and preserving forests and forest land. As to state-owned forests, there is
a clear tendency to preserve the areas of forest land by virtue of a general prohibition of
alienation of state-owned forest land, i.e. change of use of forest land into building land.
Forests and forest land can be state-owned and privately-owned. Following the transformation
of ownership, forests and forest lands which were socially-owned have become the ownership
of the Republic of Croatia. The Croatian legal system does not regulate certain special group
rights on forest land because they do not exist.
The Agricultural Land Act regulates the right to common pastures. A common pasture is
leased to interested tenderers, natural and legal persons who are cattle owners and entered
in the Registry of Farms, as well as to cooperatives organized for the purpose of common
grazing on common pastures, whose members are cattle owners and entered in the Registry
of Farms. Each selected tenderer leases an unspecified portion of the common pasture, the
surface area of which is proportional to the livestock units in their ownership i.e. to conditional
livestock units owned by cooperative members.
Privately-owned forests and forest land are managed by their owners, under conditions and in
the manner laid down in the Forestry Act. State-owned forests and forest land are managed
by the company Hrvatske šume d.o.o. established by the Republic of Croatia. The owners
manage pursuant to a forest management program adopted by Hrvatske šume d.o.o. Out of
the total area of 2,688.687 hectares, 78.4% are state-owned forests and 21.6% are private
forests.
Under the Agricultural Land Act, agricultural land is considered to include arable land, gardens,
meadows, pastures, orchards, olive groves, vineyards, fish-ponds, reed beds and marshlands,
as well as other land that can be brought into agricultural use at an economically justifiable
cost. Foreign persons may not acquire ownership of a unit of agricultural land, except by
inheritance. The prohibition of acquisition imposed on foreign natural and legal persons from
the EU Member States is valid for a period of 7 years following the accession of the Republic
of Croatia to the EU. By transformation, previously socially-owned agricultural land has
become state-owned land. Change in the use of agricultural land is made in accordance with
the documents on land use planning. A one-off fee for the change of use of agricultural land is
charged for the decrease in the value and area of agricultural land, where its amount depends
on the value of reallocated agricultural land.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    27

Protected areas of nature, i.e. strict nature reserves, national parks, special nature reserves,
nature parks, regional parks, nature monuments, important landscapes, forest parks, park
landscaping monuments, are of interest to the Republic of Croatia and are beneficiaries of its
special protection, as prescribed by the Nature Protection Act. Protected areas are managed
by public entities which may grant concession approvals for a period of up to five years to legal
and natural persons for economic utilization of natural resources or exercising other activities.
Domestic legal and natural persons can acquire ownership of real property in protected areas
under the conditions prescribed by the law. For each protected area of nature, the Nature
Protection Act expressly lays down the obligations and restrictions imposed on the owner with
regard to the economic utilization of real estate, possession and use. The restriction level
depends on the category of the protected area. The owners are entitled to a compensation for
restrictions to which they are subjected. In the case of sale of privately-owned real estate
located within protected areas, the Republic of Croatia, i.e. the county or the City of Zagreb
shall have a right of pre-emption. For the purpose of economic utilization of natural resources
in protected areas, a concession may be established. There are in total 417 protected areas
of different categories in the Republic of Croatia (the largest part of the protected area are
nature parks – 4.56% of the state territory). Protected areas cover 8.58% of the territory of the
Republic of Croatia, i.e. 12.25% of the inland territory and 1.94% of the territorial sea.
Mineral resources are owned by the Republic of Croatia and are considered to be goods of
interest to the Republic of Croatia which enjoy its special protection. This rule applies also to
cases in which a unit of land holding mineral resources is privately-owned. The exploitation of
mineral resources requires a concession for the economic utilization of common or other
goods.
Even though land types are defined by regulations, there is significant overlapping in legal
regulations and practice depending on the property type, especially with regard to certain types
of forest and agricultural land. Each separate regulation regarding a certain land type also
contains special rules on misdemeanour liability for those who breach the obligations regarding
land use, inspections and similar. Examples of illegal construction and other forms of
regulations breach exist in practice.
Different rights on land and natural resources, methods of exercising these rights and possible
restrictions are explicitly regulated by laws governing special legal regimes on lands. With
regard to all those rights, laws regulate their correlation and compensation to which their
holders are entitled in case of restricted exercising of their rights due to rights of other holders
on the same land. Private owners of forests believe that they are very much restricted by
special legal regimes, e.g. water resources, without being compensated for that, and by the
condition for establishing hunting grounds, for which they need 1000 hectares at least,
whereas the EU allows 100-500 hectares.
Different rights on certain lands are explicitly regulated by special regulations and may coexist.
In case a certain right is restricted, its holder is entitled to compensation. However, there are
inconsistencies with regard to, for example, right to forest products (mushrooms, game etc.).
Game feeds on products (acorn), and the sale of such products may generate income, but the
forest owner does not have the right to own game.
The existence of special rights with regard to mining is regulated by the Mining Act, which
clearly establishes ownership rights on ores and the manner of their exploitation, regardless
of the fact that land is privately owned. The Mining Act establishes in a transparent way the
procedure of granting mining concessions, bearing into mind possible restrictions of ownership
rights of land owners.
The Republic of Croatia does not have communal land or indigenous people. Joint ownership
of land is individualized, and common pastures are no longer in joint ownership, but rather in
the ownership of the state, which leases them. The need for the registration of joint rights in
the cadastre plan is small, but possibilities exist.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    28

For the purpose of protecting of certain lands as goods of special interest to the Republic of
Croatia, special regulations provide for special restrictions with regard to ownership and
obligations of owners with regard to possession, use and disposition. There are certain
restrictions which can hardly be justified since they cause harm to humans and their benefits
are disputable.
LGI 2: Efficiency and fairness of regulations on the use of rural land
Disposition of privately-owned rural land is, in general, not restricted. Possible restrictions have
been reduced to the fact that, for the benefit of the Republic of Croatia, a regional and local
self-government unit has the legal right of pre-emption (e.g. for certain protected parts of
nature, for cultural goods), that is, that prior to selling the land it has to be offered under the
same conditions for sale to the Republic of Croatia and to other holders of the pre-emption
right. The pre-emption process can be slow so it is, in a way, slowing down the sale and
purchase process.
Procedures of rural land governance are explicitly regulated by law and are based on the
principle of transparency and the interested public's participation in the plan adoption process.
The State and bodies of local and regional self-government units are required to regularly
inform the public of the spatial status, enable and promote the public’s participation by
developing social cohesion and strengthening awareness of the need for spatial protection and
managing participation (collecting and organizing proposals, obtaining expert opinions on
public attitudes, media intermediation etc.). Regulations regarding forest lands are mostly
being implemented, whereas the state of agricultural lands needs to be improved. There is no
systematic change in land use outside of construction areas, with the exception of the change
prescribed by general land use plans.
Management of the various types of rural land (agricultural, forest land) differs greatly.
Management plans for state-owned forest land are being followed, whereas there are mostly
no management plans for other land types. On 26 May 2015, the European Commission
approved the Rural Development Program of the Republic of Croatia for the period 2014 –
2020, the value of which amounts to around EUR 2.4 billion. The Program defines 16 measures
with the aim of increasing competitiveness of the Croatian agriculture, forestry and processing
industry, as well as improving living and working conditions in rural areas in general.
Rights on forest and other rural land have been regulated by regulations, special restrictions
regarding ownership have been prescribed, as well as special obligations of owners and
competencies of public authorities. As to rural land, the provisions of the special act on spatial
planning also apply accordingly, where some of the special regulations also contain special
rules on the change of use of land. In practice sometimes there are problems in identifying the
land type, in particular since, with regard to the data on the land type, the data in the cadastre
differ from those in the land register, and there are also differences between the actual use of
the land and the one entered in public registries.
Disposition of land is made difficult in practice due to inconsistencies between the status in the
land register and the actual legal status of real property, especially because changes occurred
during transformation of social ownership have not been entered, and the entered land use
does not correspond to the actual usage.

4.2.1   Findings and recommendations
                    Findings                                Recommendation
 Difficulties in identifying land types in      Harmonize regulations and application in
 regulations and in practice, overlapping       practice
 of agricultural and forest
 Excessive regulation of misdemeanours          Revision of misdemeanour liabilities and
 which are not sanctioned in practice           inspections
 The lack of a national strategy regarding      Adopt a rural development strategy
 rural development, the same for both
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    29

 agriculture and forestry
 Numerous restrictions on ownership            Harmonize restrictions with public goals
 rights, serving no public goals
 There are too many legal restrictions of      Decrease the restrictions of ownership rights
 ownership rights                              to a reasonable measure and consider the
                                               granting of fail compensation
 All land is entered in the cadastre/land      Enable a faster registration of the actual
 register, but the status often does not       situation using adequate procedures
 correspond to the actual situation




4.3   Urban Land Use, Planning and Development
The Republic of Croatia has a long tradition of physical and environmental planning. After
several individual examples of regulations dating back to the second half of the 18th century,
urban development plans started being made ever since the end of the 19th century and since
the 1960s the planning of wider areas (regions) has developed. The origin of the present land
use planning system can be found in the achievements of the previous system dating from the
period 1945 - 1991.
Before 1990, land use plans used to be based on long-term (20-30-year long) and medium-
term (10-15-year long) community development plans which were institutionally defined and
have turned into physical plans. Usually, these plans have reflected the wish to take complete
control over physical and facilities planning, which would assumingly occur within the next 10,
20 or more years. Therefore, in a certain way they laid the foundations for physical planning
and, since they were mutually well coordinated and connected, it was difficult to adjust them
when necessary due to changing needs of citizen and the economy.
In the period between 1967 and 1977, in cooperation with the UN, Croatia carried out physical
and environmental planning of the Adriatic region and its immediate hinterland, and by 1974 it
developed land use plans for the country's greater parts, as well as the first land use plan of
the Republic of Croatia, which were only partially implemented. The wish to have complete
control and the difficulty to adjust to population and economy needs caused the population,
the economy and even the public authorities to fail at sticking to and carrying out the plans,
which resulted in mass illegal construction.
The criteria according to which a settlement is defined as a city, more precisely, the specific
structure of a settlement having city-like characteristics have been significantly changed on the
territory since 1992, so the Republic of Croatia today counts 128 cities, while in the past only
Zagreb and Split had such a status. Apart from uneven population density, the Republic of
Croatia has been facing a continuous population decline and population concentration on the
coast.
Monocentric orientation of the area is evident, with Zagreb as the main centre which is one of
the macro regional centres according to the broadness of its gravitational area. Other macro
regional centres, namely Split, Rijeka and Osijek, are significantly smaller in relation to Zagreb.
The Zagreb or the central macro region, where 62% of the total capital is concentrated, take
up approximately 35% of the territory and about 47% of the population. The Split macro region
encompasses 26% of the area and 20% of the population. The Rijeka or the West macro region
comprises 18% of the territory and 13% of the population, and the Osijek or the East macro
region 21% of the territory and 20% of the population.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    30

The applicable legal framework has been effective since the beginning of 2014. Its provisions
completely negated the provisions of the Physical Planning and Building Act from 2007, and
ordinances, competences and procedures were also changed.
Today, the land use planning system in the Republic of Croatia comprises entities (depending
on the planning level they are as follows: the Croatian Parliament and the Government of the
Republic of Croatia, the Ministry and administrative bodies, representative bodies of local and
regional self-government units, state administration bodies, institutes and other legal persons
registered for carrying out expert tasks of physical and land use planning, the Committee for
Architectural Excellence), documents (plans on strategic and implementing level),
documentation (location, building and use permits) and procedures (analysis of the situation,
determination of the conditions and the manner of drafting, adopting and implementing of land
use documents and development of construction land).
Land use planning is based on the principles of integral approach to land use planning, giving
consideration to scientifically proven facts, spatial sustainability of development and excellence
in construction, achievement and protection of public and individual interests, horizontal
integration in the protection of space, vertical integration and publicness and free access to
data and documents important for land use planning. Land use plans have the power and legal
nature of subordinate legislation.
There are two types of plans, differing in nature: strategic and implementing. Implementing
land use plans are made in three stages:    land use plans on the government level (the State
Plan for Spatial Development, the Land Use Plan for Special-Features Areas – relates to
national parks and nature parks determined by a special law and to areas determined by the
State Plan for Spatial Development, Urban Development Plans of State Significance –
mandatory if so determined by the State Plan for Spatial Development), land use plans on the
regional level (Land Use Plan of the County and of the City of Zagreb, Urban Development
Plans of County Significance) and land use plans on the local level (Land Use Plan of the City
or Municipality, General Urban Plan and Urban Development Plan) (Figure 5).
                        SPATIAL DEVELOPMENT AND SPATIAL PLANNING
                             OVERVIEW OF THE SPATIAL PLANNING SYSTEM
                                                 TYPE OF DOCUMENT
 COMPETENCE                     SPATIAL PLANS                          URBAN PLANS

                        STRATEGIES OF
                           SPATIAL
                       DEVELOPMENT OF
                       THE REPUBLIC OF
 THE STATE                 CROATIA
 - plans are adopted                       NATIONAL PARK
 by the PARLIAMENT                          SPATIAL PLAN,
 OF THE REPUBLIC                            NATURE PARK
                         THE NATIONAL
 OF CROATIA                                 SPATIAL PLAN,
                       PLAN FOR SPATIAL
                                          SPATIAL PLAN FOR
                        DEVELOPMENT
                                             AREAS WITH
                                               SPECIAL
                                              FEATURES
 THE STATE
 - plans are adopted
                                                                                    URBAN
 by the
                                                                                 DEVELOPMENT
 GOVERNMENT OF
                                                                                     PLAN
 THE REPUBLIC OF
 CROATIA
 THE COUNTY
                                                                                    URBAN
 - plans are adopted   SPATIAL PLAN FOR
                                                                                 DEVELOPMENT
 by the County           THE COUNTY
                                                                                     PLAN
 Assembly
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    31


 THE CITY OF
 ZAGREB*
                       SPATIAL PLAN FOR                                              URBAN
 - plans are adopted                                         GENERAL URBAN
                         THE CITY OF                                              DEVELOPMENT
 by the Zagreb City                                              PLAN
                           ZAGREB                                                     PLAN
 Assembly

 THE CITY
 - plans are adopted                                                                 URBAN
                       SPATIAL PLAN FOR                      GENERAL URBAN
 by the CITY                                                                      DEVELOPMENT
                           THE CITY                              PLAN
 COUNCIL                                                                              PLAN

 THE MUNICIPALITY          SPATIAL
                                                                                     URBAN
 - plans are adopted    DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                  DEVELOPMENT
 by the MUNICIPAL       PLAN FOR THE
                                                                                      PLAN
 COUNCIL                MUNICIPALITY
* The City of Zagreb holds the administrative status of a county.
                              Figure 5. Spatial planning competence
Special (sectoral) acts regulate different areas of land use planning and use of land. The
provisions of these acts largely determine the final appearance of the plans. Particularly
sensitive and important issue is the question of their interconnectivity and coordination which
relate to the areas of the protection of the environment and nature, tourism, culture, sport,
health care, regional development, agriculture, forestry and water protection, the utility services
sector, maritime affairs, transport and infrastructure, energy and mining, internal affairs and
defence. Generally, each of the areas has several regulations (acts, regulations, ordinances
etc.).
All projects in space have to comply with the provisions of land use plans and relevant
legislation. Provisions of land use plans determine what and to which extent can be built, and
provisions of the acts determine the conditions which constructions have to comply with – in
terms of security, environmental impact, energy efficiency etc.
Numerous institutions are included in the planning of the use and development of urban land.
The manner of participation of these institutions in the procedure of drafting of plans is
prescribed by the Physical Planning Act and the plans are submitted to them for opinion. The
institutions are included according to a plan's significance and should any excluded institution
determine that it should participate in the process of plan drafting, it can voice its opinion in
public discussions. When in the city of Zagreb opinions from public law bodies are requested
in the procedure of preparing, for example, amendments to the City of Zagreb Master Plan,
there are over 120 bodies with the powers granted by the public law on the list.
Despite a wide-ranging scope of the legislative framework, frequent amendments cause
inadequate realization and implementation. Especially noteworthy is the legacy of a significant
number of illegal constructions on one's own land. To rectify this, a special act has been
adopted enabling faster and easier legalization of illegal construction built until 21 June 2011.
The construction of social housing often takes place with no specific political stronghold.
The land use planning system is characterized by the legacy of the previous system, primarily
inflexibility, and as such it is not suited to the changeable requirements in the present.
Mechanisms are lacking which will guarantee land use plans made in accordance with the
actual needs and the implementation of the plans within the agreed time limits.
The system of obtaining different permits (location, building) and particularly special
construction requirements is not fully transparent, it is based on unaligned regulations and is
subject to their hierarchically uncoordinated interpretation (implementation). The proposed
system of obtaining building permits, classification of construction works into groups (which
are not compliant with the provisions of special regulations based on which opinions,
certificates etc. are issued), unprofessional interventions in the main design through changes
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    32

in the terminology and unclear procedures do not contribute to efficient implementation of the
Act.
LGI 1: Limitations of rights
Restrictions in terms of ownership and the possibility of sale and purchase transactions of
urban land are insignificant. They do exist, however, in the case of protected cultural goods,
where in the case of a purchase, the real property must first be offered to the state/LSGU as
they have the right of pre-emption. Where a real property needs to be acquired for public
purposes, the real property is first attempted to be acquired by determining its market price
and then through negotiation with the owner. When the price asked for a real property is
unreasonably high and no agreement can be reached, the property undergoes an
expropriation procedure.
There are restrictions to the right on land in urban areas as regards the manner of use etc., for
instance in areas of alluvial land, landslides, protected areas etc. In urban areas there is a
difference between the conditions as found and as planned. Very often there are buildings
even in locations with restrictions as to their use. Most often such buildings are the legacy of
the previous periods. There are many regulations largely serving public purposes, but their
implementation is partial often due to a lack of financial resources. For instance, the City of
Zagreb allocates annually HRK 20 million to HRK 25 million for the rehabilitation of landslides,
which is not sufficient.
LGI 2: Transparency of land use limitations
The system of planning used today is transparent and information is publicly available;
however, the decision makers' lack of understanding of the complexity of the planning process
sometimes enables realization of partial interests. In addition, the present system of planning
also carries the additional burden of the significance of ownership relationships, resulting in
more difficult implementation of plans. In the past twenty years, no efficient system for the
implementation of land use plans has been set up, such as the one that had existed before
and which would, in an appropriate manner, enable the realization of the plans, taking into
account the obligations arising from the found property relations within the area covered by the
plans.
LGI 3: Efficiency of drafting urban land use plans
The planning process can tackle the issue of rights on land of those involved in the plan in
accordance with internationally recognized standards, but the process of implementation of
plans cannot. There are no statistical/planning forms for monitoring the realization
(construction) on re-zoned land and re-zoning requests are often made for speculative
purposes involving the value of the land.
There are no mechanisms requiring contractors to invest in the lower-end real property market.
The Government has launched some initiatives, but the private sector is not included. Despite
a lacking wholesome approach to the housing policy, the Act on Subsidized Residential
Construction has helped build several thousands of apartments across the country. The Act
regulates the implementation of state-subsidised housing construction, but it does not oblige
the state to make any serious sociological, demographic, economic or other analyses which
could be used to define the needs, housing structure and housing typologies. The payment
ability of citizens poses additional problems, having fallen in the past 5 to 10 years. As a result,
some of the apartments built have remained unsold and, to solve this problem, the authorities
have attempted in the past several years to introduce a system of rents as a possible means
of helping the most vulnerable household categories.
In major cities, urban spatial expansion is efficiently channelled by means of a hierarchy of
general/detailed spatial plans (MA, UDP, IUDP and DDP) which are regularly updated.
However, projects are often realized ad-hoc, with no systematic land preparation. Desired
programs are selected from a land use plan, and the planned public content and the necessary
infrastructure are then realized.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    33

The problems shared by all cities are the zones "skipped" by development in the past 50 years
as the cities expanded to then undeveloped land, challenging the efficiency of infrastructure
and its uniform distribution. The advantage of such excessive expansion is the development
of the main infrastructure sufficient for the realization of different possible scenarios in space.
The danger of such a manner of city governance lies in unbalanced development, problems in
the public transportation system and other infrastructure.
According to data provided by real property agents, there are presently approximately 10,000
to 12,000 unsold apartments in the largest city, hardly promising in terms of increased demand.
In addition, as regards population growth, in the last twenty years the Republic of Croatia has
had a negative natural population growth rate, and the rising number of city inhabitants is due
to population migration to the cities. The investment boom lost its momentum in 2010, and
currently the offer of real property for sale by far exceeds the actual demand. This does not
refer only to land plots, but to apartments as well.
LGI 4: Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land uses
The procedure for obtaining a building permit is not complicated provided all the previous
consents have been obtained, in which case it only involves the invitation of parties to the
procedure of issuing a building permit (owners and holders of property rights on the real
property which directly borders the real property for which the building permit is being issued).
Over-regulation of specific conditions, together with the discretionary rights of civil servants
and non-alignment of the legislative framework i.e. the application of different regulations may
make the obtaining of building permits more difficult.
Building permits are issued by large cities (with population exceeding 35,000) and centre cities
of counties. Smaller cities are often faced with a lack of professional staff or work overload of
a competent administrative body.
LGI 5: Forms of tenure regulation in urban areas
The Republic of Croatia has no problems with informal housing (residence on another's land).
The problem is the legalization of buildings constructed without permits on private land and the
registration of rights which exist in practice. The procedure of ownership registration can be
instigated only after a building is entered in the land register and the cadastre. Formalization
of dwelling is supported by the Act on Procedures Concerning Illegally Built Buildings which
has enabled legalization of buildings and the creation of preconditions for formalization.
However, the Act does not offer solutions for resolving unclear property relations.
Common parts of real properties in the context of condominiums are prescribed and clear
provisions are in place on the establishment of the measures for management and
maintenance of the common parts, which are implemented in practice.
Even though, according to the overall assessment of the World Bank Doing Business 2016,
the Republic of Croatia takes the 40th place, it takes the 129th place in the area of building
permit obtaining, which suggests potential for considerable improvements in this sector.

4.3.1   Findings and recommendations
                     Findings                                   Recommendation
 All land is entered in the cadastre/land           Enable a faster registration of the actual
 register, but the status often does not            situation using adequate procedures
 correspond to the actual situation
 The monitoring of the situation on land is         Set up a spatial monitoring system,
 insufficient                                       develop analytical functions in land data
                                                    storage systems, connect storages
 Actual, relevant quantification data on the        Ensure the necessary data
 economy and demography for the purposes of
 land use planning are lacking
 There is no housing policy in place and no         Adopt a housing policy
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    34

 policies regarding land management, such as
 the land policy
 Unjustified expansion of building areas, slow       Revise the existing capacities, i.e.
 re-zoning of land                                   examine the needs for building areas
 Poor communication between different                Improve communication with a special
 stakeholders (formal and professional) in the       emphasis on improved communication
 procedures of land use plans drafting               between professionals
 Insufficient standardization of data between        Implementation of the INSPIRE Directive
 land governance sectors                             and other relevant standards
 Terminological inconsistency in the area of         Draw up an adequate glossary of terms
 land governance.                                    and definitions and their translations
 Periodic deep-rooted changes in the system          Revise the existing legislative framework,
 of land use planning and construction pose          promote communication between
 problems in the implementation of regulations       participants in the procedure of drafting
 on all levels (unaligned legislative framework,     and adopting of regulations
 lack of coordination in meeting the interests of
 all users of space, lack of transparency and
 inconsistency in the implementation of
 regulations)




4.4   Public Land Management
LGI 1: Identification of public land and clear management
In the Republic of Croatia, public land is considered to be common good and land owned by
the state or by local and regional self-government units. Of the total of 8.8 million ha, 4.3 million
ha have a status of common good, 3.0 million ha is state-owned land, while regional and local
self-government units own 0.013 million ha of land, all totalling 71% of the land. Approximately
one half of that goes to the sea and the coastal region.
The responsibility for public land management is mainly shared by the Agricultural Land
Agency, which is responsible for agricultural land, Croatian Forests which manage forests, and
the independent State Property Management Administration which is responsible for other -
urban areas. Generally, public land is leased or given in concession and is only sold in
exceptional cases.
For each type of public land, an adequate level of authority has been delegated as responsible
for its management. The ownership of public land mostly serves public purposes, but the
management of this land is made difficult mainly due to backlogs in the cadastre and land
register. The competent authorities often have no data on the land for which they are
responsible. Public land management by competent institutions is not adequate because of
the fact that public land is partly neglected and uncultivated, not entered in the registers, its
property relations are not regulated and information on such land is not publicly available. The
registration of the maritime domain is done sporadically and so far only a negligible number of
these domains have been registered.
Some information on public land is available to the public through web pages and browsers of
the competent institutions. The information on public land can also be obtained through the
institutions responsible for the cadastre and land register. The entered information on
individual types of public land (land used by the military, security services etc.) is not available
to the public in accordance with the regulations.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    35

There are certain limitations to the execution of obligations relating to land management
imposed by lack of financial and/or human resources. Key information on public land allocation
(location and surface area of the allocated land, the parties involved and financial terms of the
allocation) is publicly available, but is only partially recorded in the cadastre and the land
register.
LGI 2: Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition procedure
Expropriation, as the institute of the public law whereby the public authority, by means of an
authoritative act based on law, for the purpose of achieving an indisputable public interest,
may be used to take away private land. It intervenes into an individual's right of ownership and
implies the obligation of the government to pay compensation. It is resorted to when all other
avenues aimed to reconcile the public and private interests have been exhausted.
A property may be expropriated when this is necessary for the construction of a building or
construction works in the interests of the Republic of Croatia; when it is estimated that the use
of the property, which is planned to be proposed for expropriation, will bring greater benefits
than those reaped by its current use; for the purpose of constructing a building or construction
works related to economic infrastructure, cemeteries and other municipal infrastructure
construction, health care, education, cultural and sport facilities, industrial, energy, water
supply, transport and electronic communication facilities, buildings for the Croatian judicial
system, the military and the police and research and exploitation of mineral resources and
other natural assets; when this is necessary for the purpose of construction of other buildings
or performing other construction works determined by regulations of the Government of the
Republic of Croatia as being of state and regional significance; for the purpose of implementing
strategic projects declared as strategic investment projects by the Government of the Republic
of Croatia. A decision that a construction of a building or performance of construction works is
in the interest of the Republic of Croatia is issued by the Government of the Republic of Croatia
upon proposal of the expropriation beneficiary.
Before submitting a proposal for expropriation, the expropriation beneficiary is obligated to
apply for the proof of the condition and value of the real property for which expropriation is
proposed (the finding and opinion of an expert or assessment of an assessor). The value of
the real property is expressed in money based on the explanation of the finding and opinion of
the authorised expert or assessor. The assessment is made on the basis of a special regulation
in the area of land use planning governing the manner of assessment of the value of real
property, the manner of collecting data and their evaluation and the methods of real property
assessment. Where servitude is established, the finding and the opinion of an expert or
assessor's assessment must contain an assessment of the value of limitation to the right of
ownership relative to the whole or a part of the real property.
A centralized list of expropriated real property should be kept in the Register of Expropriated
Real Property, which falls within the sphere of competence of the Ministry of Justice. The
Register should contain data on the manner of determining the interests of the Republic of
Croatia, purpose of expropriation, type of expropriation, cadastral plots, cadastral
municipalities in which the real property is located, the form and amount of compensation and
data on the parties, but the Register has not been set up yet.
In the Republic of Croatia, expropriation is used for purposes of public interest and most of the
land of private investors has been acquired by direct negotiations. There are no cases of
expropriation for private interests.
Following its expropriation, the land is made to serve its intended purpose on time, although
the expropriation procedure may be a lengthy process as a result of preventive action taken
by the expropriated parties.
LGI 3: Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedure
A real property owner is entitled to compensation for carrying out preparatory activities to be
paid by the expropriation beneficiary on whose request an authorisation was granted for
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    36

carrying out preparatory activities. The compensation for a completely expropriated real
property is generally determined by granting ownership over another appropriate real property,
whose value reflects the market value of the real property that is being expropriated in the
same municipality or town, which provides the owner of the expropriated real property with the
same living conditions and conditions for use that he/she had in using the real property that is
being expropriated. If the real property owner does not accept another appropriate real
property or the expropriation beneficiary cannot ensure such real property, the compensation
is determined to be paid in money in the amount of the market value of the real property.
Generally, compensations are paid within 15 days from the date when the decision becomes
final.
An appeal may be lodged against the decision of the authority of the first instance on the
proposal for expropriation. The Ministry of Justice decides on the appeal. An administrative
dispute may be initiated against the decision issued by the Ministry. The manner for submitting
complaints is prescribed by the Act and is easily accessible. The number of complaints
regarding expropriations in the past three years stood at 1560 and the number of complaints
resolved is 712 i.e. 45.64 %. According to data of Administrative Courts in Zagreb, Rijeka and
Osijek, the number of administrative disputes initiated against the decisions of the Ministry was
401, of which 279 or 70 % were resolved.

4.4.1    Findings and recommendations
                   Findings                                   Recommendation
 Absence of individual sectoral                 Develop the missing sectoral strategies and
 strategies                                     align them
 Data on expropriated land is neither           Make public the data on expropriated land
 public nor transparent
 Complex management due to a vast               Disclose full information on legal regimes in the
 number of special legal regimes                cadastre and land register
 Difficulties in identifying the type of land   Align regulations and their application in practice
 in regulations and in practice                 Standardize types of use, utilization and
                                                purpose of real property
 Review justification of the number and         Examine the appropriateness of awarding
 surface area of protected areas                protection status
 Underutilization of public land,               Step up efforts towards leasing of the state-
 agricultural, urban and maritime domain        owned agricultural land, promote public land
                                                management Offer common land for concession
 Inadequate efficacy of institutions'           Improve efficacy of the institutions responsible
 capacities                                     for public land management
 All land is entered in the cadastre/land       Enable a faster registration of the actual
 register, but the status often does not        situation using adequate procedures
 correspond to the actual situation
4.5     Allocation of Large Tracts of Land to Investors
The Act on Strategic Investment Projects of the Republic of Croatia regulates the criteria and
application procedure for strategic investment projects, the process of assessment, selection,
preparation and implementation of strategic projects, the disposition of property owned by the
Republic of Croatia for the purpose of implementation of strategic projects, granting
concessions related to the implementation of strategic projects and issuing administrative acts
related to the implementation of strategic projects.
The Act on Management and Disposal of Assets Owned by the Republic of Croatia regulates
the management and disposition of assets owned by the Republic of Croatia, establishes the
forms of state assets, the principles of state asset management, state asset management
documents, the manner and requirements for management and disposition of government-
owned stocks and shares in companies, the manner and requirements for the management
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    37

and disposition of state-owned property, the scope of activities and powers of the State
Property Management Administration with regard to the management and disposition of state
property. The forms and the manner of disposition of property owned by the Republic of Croatia
which fall within the sphere of competence of the State Property Management Administration
and the purchase of property on behalf of the Republic of Croatia are governed by the
Regulation on the Disposition of Real Estate owned by the Republic of Croatia.
Until 10 April 2013, agricultural land in state ownership was disposed of in accordance with the
Program of Disposition of State-Owned Agricultural Land adopted by municipal or city councils,
or the City Assembly of the City of Zagreb, subject to approval from the Agricultural Land
Agency. Local self-government units, i.e. the City of Zagreb, could not dispose of the state-
owned agricultural land prior to the adoption of the Program. After that date, the competence
for the disposition of this type of land was transferred to the Agricultural Land Agency.
According to the programs of the local self-government units, 552,504 ha of the state-owned
agricultural land were available for disposition in the Republic of Croatia. Out of that, disposition
contracts were concluded for 48% (263,307 ha), while 52% (289,196 ha) of the state-owned
agricultural land is not used. A total of 117,217 ha were disposed of through lease, 62,784 ha
through sale, and 88,071 ha through concessions and long-term lease. These data cover all
forms of disposition in the period between 2001 and September 2013, according to the data
submitted to the Ministry of Agriculture by regional/local self-government units. Considering
the fact that regional/local self-government units did not comply with the obligation to deliver
concluded contracts to the Ministry of Agriculture, the exact number or the surface of state-
owned disposed land is not known.
In 2014 a database of state-owned agricultural land was set up, which, in addition to cadastral
data on the state-owned agricultural land and available data on disposition, also contains data
of the PAAFRD on notified supports to state-owned land in LPIS. A total of 601,000 cadastral
plots comprising 738,000 ha of the state-owned agricultural land have been entered into the
database.
According to the ALA database, the surface area of allocated public land accounts for 42.5%
(318,352 ha) of the total surface of state-owned agricultural land. These data include the
disposition over the state-owned land in the following manner: through sale, lease, long-term
lease and concessions in the period between 2001 and 2014. Out of that, 255,567 were
allocated for lease. The surface area of agricultural land allocated through public bidding
procedures in 2014 equals 5,173 ha in 174 production and technological units.
A significant share in the real estate portfolio owned by the Republic of Croatia refers to the
construction land representing a huge potential for investments and the realization of economic
growth of the country. A significant part of that portfolio has been registered to the Republic of
Croatia. However, since specific status checks and checks of other facts, on which undisputed
acquisition of ownership rights is based, precede the entry of ownership, this is an ongoing
process with active involvement of the state attorney office and courts, as well as administrative
bodies throughout the Republic of Croatia.
The inventory of the real property owned by the Republic of Croatia, including building land,
has been published in the State-Owned Property Register that is available on the SPMA official
website. There are no data accessible to the public on the number of leases, sales and other
forms of the disposition of the state land managed by the SPMA.
LGI 1: Allocation of public land for private use follows a clear, competitive process with
payments collected
Most of the construction land is allocated through public bidding procedures except gifts and
direct negotiations, and that exclusively if the building plot share in state ownership accounts
for a maximum of 20%. In the past three years, agricultural land was allocated by direct
negotiations only in the case of temporary allocations of maximum 5 years. All decisions on
the disposition of state-owned land are publicly available.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    38

The amount of fees collected from lease/concessions for public land in 2014, including the total
concession payments according to the available Register of Concessions for 2014 stands at
HRK 205,700,958.12. Since the records on collections from lease and sales agreements fell
within the sphere of competence of local self-government units, the exact percentage of
collections from lease/concessions of public land is not known, but it is estimated that the
collection of fees is regular in 70% to 90% of agreements. The setting up of central records on
the collection from all lease agreements and other forms of disposition of state-owned land is
under way.
Investor status plays no role in land allocation. Land is rather allocated at market prices. State-
owned land in the area of local self-government units is, for the purpose of meeting the needs
of the citizens and development, allocated to the ownership of these units. Such land allocation
to local self-government units is sometimes viewed as illegitimate market support and, as such,
could become the subject of EU monitoring.
Re-zoning of agricultural land into non-agricultural land is carried out in accordance with land
use documents and other regulations. The competent office of the state administration in a
county or the administrative body of the City of Zagreb responsible for agriculture is obliged to
keep records on agricultural land re-zoning. The records are not accessible to the public and
it is, therefore, not easy to determine the benefits of land re-zoning.
In the case of the Republic of Croatia, one could say that there is no significant share of the
poor or marginalized groups that would be interested in land. There are certain support
measures in place for the young and family-run farms. There is no systematic policy of
allocating the state land to the poor or marginalized groups.
LGI 2: Private investment strategy
There is a lot of unutilized state-owned land in the Republic of Croatia which meets the needs
of large investors. Within institutions, there are clear policies and prescribed procedures in
place for identification of land available to investors. However, there is no systematic
assessment of the possibilities of all state-owned land available to investors and such
assessments are made on a "need only" basis and for the land for which there is interest. The
compensations prescribed are sometimes too high, which is deterring investors.
There is a policy in place (prescribed by law) which considers the benefits on the national level
in the selection of investments and this policy is respected. Each institution has a prescribed
procedure for the allocation of public land and the criteria that have to be met. On the level of
strategic projects, there is a clearly prescribed procedure and the criteria that have to be met
for a project to be declared strategic, but there are no options of distribution of benefits on the
local level. The inclusion of local self-government in project selection sometimes implies the
promotion of local, particular interests which impede investments.
The key institutions for the allocation of land to investors (ALA and SPMA) are clearly identified
and their spheres of competence are clearly defined, but the procedure may be too
complicated for investors and deter their investments. The inclusion of other institutions is
prescribed by many acts, depending on the type of land, which requires a large number of
approvals.
The coordination between the two institutions (ALA and SPMA) in resolving the issues of
overlapping in land zoning and the manner of disposition of state land is efficient, but there is
no prescribed policy governing the coordination between different government departments
which would ensure that the decisions on land zoning and rights on the land are well
coordinated between all the competent institutions.
The institutions do not share with each other the official data on the level of connecting
databases, but there is mutual coordination of the work of institutions, which has been
professionally established on the level of exchange of experiences and information. There is
no officially appointed coordinating body or person. ALA is responsible for the disposition of
state-owned agricultural land (state-owned agricultural land outside the borders of construction
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    39

areas in entirety and the land within the borders of construction areas with limitations). SPMA
is fully responsible for the disposition of the state-owned building land within the construction
areas and with limitations for the disposition of the enclaves of building state-owned land
outside the borders of building land. The Agency for Investments and Competitiveness, in light
of its business activity, seeks support from ALA and SPMA in the measures for improving
competitiveness of the Croatian economy, with a special emphasis on the promotion of
investments of legal persons.
The monitoring of the compliance with the agreed business plan is being conducted to a certain
extent. The agricultural inspection of the Ministry of Agriculture acts only upon reported cases,
checking the use of state-owned agricultural land, whether the land is being used or has been
subleased, whether the economic program which is a constituent part of the lease agreement
is being implemented and checks any unauthorized assumption of possession of state-owned
agricultural land. When necessary, remedial actions are taken. Only some of the monitoring
results are accessible to the public.
Protective measures which are partly compliant with the best international practice are taken
in the situations where public land is owned by a local self-government unit or has been notified
for a strategic investment and has a direct impact on local community. Environmental impact
assessment, the assessment on the community etc. are not conducted in the cases of
disposition of state-owned agricultural land as they are not prescribed.
There is no resettlement policy and so far there has been no need for such systematic policies
in the Republic of Croatia given the absence of any such large scale investments that would
require that.
LGI 3: Implementation policy is efficient, consistent and transparent
Investors are obliged to provide the requested documentation in connection with complaints
regarding the procedures of land allocation. In some procedures, the documentation contains
economic plans (investor's business plans) and evidence on meeting the technical
sustainability requirements. The documentation is not sufficient for effective identification of
project risks before the project is launched. In cases of non-compliance with the enclosed
economic plan, there is a contractual obligation to terminate a lease agreement.
The documents submitted with the application for allocation for the disposition of state land are
examined in accordance with uniform criteria prescribed by law and subordinate legislation.
The reply on the selection of the most favourable bidder is obtained within 6 days from the day
of bid submission, and the institutions respect this time limit. The procedure of approval of a
strategic project takes more than 6 months from the date of notification of the strategic project
until the date when a decision is adopted by the Government of the Republic of Croatia that
the project is of strategic importance for the Republic of Croatia.
Rights holders can freely and directly negotiate with investors, but the possibilities for obtaining
relevant information are limited. The contractual provisions are not accessible to the public
even in the case of state-owned land. Most of the contractual agreements do not include
information on the distribution of benefits with rights holders.
LGI 4: Contracts including public land are public and accessible
Information on spatial scope and the duration of the approved leases/concessions is currently
not easily accessible to citizens in general, thus preventing the determination of overall
utilization of the state-owned land and the possibilities for planning further investments. The
data are currently made available to competent government institutions on their request, but
they do not make them available to private parties on a regular basis, but only for briefing
purposes and when required. Information on spatial scope and the duration of the approved
concessions are also made available to parties on their request, in accordance with the Act on
the Right of Access to Information. Presently, there is no publicly available information on the
amount of state-owned land available for disposition in an individual local/regional self-
government unit, their surfaces and intended purposes.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    40

Guarantee compliance by lessees of the state-owned agricultural land is insufficiently
monitored, independent monitoring of investor guarantee compliance is scarce and the
mechanisms for fast and efficient compliance are not easily accessible to the relevant
communities. Unit recently, the records on collection of all types of dispositions have been the
responsibility of local self-government units and it was not possible to get full information on
the balance of collections under lease or sale agreements for state-owned land.
The Concessions Register, which is being set up by the Ministry of Finance, should provide an
overview of all concession-related payments, but it will not provide information to concession
givers about unsettled concession payments due to be paid by concession holders.
There are methods for dealing with the breach of contractual obligations that provide the
possibility of reaching a timely and fair decision, but they are insufficiently implemented. A
lease agreement is terminated if the leased agricultural land ceases to be agricultural due to
re-zoning or if the land is used in a manner contrary to the provisions of the agreement or law.

4.5.1   Findings and recommendations
                  Findings                                 Recommendation
 Procedures for the allocation of public     Review the procedures for the allocation of
 land are complex                            leases/concessions
 Underdeveloped system for monitoring        Develop procedures for collection control,
 collection of payments for public land      common for all sectors
 use
 Data on allocated public land are only      Publish all data on the allocated public land
 partly published
 Failure to comply with contractual          Increase efficiency in sanctioning non-
 obligations is mainly sanctioned in         compliance with contractual obligations
 accordance with the procedures
 There are no (sufficient) large tracts of   Implement measures for land consolidation
 land
 All land is entered in the cadastre/land    Enable a faster registration of the actual
 register, but the status often does not     situation using adequate procedures
 correspond to the actual situation
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    41




4.6   Provision of Public Information on Land: Land Register and Cadastre
The Croatian system for the registration of real property and real property rights is based on
two registers – the cadastre and the land register. In the cadastre, real property is described
according to its technical characteristics. Real property cadastral data (cadastral plots) are the
basis for the establishment, renewal, management, and maintenance of land registers. In the
land register, the data on cadastral plot title and encumbrance holders are added to the data
on cadastral plots established in the respective cadastre.
In Croatia, the largest part of the land register and cadastral system was built during the Austro-
Hungarian rule, and part of this heritage includes also its maintenance by two institutions: The
tradition has survived until today. Instead of having a single organizational structure, Croatia
has opted to build a Joint Information System for Land Register and Cadastre (JIS) and the
maintenance of its data by the existing institutions, but with clearly divided competences. Land
register employees are responsible for legal changes (title and other real rights), while cadastre
is responsible for technical data. All data are in electronic form, and the migration to JIS, that
should be completed by the end of 2016, is under way.
Further development of the JIS is under way, which should allow for communication with
citizens and other interested entities through the One Stop Shop service for all data contained
in the JIS, as well as further development of the e-Citizen service, which will provide not only
access to land information, but also access to corresponding documents without a need for a
visit to official institutions.
Before the current legislation was adopted, meaning after the independence, the land register
procedures in the Republic of Croatia were based on Austro-Hungarian General Civil Code,
Land Office from 1855 and Land Registry Act and other Land Registry legislation from 1931
(the Kingdom of Yugoslavia). Property law, and thereby Land Register Law as well, were
subject to social ownership and planned economy, as well as to suppression of individual, that
is, private ownership and simultaneous expansion of social ownership.
Real property rights were not, as a rule, registered in the land register, while the registration of
changes to social ownership in terms of the right to administration, use and disposal did not
actually provide any freedom of entering into legal transactions nor any adequate legal
protection or status, leading, thus, to an increasing neglect of the land register role and
inconsistency both with actual situation and cadastre registration. The fundamental cadastre
function, which primary purpose was tax rather than legal, significantly contributed to such a
situation.
From the Croatian independence until today, Property law and registrations connected
therewith have undergone large changes. The largest ones consisted in the abolishment of
social ownership, company privatization and transformation, denationalization, tenant
purchase and final legislative adoption, primarily the adoption of the Land Registration Act, the
Land Register Rules of Procedure and State Survey and Real Estate Cadastre Act, including
numerous amendments and respective by-laws.
The cadastre is a register of land parcels, buildings, and other structures permanently affixed
to the land or laying under its surface, as well as of special legal regimes on the land, while the
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    42

actual real property situation relevant for legal transactions is recorded with the land register.
The cadastre is managed by the regional cadastral offices of the State Geodetic Administration
with its branch offices (county centres and cities) and the City Office for Cadastre and Geodetic
Affairs of the City of Zagreb, while the land register is managed by land register departments
of municipal courts. Tasks of cadastre and land register maintenance are performed by
cadastral offices (114) and land registry offices of the Municipal Courts (109). They are located
in larger towns, mainly the seats of former municipalities. Cadastral offices have around 1100
employees, and land registry offices around 1000 employees. The number of offices and
employees is relatively high compared to the size of the state. As a part of public administration
and justice rationalization, the number of municipal, land register departments and cadastral
offices has been reduced.
Croatia has developed a system enabling easy access to, and transparency of, land
information in electronic form, but, despite being official in the land register and cadastre
systems that manage it, the information is neither reliable enough nor updated.
LGI 1: Land rights recognition mechanisms
The need for the formalization of uncontested land possession enjoyed by the poor in Croatia
is very little. The land register and cadastre system has been in place since the 18th century
and encroachment cases have been rare. There is no first registration requirement, for such
registration already exists, only the requirement of proof of ownership transfer or acquisition
eligibility, which is a formal procedure defined by the legislation in force.
Each party may exercise its right to the registration of land rights through a single correction
procedure, where, if it fails to provide all necessary and unambiguous documentation proving
such right, it may indicate that there is a justified reason for registration. In such case, the proof
may be indirect as well, but the judge will decide whether it is to be accepted or not. In absence
of documentation or a justified reason for registration, a right recognition claim may be filed. In
the evidence producing process, the party is asked to provide a proof of its real property right,
where written documents are more important than any other form of proof, although other forms
are also possible (e.g. witness statements).
Ownership right may be acquired through adverse possession. Adverse possession is the
original way of real property ownership acquisition by independent possession thereof, i.e.
continuous possession during certain period of time, provided that the one who acquires the
ownership must be capable of being the owner of such thing. Adverse possession may be
ordinary, if the possession is qualified - lawful, true and fair, and extraordinary, if the
possession is at least fair, which depends also on the time required for acquiring the right of
ownership in this manner.
The deadline for ordinary adverse possession of real property owned by the Republic of
Croatia, counties and local self-government and government units and equally-treated legal
entities, as well as ordinary adverse possession of things owned by the Church and other legal
entities that do not seek gain but engage in charity or other activities directed at the common
good, is 20 years, while the deadline of extraordinary adverse possession is 40 years.
Regarding real property that used to be state-owned and that is now owned by the Republic
of Croatia or LSGU, adverse possession deadlines are not counted from 6 April 1941 to 8
October 1991.
There is no procedural difference between the first registration and ordinary ownership change
(sales and purchase). Differences can be found only in part referring to the tax paid at the time
of ownership transfer, which, in principle, depends on the real property value assessed by the
Tax Administration. In the event of cadastre plot division, a plotting study must be made, which
increases the costs of transfer of the existing cadastre plots.
LGI 2: Completeness of land registries
In the 19th century, a cadastre plan, based on which the land register was established, was
made for the entire territory of the Republic of Croatia according to a graphical land survey. In
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    43

the socialist period, the cadastral plan was updated with respect to approximately 25% of the
territory, but the land register information mainly remained unchanged and the register was
kept based on previous data. Such situation causes the lack of connection between the
cadastral plots on the cadastral plan and those in the land register.
From the moment of establishment and implementation of the land register, property rights and
encumbrances (either in favour of the real property or a person) may be registered in the
principal land register files. Encumbrances most often include liens (mortgage) and easement.
The registration of encumbrances and other land register entries were neglected during
socialist times; therefore, the land register had not been updated in this sense either.
Public law restrictions may be registered with the property register of the land register file and,
when they refer to all lands of a cadastral municipality, they can be seen on the cover of the
principal land register. In practice, public law restrictions were quite often registered only on
the cover of the principal register, containing a note that they relate to all land register files.
Therefore, they were not entered in every land register file. In addition, the registration of the
spatial scope of legal regimes has been recently introduced into the Real Estate Cadastre, as
well. However, very few legal regimes have been registered so far.
All land register and cadastre information is managed and kept in electronic form, allowing for
a timely data access. Nevertheless, the opening hours of certain offices working with the public,
as well as some excerpts (e.g. historical excerpt) are not enough to obtain all excerpts in one
day. Unofficial information on current cadastre and land register situation may be accessed
on-line free of charge, but in order to obtain actual documents, one must go to the competent
office. It is planned that, by migrating to JIS, official electronic documents will be issued through
the e-Citizen system 365/24/7.
Cadastre and land register are public registers and everybody may access the information
contained therein or ask for an official document concerning the situation of such registers
without having to prove any legal interest or eligibility, but subject to personal data protection
legislation. The information may be accessed only based on the enquiry related to a single
land (cadastral plot), not to a person's name, unless a legal interest can be proven.
LGI 3: Reliability of land registry data
Long-time independent management of cadastre and land register systems, which were
autonomous and partly influenced by the governing politics (former Yugoslavia), has led to
considerable data inconsistencies concerning the same real property. Data are not managed
in a harmonized fashion any longer, and the consequences are outdated data. This has led to
the loss of confidence in the institutions and to an increase in the possibility of misuse.
A poor consistency between cadastre, land register and several other registers based on the
same land identifier reduces the integrity of registered rights and increases the transfer costs.
Furthermore, less than 30% of people have their Personal ID Number (OIB) entered in the land
register, which makes the identification of registered persons more difficult.
The Register of Deposited Contracts allows for a temporary registration of purchased
apartments under tenant purchase scheme that were located in the buildings which were
registered neither with the cadastre nor the land register after the independence and the
privatization of state-owned apartments. The elements of the Register of Deposited Contracts
are the same as the elements of the land register. It is not well-connected with the principal
land register because indicating the cadastre plot next to the apartment address is optional.
There is an intention to connect the Register of Deposited Contracts with the land register.
RDC files are translated into corresponding land register sub-files in accordance with a
stipulated procedure. RDC still exists and it is managed as a separate register since the
registration transfer is very slow. Due to a poor connection with the principal land register, RDC
is unreliable and misuse thereof is possible.
The failure to report changes occurred on site to the cadastre and the land register in the
socialist period has had especially adverse effect on the freshness of registration data
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    44

compared to on-site situation. Many studies and projects have shown that data freshness is
hardly above 50%. This is due to different circumstances: the cadastre plan situation does not
match the actual one or the person registered is not the right-holder any more.
LGI 4: Cost-effectiveness and sustainability of land management system
Cadastre and land register fees represent the state budget income and they are not recorded
as separate income. Also, the expenses are financed both from the state budget and other
sources. It has been estimated that the income is much lower than the expenses because,
among other things, the separation of these two institutions. As a rule, budget funds usually
get reduced and so do the capital investment funds. On the other hand, earmarked EU funds
may be used to directly finance the progress, but they are not sufficiently utilized.
LGI 5: Fees are determined in a transparent manner.
All service fees and charges are public and stipulated by law. Receipts are issued for all
payments, but introducing non-cash methods of payment (cards, services) and increasing the
availability of on-line official document issuing services should be stimulated.
When detected, cases of unlawful or corruptive conduct are processed quickly and
transparently. Since there aren't many cases of this kind, major or systematic detection actions
are not being undertaken. What can be noted, though, is the difference in the professionalism
of the personnel, its readiness to assist the client, its courtesy and flexibility.
The Ministry of Justice has been publishing a quite detailed statistical report on the work of
land register departments and individual statistics for each department on a monthly basis for
several years now. Certain performance and promptness standards and measures according
to which the departments are categorized have been implemented, as well. Since slow
processing and a constantly high level of unresolved cases have been a burden for the land
register as well as a source of many speculations on facilitation, this practice has helped to
significantly reduce the backlog and increase the transparency of work and mutual comparison
against known parameters. Such report is not published for SGA.


4.6.1   Findings and recommendations
                     Findings                                  Recommendation
   All private land is entered in the            Enable a faster registration of the actual
   cadastre/land register, but the status        situation using adequate procedures,
   often does not correspond to the actual       impose taxes on all real property
   situation
   Cadastre/land register institutional          Cadastre/land register and, possibly, other
   organization is inadequate                    key registers should be placed under a single
                                                 administrative institution-agency
   The situation of interests on the land        Define legal regime registration procedures
   registered with the cadastre and the land     and supplement them with public utilities
   register is incomplete                        infrastructure and address system
                                                 Impose the obligation of registration with the
                                                 land register and encourage improvement of
                                                 record data, both by the clients and ex officio
   Lack of harmonization between cadastre,       Speed up the establishment of the Real
   land register and administrative              Estate Cadastre and EDP Land Register
   organisation                                  Align cadastre municipalities indicated in the
                                                 cadastre/land register with the settlements
   Existing legislation has been written for     Modernize legislation, especially the
   the books, forms and analogue recording       implementing one, in the way that electronic
                                                 data form is accepted as official
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    45




4.7   Land Valuation and Taxation
The taxation of real property in the Croatian tax system is carried out through taxation of
income incurred from real property acquisition taxation and real property ownership taxation.
Periodical taxation of real property ownership includes only one, relatively small, category of
real property – holiday home tax. The tax amount is determined by a decision of the competent
local self-government unit, and it may total from HRK 5.00 to 15.00 per square meter of usable
surface area, depending on the location, age, infrastructure condition or other circumstances
relevant to the real property use.
The income tax, that is, the profit tax on property and property rights is paid by natural persons
or legal entities accruing income from real property rent or lease. The tax base, that is income,
is the difference between rental/lease income and expenditures determined as a lump sum.
The expenditures are recognized in the amount of 30% of the incurred rental/lease income.
The income tax rate amounts to 12%. The Tax Administration is authorized to estimate the
rental/lease market value, that is, the real property income and to determine the amount of real
property income – for cases in which it estimates that the rental/lease amount was not reported
in the market amount.
The transfer tax is paid by the person acquiring the real property, if such acquisition does not
include payment of the Value Added Tax. Acquisition of real property means buying and
selling, exchange, inheritance, gift, contribution and exclusion of real property to and from the
company respectively, acquisition by adverse possession, acquisition of real property in the
liquidation or bankruptcy procedure, acquisition pursuant to a ruling by a court or a decision by
other body and other manners of acquisition of real property from other parties. The tax base
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    46

is the market value of the real property at the time of tax liability occurrence, and the tax rate
amounts to 5%. Where the real property transfer was not reported in accordance with the
market value of the real property, the Tax Administration is authorized to estimate and
determine the market value thereof.
The estimate is made by the Tax Administration officer in accordance with the comparative
data on the market value trends for similar real property from approximately equivalent territory
and at approximately the same time. TA has been storing transaction information for such
purposes in its internal data base for quite some time now. If the comparative data are
insufficient, the market value is appraised by an expert appointed by TA.
The utility fee is not deemed a tax, but as a user fee it includes certain features of a periodic
real property ownership tax. The utility fee is paid by owners or users of: residential premises,
business premises, garages, construction land serving the purpose of business activities and
undeveloped construction land. The utility fee is paid for real property within the construction
area of the settlement as well as residential and business premises outside the construction
area where at least the following utility activities are conducted: maintenance of public areas,
maintenance of unclassified roads and public lighting, and those fitted at least with access
roads, facilities for the supply of electricity and water in accordance with local conditions and
that are a part of the infrastructure system of the local self-government unit.
The utility fee constitutes the budgetary revenue of the local self-government unit. The method
of utility fee calculation is set forth in the Utilities Act. The utilization of utility fee funds is
earmarked for the financing of utility activities and, according to the decision of the LSGU
representative body, they may be used for the purpose of school, health and social facility
maintenance.
LGI 1: Transparency of valuation
There was no legislation in the field of real property value appraisal until the adoption of the
Real Estate Value Appraisal Regulation in 2014. The Regulation was later replaced by the
Real Estate Value Appraisal Act regulating fundamental issues concerning the real property
value appraisal and providing definitions of basic appraisal-related terms. Furthermore, it
specifies the methods of real property appraisal and the selection of method, the method of
data collection and the persons certified for real property appraisal.
Prior to the adoption of the Real Estate Value Appraisal Regulation, pursuant to the Local and
Regional Self-Government Act, some local self-government units adopted their own Decisions
on the Real Estate Market Value Appraisal. Thus, in 2012, the City Assembly of the City of
Zagreb adopted the Decision on the Real Estate Market Value Appraisal, whereby, in addition
to specifying the basic terms and principles for appraisal of the real property market value, the
Auxiliary Data Register was established and specified.
LGI 2: Efficiency of collection
The Act regulates common exemptions from payment of the transfer tax and accordingly the
foregoing tax is not paid by the following:  The Republic of Croatia, local and regional self-
government units, governmental bodies, institutions the sole founder of which is the Republic
of Croatia or the local and regional self-government unit, endowments and foundations and
any legal persons the sole founder of which is the Republic of Croatia, Red Cross and similar
humanitarian organizations established pursuant to special legislation; diplomatic or consular
offices of foreign countries under the condition of reciprocity and international organizations
that are exempt from paying the transfer tax pursuant to international agreements; persons
who acquire the real property in the procedure of restitution of confiscated property and real
property consolidation; displaced persons and refugees who acquire real property through
exchange of their real property in another country; citizens who purchase a residential building
or an apartment (including the land) to which they used to have tenancy rights or with consent
of the holder of tenancy rights pursuant to legislation regulating the sale of apartments for
which there are tenancy rights; protected tenants who purchase a residential building or an
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    47

apartment in which they are residing pursuant to a rental agreement; the spouse, offspring and
ancestors, adopted children and adoptive parents who acquire the real property in relationship
to the life-long support beneficiary in accordance with the life-long support agreement; persons
who acquire specific portions of a real property through dissolution of co-ownership or division
of the joint real property ownership; citizens who acquire their first apartment or house in
accordance with the concluded purchase agreement, whereby they resolve their own housing
issue; citizens who, in accordance with the concluded sale and purchase agreement, acquire
the land within the construction area amounting to the surface area below 600 m 2 where they
will build a house to resolve their own housing issue.
In addition, there are relieves applying to holiday home tax: inability to use holiday home due
to war destruction and natural disasters, age and state of disrepair; inability to use holiday
home while accommodating displaced persons and refugees; where resorts owned by local
and regional self-government units used for accommodation of children below 15 years of age;
a decision by the municipality or the town/city regulating other exemptions due to economic
and social reasons. Some exemptions are further defined by law, for example, maximum
usable surface area to be exempt from the transfer tax for the purpose of solving housing
issues with regard to the number of family members. It may be concluded that the exemptions
are based on fairness. Necessary documentation for exemptions and relieves is published and
available to the public. Proving the right to exemption or relief requires substantial
documentation.
A more intense development of the Croatian real property market began by the end of 90s
when a large number of properties became private. The lack of laws and other regulations
concerning the methodology and inconsistencies of spatial data registration systems is
becoming an increasing issue for the domestic real property market. Cases of inconsistency
of cadastre and land register data are very often, which, when added to unsolved ownership
problems and a relatively slow registration procedure, significantly hinder the functioning of the
real property market.
In addition to the surface area of the cadastral plot, the mass agricultural land valuation system
– cadastral classification, introduced in the 19th century, was the only element of the agricultural
land valuation in the Republic of Croatia. This system data management saw its end in 2001.
Today, the valuation system of the agricultural land owned by the Republic of Croatia is set
forth in the Ordinance on Determination of the Market Price for the Sale of Agricultural Land
by Direct Contracting.
Although the tax bases are based on the market value (transfer tax, income tax from property
and property rights), which is in line with the tax fairness principle, for the purpose of tax
determination, the tax Administration uses the information system containing significant
differences in estimated values determined by the system and market values determined
according to different intended uses of real property.
The Tax Administration value lists are updated according to the transactions effected in a
determined period of time, which, when the market activity is low, provide data of a relatively
poor quality ("The estimate is made by the Tax Administration officer in accordance with the
comparative data on the market value trends for similar real estate from approximately
equivalent territory and at approximately the same time"). This increases the number of
appeals against the Decision determining the tax base and tax transfer, which affects the tax
collection efficacy and the increase in the collection costs.
Previously described procedure of real property market value determination by using the
comparative method and real property market data bases will enable official valuators to
access data contained in the collection of sales and purchase contracts. This applies
exclusively for the purpose of real estate appraisal studies. There is no disclosure policy
regarding such data. The City of Zagreb i.e. the Real Estate Appraisal Office plans to publish
the plan of approximate values of the construction land for the City of Zagreb area. It was
planned for September 2014, but it has not been implemented yet.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    48

The Ministry of Finance - Tax Administration issues personal identification numbers (OIB) for
tax and other purposes. The current number of active taxpayers is 4,007,695, 3,806,206 being
natural persons and 201.489 legal entities. There are no reliable data on recorded taxpayers
in the holiday home tax and utility fee calculation systems, which are partly managed within
the internal LSGU systems. There is no data freshness assessments related to such systems
or a single policy regarding data update. Some LSGUs have capacities for a periodic on-site
check of real property data, while the others entrust these tasks to independent contractors.
In order to improve unsatisfactory utility fee data for payers, on 30 June 2015 the Government
of the Republic of Croatia adopted the Decision on recording all real property on the local self-
government unit territory and on updating of utility fee data for payers.
It is impossible for the valuation to encompass real property built contrary to or without a
building permit or other permit for construction, which is neither registered nor recorded in the
data management systems intended for utility fee collection purposes. Incomplete data
differing from the on-site situation can often be found in the register. Such data mainly refer to
building extensions or non-recorded auxiliary buildings.
According to Income and State Budget Income Plan data obtained from the official Ministry of
Finance Annual Reports for 2004 - 2013 and Total County, City and Municipal Budget Report
for 2010 - 2013, the percentage of transfer tax collection is high.
Although the current real property taxes and fees have components partially associated with
market valuation, there is no mass valuation system based on monitoring of the real estate
market and market prices.

4.7.1     Findings and recommendations
                        Findings                              Recommendation
      Available value appraisal data are         Introduce a mass real property valuation
      insufficient                               system
      Insufficiently trained human resources     Improve valuer training
      and insufficient training offer
      Value lists mostly remain unpublished      Publish value lists
      All land is entered in the cadastre/land   Enable a faster registration of the actual
      register, but the status often does not    situation using adequate procedures
      correspond to the actual situation



4.8     Dispute Resolution
For the resolution of land disputes in the Republic of Croatia there are clearly stipulated,
transparent and objective mechanisms, in other words there are clearly defined jurisdictions
between courts competent for dispute resolution and other bodies (administrative bodies) that
decide in specific types of dispute in connection to the real property, i.e. when deciding on the
proposals for the registration into the land register. In cases when an administrative body is
competent for dispute resolution in the first instance, the protection is provided for in the first-
instance administrative courts as the courts with full jurisdiction.
It is also possible to resolve land disputes through alternative methods, in the conciliation
proceedings before various bodies such as, for example, the Croatian Chamber of Economy,
the Croatian Chamber of Trades and Crafts, the Croatian Banking Association, the Croatian
Association for Conciliation, etc. Conciliation is a voluntary procedure, proposed by one of the
interested parties, and the other party may or may not accept it; however, if it is accepted and
if the dispute is settled amicably in the course of proceedings, the procedure ends with a
settlement that is enforceable. Although such dispute resolution is cheaper for the parties, it is
rarely implemented in practice considering the fact that citizens are in general used to resolving
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    49

disputes before a court, and not some other bodies. It is also possible to resolve real property-
related disputes by means of arbitration, and the Permanent Arbitration Court is established at
the Croatian Chamber of Economy.
Disputes can also be amicably settled before a competent state attorney's office. Where the
Republic of Croatia would be a plaintiff or a defendant, such conciliation proceedings must be
conducted. Unlike conciliation and arbitration proceedings, the number of disputes resolved
amicably before the competent state attorney's office is on the rise every single year.
LGI 1: Distribution of responsibilities
Disputes are resolved in the first instance by municipal courts, of which there is a total of 24,
and which provide court protection. There are 108 land registry departments in municipal
courts across the entire territory of the Republic of Croatia, and these departments decide on
proposals for the registration into the land registry. Any appeal to a second instance county
court against the ruling of a municipal court is permitted, and as of 1 July 2015 only three of
the total of 22 county courts are competent for land registry cases, while all second instance
courts remain competent for other real property-related disputes. All dispute resolution
mechanisms are available to the public, and the network of first instance municipal courts, or
currently their permanent attendances, operate directly in local self-government units.
Commercial courts can also decide on disputes between legal entities and between legal
entities and craftsmen, when such disputes are related to their business activities and relate
to real property. Commercial courts have jurisdiction over the disputes in which the party is a
person in respect of which bankruptcy proceedings have been opened, regardless of the
character of the other party. If a commercial court of first instance (there are currently eight
such courts) adjudicates in those disputes, the High Commercial Court of the Republic of
Croatia decides on appeals in the second instance. Parties may ask for protection before the
Supreme Court of the Republic of Croatia by lodging legal remedies, namely by filing a motion
for revision.
Regarding the procedures for the restitution of property confiscated during the Yugoslav
communist rule and regarding the expropriation procedure, decisions are rendered by first
instance administrative bodies. There is one first-instance administrative body in each county,
while the Ministry of Justice has jurisdiction in the second instance. In case the party is
discontent with the decision rendered by the Ministry of Justice, the protection can be sought
after in an administrative court. At the moment, there are four first-instance administrative
courts in the Republic of Croatia (Zagreb, Split, Rijeka and Osijek), and the High Administrative
Court of the Republic of Croatia deciding on legal remedies against the decisions of
administrative courts. Administrative bodies and administrative courts apply the provisions of
the General Administrative Procedure Act and the Act on Administrative Disputes.
Notaries acting as court commissioners conduct probate proceedings. Jurisdiction over
probate proceedings is related to permanent or temporary residence of the testator, or to the
seat of a notary. If, during the probate proceedings, a dispute arises over the facts on which
the inheritance right depends, over that which comprises the inheritance property or over the
validity of the will, notaries halt the proceedings and remand the case to the court which
assigned him/her the conducting of the probate hearing. Further proceedings are carried out
before a probate court. Notaries handle probate proceedings only in the absence of dispute
between heirs.
In the Republic of Croatia there are no informal systems of dispute resolution in place in terms
of village councils and peace councils, whose decisions would then be valid on a specific
territory (in the specific local community). Former informal systems were completely replaced
by a formal system.
LGI 2: Proportion of land in unresolved disputes is low and declining.
In 2014 municipal courts started to work on the total of 140,935 new civil cases. Out of that
number, there were in total 17,560 or 12.45% proprietary cases. Proprietary cases include
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    50

deletion claims, vindicatory actions, claims for the protection of easement, for trespassing, for
the establishment of the right of ownership on real property and chattels, and for the
performance (prohibition of harassment, restoration to the previous condition, and similar).
During 2014 all municipal courts resolved in total 157,801 civil cases, of which 21,121 were
proprietary cases, and based on that it can be concluded that proprietary cases accounted for
the total of 13.38% in the structure of resolved cases. At the end of 2014, there were 167,288
unresolved civil cases, of which 32,391 were proprietary cases or 19.36% of the total number
of unresolved cases.
At the same time, in 2014 land registry courts received in total 438,089 new cases; in the total
434,210 cases were resolved, and 39,262 land registry cases remained unresolved, which in
comparison with the end of 2013 accounts for 3,548 cases less (at the end of 2013 there were
in total 42,810 unresolved cases). In land registry cases there is a considerable reduction in
the number of appeals in comparison to the earlier period, before amending the Land
Registration Act in 2013. By introducing an objection as a legal remedy, the pressure on
second-instance courts, resulting from land registration cases, was alleviated to a considerable
extent. In the 6-months period, from 1 November 2014 to 1 April 2015, in total 2,183 objections
were filed in all land registration courts, and only 458 appeals.
Decisions by second-instance courts, excluding the County Court in Zagreb and County Court
in Split where there are certain backlogs, are rendered within appropriate time limits. Most
cases are resolved within one year from the day of their receipt by the judges chamber, while
those time limits are longer when it comes to courts with heavier workloads.
In the last three years the total of 1560 appeals were lodged against the first-instance rulings
regarding expropriation procedures, of which 712 were resolved, which means that more than
54% of lodged appeals remained unresolved, while the total of 401 complaints were filed in
expropriation procedures with administrative courts in Zagreb, Rijeka and Osijek, of which 279
complaints were resolved within three years.
Typical land disputes in civil procedures, especially in the coastal area, are the so-called formal
claims, which are used to put order to outdated real estate registers. Courts in Slavonia and
Northern Croatia started working on 10-20 of such cases in 2014, while, for example, the court
in Krk received 610 cases, the one in Split 873, the one in Supetar 175 and the one in Stari
Grad 252 cases etc. In such cases the person claiming to have acquired real property
ownership in a manner provided by the law sues the owners registered in the land register for
recognition of ownership rights and sufferance of entry into the land register, that is for the
issuance of clausula intabulandi. The problem in such proceedings is on the passive side, that
is, determining the defendants in such cases, whereby very often the registered owners are
deceased and their heirs have to be determined or such persons are given temporary
representatives. The defendant side may comprise more than ten defendants, and the data on
those persons in the land register is often incomplete and their addresses or some specific
marks so as to accurately identify those persons are missing. Precisely for this reason do these
cases take some time for the proceedings to initiate, because the exact addresses of
defendants must be obtained, information from the police acquired, and similar. Due to this, it
often takes even more than five years to resolve such cases.
Protection is available to individuals and legal entities, and the right to appeal is provided for
in every individual case. At the end of 2014, the proprietary cases account for almost 20% of
the total unresolved civil cases, which means that they also represent a considerable burden
for the system when it comes to old unresolved cases.

4.8.1   Findings and recommendations
                   Findings                                     Recommendation
   A significant share of proprietary cases      Introduce an informal dispute resolution system,
                                                 for example representatives in the procedures of
                                                 establishment, renewal of amendment to land
Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                      Croatia                                    51

                                            registers, prevent unskilled persons from making
                                            submissions
 State of play with regards to dispute      Harmonize procedures through additional
 resolution differs from one Croatian       personnel training, resolve the status in the land
 region to another                          register through a land register rather than civil
                                            procedure
 All land is entered in the cadastre/land   Enable a faster registration of the actual
 register, but the status often does not    situation using adequate procedures
 correspond to the actual situation
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    52

4.9   Organization of Institutions and Policies
All branches of the government, the legislative, the judicial and the executive, are responsible
for land and the associated land-related policies in the Republic of Croatia, each one of them
within their own powers and competence. There is a great number of institutions responsible
for land and different land-related policies, but each one of them within their own scope of
competence, and there is very little coordination. The scope of activities and competence of
the public administration bodies are clearly regulated by law and formally they should not be
mutually overlapping.
There are certain overlaps between some segments, particularly with regard to maintenance
of different real estate registers (PPIS, LPIS), partially also caused by the fact that the land
register and cadastre fail to indicate the updated real property status, the procedures of new
cadastral surveys and the resulting land register renewal are long-term and expensive, and
the cooperation between the Ministry of Justice and the State Geodetic Administration is
insufficient. In such cases other state bodies or agencies want to quickly establish their own
databases on the land of their concern, failing to take into consideration the role of fundamental
real property registers (land register and cadastre).
Within the judicial power, there is a clear distinction between the competence of the first
instance and second instance courts, as well as of the Supreme Court, but the land register is
maintained by the first instance municipal courts. However, the technical and substantive
assumptions for the operation of courts are provided by the Ministry of Justice, and the
efficiency of the entire system often depends on the activities and work of the Ministry of
Justice. There are situations in which the administrative bodies i.e. the first instance
administrative courts and the Higher Administrative Court also render decisions in some types
of disputes (the proceedings which concern expropriation, determination of fees and restitution
of confiscated property). The Civil, Commercial and Administrative Law Directorate within the
Ministry of Justice is competent for such activities.
In the context of agricultural land, in addition to the Ministry of Agriculture, which is responsible
for agricultural land, forests and forest land, water region and fishing region, there is also a
special Agricultural Land Agency, in charge of administration and disposal of agricultural land
owned by the Republic of Croatia. A special issue in this area is the quantity of such land,
given the fact that in 1991 all socially-owned agricultural land became the ownership of the
Republic of Croatia by law. The role of the Paying Agency for Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural
Development is also important for agricultural land, which Agency is concerned with cultivated
agricultural land and payment of incentives in accordance with the European Common
Agricultural Policy.
The Ministry of Construction and Physical Planning, as well as the Croatian Institute for Spatial
Development and the Institutes for Physical Planning at the level of cities and counties are in
charge of physical planning. Their activities are linked to construction land and other types of
land, seeing as physical plans are developed for whole territories of spatial units.
The Ministry of Environmental and Nature Protection is in charge of nature protection through
the Nature Protection Directorate, which is responsible for protected areas (national parks,
nature parks etc.) as well as through the Environmental Protection Agency, which establishes,
develops, maintains and coordinates an integrated environmental protection information
system. Furthermore, there is also the State Institute for Nature Protection as well as the
Environmental Protection and Energy Efficiency Fund in that field. Of the total territory of the
Republic of Croatia, the protected areas account for 8.195% in total, and the Ministry of
Environmental and Nature Protection maintains a special Protected Areas Register. Such
register also considerably overlaps with the cadastre i.e. with the land register.
The Ministry of Culture is in charge of cultural goods and keeps the Register of Cultural Goods
where the data mostly overlaps with the data in the cadastre i.e. the land register.
The Ministry of Finance exercises supervision over concessions and public-private
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    53

partnerships, conducts tax policy, regulates the tax system and maintains a Concession
Register. The Tax Administration maintains the Register of Taxpayers and has a very important
role in determination and allocation of the personal tax identification number.
The Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Transport and Infrastructure has a role in the delineation of
the maritime demesne boundary, whereas the Ministry of Economy is concerned with
investments and especially with strategic projects and public-private partnership projects.
The State Property Management Administration drafts the state property management and
disposal strategy, adopts the State Property Management Plan, is responsible for
administration and disposal of residential buildings and maintenance of a special State-Owned
Property Register. A large portion of the territory of the Republic of Croatia is owned by the
Republic of Croatia, the complexes of agricultural land, forests and forest land, the land
unconverted in the transformation and privatization process, the land unrestituted to previous
owners in the process of restitution of confiscated property etc. Although the competent state
bodies have an obligation to register the Republic of Croatia in the land register for all real
property in its ownership, there is also a special State-Owned Property Register, the data of
which overlap with the data of the cadastre and the land register.
Until 28 October 2015, public administration bodies reported the total of 1,015,444 pieces of
real property to the State-Owned Property Register. Out of that, 376,936 pieces of real property
are exclusively state-owned. State-owned property is mostly agricultural land (604,608) and
forests and forest land (307,081).
The local self-government units adopt physical plans, manage land in their ownership and
collect the utility fee, a contribution which is then used for land governance. At every county
level there is a County Institute for Physical Planning, which often provides the service of
physical plan development for the local self-government unit in their territory. At the county
level, there are public administration offices concerned with conducting the restitution
procedures for the property confiscated during the Yugoslav communist rule, that is carrying
out (complete and incomplete) expropriation procedure, determining the ownership right
regarding the land on tourist and other construction land, the value of which was not appraised
during the procedure of transformation and privatization of the previously socially-owned
enterprises.
Publicly-owned enterprises, such as Hrvatske šume d.o.o. (Croatian Forests Ltd.) administer
specific types of state-owned land, which enterprise is responsible for forest and forest land
administration, as well as for state-owned hunting grounds. Hrvatske autoceste d.o.o.
manages highways, state roads, local roads and county rounds, HŽ-Infrastruktura d.o.o.
manages the railway infrastructure, and Hrvatske vode d.o.o. manages public water resources.
Apart from the state-owned institutions, attorneys-at-law also deal with land and provide legal
counsel, draft land-related deeds, as well as claims and other petitions in legal disputes, acting
as authorized representatives of the parties before the court. Notaries public draft and issue
public deeds on legal affairs, declarations and facts, certify signatures on private deeds,
receive documents, money and other valuables into custody, issue writs of execution in
accordance with authentic deeds and conduct probate proceedings as court commissioners.
The Croatian Association of Court Expert Witnesses and Valuers gathers members which
provide their expert testimony in the proceedings before the court i.e. make appraisals of the
value of real estate at the request of the court. Chartered geodetic engineers design geodetic
surveys and other studies for the cadastre, while real estate brokerage is conducted by
licensed brokers organized under the Association of Real Estate Brokers within the Croatian
Chamber of Economy. The association “Manager” gathers managers of residential buildings,
which have an important role in the procedure of integration of the land register with the register
of deposited contracts.
The State Geodetic Administration designs, renews and maintains the surveys and the real
estate (land) cadastre. In the process, the land use data maintained by the SGA are not
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    54

harmonized with the needs of other institutions, which is also one of the reasons why other
institutions establish their own registers, special data bases.
The systematic negligence in the land registries in the period of socialism and the fact that the
cadastre was more updated due to the collection of taxes resulted in variation in the foregoing
registers. Although the law regulates that the land registers are based on the cadastral survey
data i.e. that the data on owners in the cadastre are the data adopted from the land register,
and not the original cadastral data.
In the Republic of Croatia real property agreements (deeds on legal transactions) may be
drafted both by notaries and attorneys-at-law. In this process, any deed drafted by a notary
has its number in the Register of Notaries, whereas the deeds drafted by the attorneys-at-law
often have no mark indicating that the deed was drafted by an attorney-at-law. Since the right
to draft land deeds is not restricted to attorneys-at-law and notaries, there is still a large “grey
zone” in which different pseudo-notaries draft real property deeds, whose lack of competency
or knowledge also results in disputes.
Any legally capable person is entitled to submit a proposal for registration, which often implies
that insufficiently qualified persons submit such proposals and, consequently, their proposals
are often refused or rejected. In addition, there are overlaps in jurisdiction between the lawyers
and notaries public when it comes to document composition, and party representation in land
court proceedings, where notaries public have the right to represent parties in cases arising
from the same documents that they compiled. In this context, it is important to mention that the
number of notaries is restricted and accurately regulated by law, whereas the number of
attorneys-at-law is unrestricted. It is only important that the person who wants to be an
attorney-at-law complies with the statutory conditions and pays the adequate fee to be
registered in the Bar Association.
The real property which is a common good as a rule is not registered in the land register i.e. it
is registered where concessions are established on such land. In this regard, in general a
maritime demesne is not registered in the land register and, in the same way, the marine
cadastral plots are not registered in the cadastre.
For certain pieces of real property which became state-owned property it is disputable whether
they are owned by the Republic of Croatia or by the local self-government unit, particularly in
cases which concern the real property on the boundary between construction land and
agricultural land, the real property registered in the land register as socially-owned or common
national property, without any title holder registered for the socially-owned real estate. In urban
areas, there is still a considerable number of unregistered buildings, that is, even if the
buildings are registered, there is no registration of ownership of the special part of the real
estate in accordance with the provisions of the Act on Ownership, nor are the register of
deposited contracts and the land register integrated.
The registration of roads in the land register, whether of public roads owned by the Republic
of Croatia or of unclassified roads owned by self-government units (municipalities or
towns/cities) mostly was not done in the past. The 2011 Roads Act regulates simpler
registration rules, with the aim of registering the genuine real estate status.
LGI 1: Clear competences and practice
From an administrative viewpoint, there is no overlapping of different levels of administration
and government. In that sense, the competence of the first instance bodies and second
instance – appellate bodies is clearly regulated, within the framework of the administration as
well as judiciary. In case of adoption of land use plans, the competent bodies of the self-
government unit adopt the land use plan, but those same bodies are also involved in its
implementation, and politics sometimes influence adoption of land use plans.
There is a horizontal overlapping of ministries and agencies, especially with regards to
maintenance of different land registers, which represents a financial burden for the state with
different redundant records and information systems. The reason for the establishment of such
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    55

special registries, along with the existing fundamental real property registers (land registers
and cadastre) is the unreadiness of such registers to provide data required by particular
ministries and agencies on certain types of real property (e.g. protected and cultural goods
etc.)
Land information is easily accessible, often completely free of charge or at a reasonable price.
There are differences in data standards, which sometimes cause difficulties. The
implementation of the European Union INSPIRE guidelines is under way. These cover the
issues in question and it is expected that their implementation will have a positive effect on the
availability of public information in general.
Different public institutions administer land-related issues in different ways, and there are no
effective mechanisms for coordination of their actions. Despite the normative framework being
detailed and harmonized, different interpretation and procedures are found in different
institutions. A large number of cadastral surveys remain to be completed even though
considerable funds have been invested. The fact that this problem remains unsolved points to
insufficient coordination or lack thereof between the State Geodetic Administration and the
Ministry of Justice.
The renewal of cadastral and land register data by means of cadastral surveys began some
20 years ago. Approximately 300 projects of cadastral surveys have been initiated, and only
about 150 have been completed. The final result is brought into question by the length of
project implementation, as projects sometimes last for more than 5 years. With time, data
becomes outdated as life continues on regardless of the surveys and land register renewal.
On the one hand, establishment of different databases in particular institutions with regard to
the real property in the interest of these particular institutions shows that neither the cadastre
nor the land register can provide the data which these institutions need, which on the other
hand may point to the lack of a wider land policy and non-existence of a vision of the purpose
and role of different real property registers.
LGI 2: Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process
There is no unified land policy in the Republic of Croatia, and decisions are made depending
on the need or the sector, usually without consultation with those affected by these decisions.
For example, there is no unified strategy of development of the land register and cadastral
system, regardless of the fact that a Joint Information System is currently being developed.
There is no comprehensive land policy, but certain elements can be found in certain regulations
and other documents, and there are elements of dedication to ecology. However, frequent
changes in regulations make long-term activities difficult. In those parts where there is a land
policy, its implementation can be assessed as satisfying.
Official land institutions frequently report on the implementation of their land policy and these
reports are publicly available. Reporting is present, but it differs from one sector to another,
which makes it difficult to compare due to unharmonized approaches to reporting and the
methodologies used.
There are certain measures and activities oriented towards provision of more affordable
housing (subsidised housing schemes), but there is no significant need for such policies in the
Republic of Croatia since there are no poor or marginalized groups which would benefit from
this.
Future risks are taken into account in certain segments, for example in land use planning.
However, there is no comprehensive policy based on the analysis of future risks.

4.9.1   Findings and Recommendations
                    Findings                                   Recommendation
   Almost every public administration body         Restructure various registers and abolish
   maintains its own land/real property            the redundant ones, foster data exchange
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    56

   databases, which are mostly not connected      between institutions
   to the cadastre/land register.
   Common goods, as well as other legal           Speed up/foster registration of common
   regimes, are not registered in the             goods and legal regimes
   cadastre/legal register
   There is no land governance strategy, land     Adopt a land governance strategy which will
   is governed in an uncoordinated manner         cover all sectors
   through sector policies




4.10 Coastal Zone Management
Croatian coast is 6,278 km long, of which 31% is on the mainland and 69% on the islands. In
the Adriatic coastal zone, there are 790 settlements with about 1,050,000 inhabitants, 370,000
apartments and 190,000 secondary homes, around one hundred spatially detached tourist
zones with about 430,000 beds, few dozen industrial zones and about one hundred big
harbours or marinas with 17,000 berths. According to the situation as recorded in 2000,
cities/town, settlements and other urbanised areas occupy about 850 km or 15% of the total
length of the maritime coastline.
Until 1960, when all types of intensive construction began in the Adriatic region, about 120-
150 km of the Adriatic coastline was used in total. This means that in the last 40-odd years the
construction activities "used up" 5 times more space, most commonly best quality coastal
space, than built and used by any previous generation. The developmental strains on the coast
continued to grow to an immeasurable extent, posing a real threat of irreversible destruction in
this zone which belonged, and fortunately still belongs, to a relatively well-preserved part of
the European continent.
According to the land use plans in force, additional ca. 800 km were planned for further
expansion of cities/towns and settlements along the coastline, and consequently, the urban
part of the coast might expand to about 1,650 km, and the size of the urban area by about
65,500 ha. Of the above-mentioned numbers, the tourist zones would take up about 600 km
of the coast and 15,300 ha of space. The 2013 Physical Planning Act imposes clear limitations
to the expansion of construction land that is an obligation of its reduction in compliance with
the given criteria.
In accordance with such criteria, a new generation of land use plans is developed which shall
comply with the stipulated criteria and reduce the planned areas to the realistic scope. The
Physical Planning Act defines the Protected Coastal Zone (PCZ) as a zone of special state
concern and lays down significant limitations to the construction in such zone. The PCZ
includes the continental belt and islands 1,000 m in width from the coastline and the maritime
belt 300 m in width from the coastline. In its continental part, the PCZ covers 4,369 km 2 (the
mainland - 1,401 km2, the islands - 3,238 km2).
Illegal construction, particularly in the coastal zone, is an ongoing land governance issue in
Croatia. In 2012 legalisation of illegally constructed buildings was allowed with a serious
intention to prevent future illegal construction. Of 274,679 applications for legalisation in
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    57

maritime counties, in terms of the number of applications per linear kilometre of the coastline
the County of Istria is in the forefront with 83 applications per kilometre, followed by the County
of Zadar with 71 applications per km, and the County of Split-Dalmatia with 66 applications per
km. The average number of applications for the entire coast is 44 applications per km.
Despite the expected decline in the total number of inhabitants in the Republic of Croatia, it is
estimated that the number of urban population in the coastal zone will significantly increase,
from 794,000 in 2000 to 929,000 inhabitants in 2025. In the same period, the total number of
tourists on the Croatian coast will double in 2025 in comparison with the number in 2000, from
6 million to 12 million tourists annually.
To date no coastal zone management strategies, programmes and plans have been drawn up,
if their definition according to the ICZM Mediterranean Protocol is taken into account, although
some initiatives have been undertaken. The Šibenik-Knin County Coastal Plan is being drafted
with the focus on adaptation to climate change and variability. The Dubrovnik-Neretva County
has adopted the ICZM guidelines and this County seems to be implementing serious spatial
protection and development measures for the coastal zone, also including significant quality
improvement in the built environment. Drafting of the Integrated Marine Environment and
Coastal Zone Protection Strategy of the Republic of Croatia is also undergoing. The strategy
aims to develop a framework to introduce the ICZM as a compulsory coastal and marine
ecosystems management system.
LGI 1: Marine use right for the purpose of fisheries
There are no special regulations concerning management of the coastal zone as a whole, but
there are regulations concerning specific coastal zone issues, but they are not fully mutually
aligned. The integrated coastal zone management in the Republic of Croatia has not been
formally legally regulated, and for the time being there is a lack of the institutional framework
for the development and implementation of formal strategies and policies. However, a majority
of the Protocol principles, as well as a majority of its instruments, are present and applied to a
greater or lesser extent. They can be found in a number of laws and other legal acts, as well
as in strategies, plans and programmes pertaining to the coastal zone from different aspects.
Several ministries have been involved in resolving individual coastal zone-related issues:
Ministry of Environmental and Nature Protection, Ministry of Construction and Physical
Planning, Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Transport and Infrastructure,
Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Regional Development and European Union Funds, Ministry of
Agriculture and Ministry of Economy.
Coastal zone management is burdened with specific, but also general difficulties making the
efficient land governance impossible. Out-of-date cadastres and land registers aggravate
efficient land policy enforcement, allow manipulation with construction land and obstruct
investment implementation. As a result of long-standing coastal and island depopulation, it is
difficult to access real land owners, which additionally aggravates regulation of property rights
issues. In the largest section of the coast the maritime domain has not been determined and
registered. It is practically exclusively determined upon request of potential investors or of the
local self-government units.
The tax policy fails to encourage registration of actual land-property relations, and the
instruments for construction land governance (municipal development, provision of public
areas, etc.) are not elaborated to a required extent, which aggravates quality governance over
newly urbanised parts of the coast. Regulatory compliance control fails to ensure full
application of environmental and nature protection standards and criteria.
LGI 2: Efficiency of the process of drafting land use plans in coastal zones
Land use plans are often developed without clear programmes and as a rule include intentions
and interests often not considered from all aspects. The purpose of areas for industrial
activities and other functions is commonly not preceded by adequate development strategies,
or appraisal of carrying capacity, which could create balance between developmental needs
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    58

and admissible environmental burden. The planned sizes of construction land and detached
tourist zones in the coastal zone often exceed the needs and the capacities of the local
community in terms of its demographic, labour and social potential.
Unrealistic expectations of land owners and equal treatment of the right of ownership and the
right of construction (ownership over purpose) result in the planning process which often
begins with the land owner and his/her intentions instead of with a planning process led by
planning intentions concerning the integrated settlement development. This is also connected
with the problem of (in) capacity of local communities to develop a model of sustainable local
development. Local self-government units often trivialise plan development and reduce it to
"delineation of requests for an increase in the construction land", which is more prominent in
the coastal zone due to the high value of construction land.
LGI 3: Efficiency of the process of marine use planning
There is no separate system of developing and adopting spatial plans for marine areas. Such
areas are planned under County Land Use Plans, which allow public expression of opinions
and suggestions. Mariculture zones are included in County Land Use Plans and the interests
of different sectors are aligned in the process of their adoption.
The territorial use rights for fisheries are legally recognised, but there is a problem of fishing
without a license, and a problem with "small", occasional fishermen. The aquaculture sector is
in its initial stage of development. Such areas are reserved under plans, but the investments
are scarce.
Despite a lack of specific maritime spatial plans, the existing County Land Use Plans partially
also define the marine purpose. The co-existence of the fishing and trading rights is possible
under the law and complied with in practice, but dispute resolution mechanisms are often
inadequate. There are individual conflicts over the use e.g. between mariculture and tourism,
and their resolution leads to disputes as a result of inadequate dispute resolution mechanisms.
In urban coastal zones, although urban development depends on the hierarchy of
county/town/municipal/detailed plans for the use of space, in practice the development is only
partially in compliance with available construction land and depends on infrastructure
availability, whereby the plans are only partially implemented. The available size of
construction land approved under the plans exceeds the actual demand for space several
times and there are no efficient land consolidation instruments.
The process of urban planning and adequate institutions are partially capable to cope with an
increased demand for construction land in urban coastal zones. The recent legalisation and
rigorous actions against new illegal construction give hope that the number of illegal facilities
will considerably decrease.
The requests for marine use permits are clear, direct, available, but not consistently applied in
the framework of a transparent procedure. Since integrated coastal zone management is only
in its initial stage of development, a special procedure has not been developed yet. Rare
approved in compliance with determinants under the County Land use Plans which fail to cover
the marine space systematically but use the ad hoc basis pursuant to the regulations of specific
sectors. The time required for obtaining the license depends largely on the type of use and the
number of sectors/institutions competent for issuing individual consents.
The hierarchy of land use and temporal plans for the use of marine areas is defined under the
law and enforced in practice, but in terms of planning, greater respect for load-bearing marine
capacity is required. Marine area is under considerable impact of mainland activities and it is
an important integrator of development in the marine and the continental part of the coastal
zone. Although currently there is a lack of special marine use plans, the purpose of marine
areas defined under county plans is partially in compliance with territorial strategies and plans.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    59

4.10.1 Findings and recommendations
                    Findings                             Recommendation
  The maritime domain is largely             Accelerate/encourage registration of the
  unregistered in the Cadastre and Land      maritime domain
  Register
  A lack of adequately standardized data     Stimulate standardization of official data
  concerning marine areas                    and update the existing official information
                                             systems
  A lack of development programs based on    Draft development programs and new
  sustainable development as a basis for     plans taking into account realistic needs
  land use plans development                 and potentials for sustainable
                                             development
  Overregulated professional activities      Review legislation and repeal unnecessary
                                             provisions
  Insufficient coordination between          Improve coordination between institutions
  competent institutions                     competent for maritime areas
  All land is entered in the cadastre/land   Enable a faster registration of the actual
  register, but the status often does not    situation using adequate procedures
  correspond to the actual situation
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    60

5. Policy analysis and recommendations
The land governance assessment in the Republic of Croatia was by the implementation of
LGAF. The assessment indicated that land governance is developed differently across sectors.
Some indicators were assessed as successful whereas others show a potential for
improvement. Generally speaking, some areas may deliver good performance, but even good
examples, on account of incompliances, sometimes fail to give satisfactory results.

5.1.1   Land governance strategy and policies
Land governance is disunited. The integrity of the land governance system needs to be
improved by developing a strategy which will include all sectors. The majority of land
governance activities are carried out across sectors. Many sectors achieve good results.
However, the coordination of activities across sectors is insufficient due to the lack of basic
umbrella documents on the basis of which particular activities could be planned. This
particularly concerns the integrated land governance strategy which should be drafted. In
compliance with such strategy, the current sectoral strategies should be updated and the ones
which are missing should be drafted. All sectors should cooperate to define the integrated land
and housing policy, which will be included in adequate legislation and other documentation.
Land development planning and determination of purpose is technically well-developed. Since
Croatia gained its independence, a generation of all land use plans for the entire territory of
the Republic of Croatia has been drafted. The analysis of the implemented generation of land
use plans and drafting of a new generation of land use plans are undergoing. For such
purpose, criteria have been adopted under legislation, but a majority of areas still lack
development programmes as a basic planning parameter. A large number of small local self-
government units do not have adequate resources to plan sustainable development, for which
purpose they often also lack spatial data. It is necessary to establish land use planning, both
continental and marine, based on a strategy and sustainable development programmes.

5.1.2   Land and tenure registration
The registered entries in the cadastre and the land register do not match the reality. It is
necessary to intensify updating of information in the cadastre/land register with the actual
situation. At the end of the 19th century the Republic of Croatia had the basic factors in the
land governance system (cadastre and land register) established for all continental land. The
changes in the social and political system had an impact on their development, and initially
fully aligned management and maintenance were undermined in the period of socialism. In the
period of socialism, the cadastre was a fundamental instrument for collecting agricultural
income tax paid by the actual beneficiary, irrespective of him/her being the owner or not. The
Government treated the private freehold as something undesirable that is as something to be
phased out, so that everything could become socially owned. Consequently, the land register
was neglected. It was obligatory to register all land changes in the cadastre, whereas any
registration in the land register was on voluntary basis. Moreover, there were many
circumstances discouraging such registration. To avoid paying a high real estate excise tax
rate (up to 70%), many failed to request registration in the land register.
More than 70% of the areas are demarcated in the cadastral plan resulting from a graphical
surveying method in the 19th century, and the accuracy of locations in that plan is inadequate
for current needs. The agricultural income tax is not collected anymore and as a result the
information in the cadastre is out-of-date, that is has not been updated for the last 20 years.
Therefore, it is necessary to intensify activities and to introduce measures to update the
information in the cadastre and in the land register in accordance with the reality.
An increasing number of industrial activities are carried out in maritime areas and at sea itself.
Such areas are not delineated in the cadastral plan and registered in the land register although
recently adopted legislation makes provisions in this regard. Such areas are in the common
land regime and may not be subject to the right of ownership, but their registration is necessary
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    61

due to transparent and clear allocation of concessions increasingly requested in such areas.
In addition to private land rights, land characteristics (e.g. value) are also determined by public
limitations determined under legal regimes. The Republic of Croatia has a number of legal
regimes rarely determined for a cadastral plot, but more commonly for areas (national park,
protected area...) in maps or coordinates. Determination of marginal cadastral plots they
concern very often causes difficulties. The maritime domain and other legal regimes are not
registered in registers for the time being, and their systematic registration should be
accelerated.
In addition to legal regimes, the registers seldom include registration of public municipal
infrastructure and legal relations between the land owner and the infrastructure situated on
such land. The current Utility Cadastre registers only technical characteristics without any
legal relations, and the registration of corresponding encumbrance is only sporadically
required in the land register.
A temporary solution (Register of Deposited Contracts) makes registration of special parts of
real estate possible. The transfer of registration from the Register of Deposited Contracts to
the land register is carried out very slowly and such process should be accelerated.
Pursuant to the Acts on Transformation and Privatisation of the Socially Owned Property,
adopted after the Republic of Croatia gained its independence, the holder of the right of
ownership was determined for a lot of land. The registration of such fact was not carried out
systematically in the registers, but it was up to the right holders to file an application for such
registration. A lot of such real estate is still registered as socially-owned in the Land Register.
It especially concerns the real estate which became state-owned. For such reason, the
protection of confidence in the land register was postponed several times to date. This situation
creates uncertainty in the real estate market and it is necessary to finalise the registrations
resulting from the transformation of social ownership in the cadastre and land register as soon
as possible.
The boundaries of cadastral municipalities, as well as the boundaries of settlements, were
delineated and marked in the field 200 years ago. They were always used to establish area
units of higher levels (city/town, municipality, district, county) the composition of which included
the entire settlements whereby their boundaries were clear and unambiguous. Meanwhile, the
development changed the area considerably and the boundaries of cadastral municipalities, in
many cases, are not taken into consideration as the boundaries between territorial units of
higher hierarchical level. This aggravates administrative activities, determination of
competence and does not allow the use of cadastral data for the analysis of situation in
territorial units of higher levels. Therefore, the hierarchy of territorial units should be aligned.
The Republic of Croatia does not have a tax on all real estate. There is a real estate excise
tax and levies which concern specific real estate. The taxes and levies are calculated using
different methodologies depending on the purpose and there is no single evaluation system
that could be used for multiple purposes. More efficient determination of levies, but also the
support for the introduction of the real estate tax, announced quite a while ago, is possible if
the national system of large-scale real estate valuation is introduced.
The outdated registrations in the cadastre and land register, but also a lack of coordination in
the land governance system have resulted in the establishment of many real estate registers.
They mostly include one piece of information, whereas other information is taken from the
cadastre or the land register. Managing and maintaining such registers is unnecessary
dissipation of resources and thus restructuring and abolishing of redundant registers are
proposed.

5.1.3   Spatial data control
The available data on the spatial situation is insufficient for planning and land management
needs. The current spatial information systems (JIS) need to be combined and supplemented
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    62

with the necessary content. Many activities concerning land governance require knowledge
about spatial data. They can be found in current registers or by carrying out ad-hoc activities
to collect the data. Outdated information in current registers and their specialisation and
separation do not allow easy performance of the spatial data analysis. To improve the usability
of information, it is necessary to standardise methodology, terminology and data collection and
cross-sectoral exchange and reporting to build an efficient spatial data control system. While
many digitalization projects concerning the cadastre and the land register have been
implemented, getting a response from competent institutions to simple analytical inquiries is
impossible (e.g. how many cadastral parcels of arable land are registered, how much of social
ownership is registered, etc.) APPRRR, from the ARKOD system, responds quickly and
reliably to similar inquiries.
The availability of information in the public sector is provided under legislation. The services
are largely established which allow prompt and easy access to such information. For specific
land information, e.g. expropriation, valuation rolls, concessions and leases of public land, the
services do not exist or are still undergoing. The fundamental online platform e-Građani/e-
Citizens was established with a minimum number of services. It represents a good basis for
further development of services for citizens and it is recommended to include the services
concerning land governance data into this platform.
The e-Građani/e-Citizens platform includes a One Stop Shop of the Joint Information System,
but for the time being with low functionality. It is especially recommended to encourage data
exchange between institutions in charge of land governance by establishing a data exchange
system and coordinating bodies to discourage keeping of special separate registers.

5.1.4   Land resources management
There are many inactive pieces of land/real estate in the Republic of Croatia. Inactive land/real
estate, especially those under state authority, should be activated by improving the land
management system. The socialist system had a number of policies resulting in land
fragmentation. Today there are more than 14 million of cadastral plots in Croatia. Many of them
are so small that they are inconvenient for any agricultural production. This situation has been
known for a long time, but adequate measures are carried out slowly. Individual attempts at
land consolidation failed to produce more significant results to date. In 2015 the Land
Consolidation Act was adopted, but a lot of effort should be invested for it to take hold and to
start showing results. In the context of land consolidation, special attention should be paid to
take into account both the economic benefits and sustainable development.
There is a lot of uncultivated agricultural land, not only as a result of fragmentation. The
ownership structure is inadequate, many cadastral plots are co-owned, and the registration is
not updated. Such situation concerning the registered land rights discourages its use. The
corrective registration procedures are clear, but very often time-consuming and it is necessary
to find simpler procedures to activate the use of land, in which process the introduction of
incentive measures is also recommended.
The sectoral approach to defining the types of land resulted in a number of classification
standards which are not always compatible. The same land is classified differently, and it is
thus necessary to standardise the types of land and to simplify identification of types in
legislation and practice.
There are many legal regimes in the Republic of Croatia. They limit owners in use and
management. With the aim of preserving resources, their introduction is imperative. There is
an impression that their number and the scope of restrictions are too large, and that often the
opposite effect is produced. Instead of having the resource preserved, the use of such resource
is abandoned and it is left to deteriorate. Therefore, the justification of limitation to ownership
under legal regimes and protected areas should be reviewed and more efficient management
in cases of the overlapping land tenure allowed.
There are considerable, still unused, areas of public land. Granting concessions and lease
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    63

have recently intensified. The allocation of such land was not followed by the development of
a use control system which sometimes leads to non-compliance with the contractual
obligations. The development of a control system for the public land use collection and more
severe sanctions against incompliance with contractual obligations may improve the use of
public land. Although misdemeanour sanctions and inspections are regulated, sometimes
there are no resources for their implementation. It is necessary to review them with the aim of
improving their implementation.

5.1.5   Regulations and institutions
Legislation is segmented and too extensive, and too many institutions are involved in land
management activities. Legislation needs to be simplified, the number of institutions reduced
and they should be adapted for e-business. The land governance legislative framework is very
comprehensive and detailed, but rarely defines state-of-the art technologies and procedures
in the electronic environment. It should be upgraded in that context. A detailed analysis of
cross-sectoral regulatory overlap can help remove excessive segmentation and over-
standardisation.
The key land and rights registers, the cadastre and land register fall within the scope of different
institutions, which causes uncoordinated approaches. At the technical level, the difficulties are
resolved through the introduction of the Joint Information System (JIS). Further integration of
maintenance of the key land data (cadastre and land register) along with the creation of a more
efficient governance structure should be a priority. This could reduce the costs and make the
registers focus on self-financing.
A reduction in the number of institutions granting land consents would help the economy and
accelerate obtaining of permits. In many areas cross-institutional cooperation is at an
impressive level. For those areas which are still lagging behind, better cooperation should be
provided. It is also possible to improve cooperation between public administration and the
educational system. Uneven development in the Republic of Croatia can also be seen in the
context of human resources responsible for land governance and it is necessary to allow
training to everyone and to provide equal distribution of adequately educated human resources
in the entire Republic of Croatia.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    64

6. Conclusions
The implementation of LGAF in the Republic of Croatia contributed to the identification of its
status and enabled the defining of priorities for conducting improvement activities in the area
of land governance. The joint conclusion of all participants is that the fact that the entries in
the cadastre and land register are not updated makes it difficult to formulate land policy and
implement it in practice. The status of land governance in the Republic of Croatia can be
assessed as good, but improvements are possible; therefore, the following is suggested:
a. Update the registration status of land and tenure in registers:

      Align the status in cadastre and land register with the actual status
      Register maritime demesne and other legal regimes
      Complete the registration of rights resulting from "social ownership"
      Align the hierarchy of territorial units (technical and normative)
      Develop a system of mass valuation of real estate
      Restructure various land registers and abolish the ones that are redundant.
b. Work on land governance strategy and policies:

      Develop a comprehensive land governance strategy that will cover all sectors
      Develop sectoral strategies based on a comprehensive strategy
      Define land and housing policy
      Base spatial planning, both on land and sea, on the strategy and sustainable
       development programmes, taking into account sustainable development.
c. Develop the monitoring of spatial status:

      Improve the system for spatial status monitoring, standardize methodology,
       terminology and data collection as well as the exchange and reporting between the
       sectors
      Publish the information on status (expropriation, value lists, public land concessions
       and leases...)
      Encourage data exchange between institutions and services.
d. Improve land resource management:

      Expand the lands by joining them together
      Simplify the procedures for activating land use, introduce incentive measures
      Standardize types of land and simplify the identification of types both in regulations
       and in practice
      Review the justification of ownership limitations by way of legal regimes and
       protected areas, enable a more efficient management in cases of overlapping
      Develop a system for monitoring the charging of public land use and increase the
       sanctioning of the breach of contractual obligations
      Review the effectiveness of misdemeanour sanctions and inspections.
e. Align the regulations and institutions:

      Improve the legal framework by implementing modern technologies and eliminate the
       high segmentation of regulations and excessive standardization
      Unite the keeping of key land data (cadastre and land register) and create a more
       effective management structure with greater focus on self-financing
      Reduce the number of institutions that issue consents for lands
Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                      Croatia                                    65

    Ensure better cooperation between the administration, professions and competent
     institutions
    Ensure balanced distribution of educated and quality staff across the Republic of
     Croatia and enable professional training.
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    66

7. Further steps
During 2015, six phases of the LGAF implementation were carried out in the Republic of
Croatia. During the preparation phase, the national coordinator examined the LGAF and
adjusted the indicators and measures to the national context, and identified the data sources
necessary for assessment. He also planned the resources and found appropriate expert
researchers and panel participants. He developed land interest typology and the overview of
institutions in cooperation with expert researchers.
During the second phase, expert researchers prepared status reports for each module. They
prepared the reports by collecting qualitative and quantitative status data and by expert
analysis. They preliminary assessed the criteria and suggested the grades. Based on the
status reports, reports for panel discussions were made during the third implementation
phase.
During the fourth phase, 10 panel discussions were held with the national coordinator taking
part along with recognised experts from the panel area, and they agreed on the criteria
assessment. Panel discussions were documented in the memoranda made for each panel.
During the fifth phase, the national coordinator drafted a detailed LGAF report for the
Republic of Croatia. The report contained a table of criteria assessment and proposals of
future policies derived from previous implementation phases. After a review and suggestions
from the World Bank, the national coordinator amended the report and prepared it for the
next phase.
Pursuant to the LGAF methodology, these are: the fifth phase: the technical inspection
workshop, and the sixth phase: the policy dialogue workshop. The technical inspection
workshop will review the results and suggested policies and where necessary amend the
proposals. The policy dialogue will result in an action plan which will be agreed on following
the discussion on policy application.
The national coordinator will prepare a single-day workshop on technical inspection. This
involves the definition of the list of participants in cooperation with the World Bank, the
provision of logistics for the proper implementation of the workshop, and the delivery of
materials to the participants. Around 50 participants will be invited to the workshops. Part of
the participants will be experts who took part in the panel discussions, and they will be joined
by public and other experts from the land sector. Work will be conducted according to the
following preliminary agenda:

       Time     Activity                                   Leader/speaker
    8.00 -9.00. Arrival of participants/registration       Organiser
                                                           Government representative and World Bank
    9.00 -9.15. Welcome and introduction
                                                           representative
                LGAF in General                            Miodrag Roić – LGAF
    9.15 - 9.45
                Implementation of LGAF in Croatia          national coordinator
   9.45 - 12.30 Presentation of LGAF finds per module      Leader - national coordinator

                Recognition of land rights/ Forest and
   9.45 -10.10. communal land rights and regulations on the Expert Researcher
                use of rural land
                Urban Land Use, Planning and
     10.10 -
                Development/ The valuation and taxation of Expert Researcher
      10.35.
                land
     10.35 - Coffee break
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    67

      10.55.
     10.55 -      Public Land Management/ Allocation of
                                                             Expert Researcher
      11.20.      Extensive Plots of Land to Investors
     11.20 -      Provision of Public Information on Land:
                                                             Expert Researcher
      11.45.      Land Register and Cadastre
     11.45 -      Settlement of Disputes/ Organization of
                                                             Expert Researcher
      12.10.      Institutions and Policies
     12.10 -
                  Coastal Zone Management                    Expert Researcher
      12.30.
     12.30 -
                  Lunch                                      Organiser
      13.45.
     13.45 -      Group discussions/ overview of results per
                                                             5 leaders and recording clerks
      15.15.      module (5 groups)
     15.15 -
                  Coffee break and group photo               Organiser
      16.00.
   16.00 -1645.   Presentation of work per group             Group leaders
     16.45 -
                  Discussion                                 National coordinator/participants
      17.00.
     17.00 -      Conclusions and proposals for future
                                                             National coordinator, World Bank representative
      17.15.      steps
     17.15 -
                  Closure                                    Government representative
      17.30.


The half-day workshop on policy dialogue will have key policy makers who will discuss the
findings and proposals of future policy. It will be organised a day after the technical
inspection workshop. Workshop participants will be policy makers from appropriate levels of
the ministry, the program, parliament groups in charge of land policy questions, etc. The
national coordinator will, in cooperation with state administration and the World Bank,
suggest a list of participants and deliver in advance the concluding report to participants, with
proposals for future policies, in electronic and printed format. The policy dialogue workshop
will be scheduled according to the following preliminary agenda:

       Time     Activity                                            Leader/speaker
    8.00 -9.00. Arrival of the participants and registration        Organiser
    9.00 -9.10. Welcome and opening                                 Government representative
    9.10 -9.30. Introductory presentation                           Workshop leader/World Bank
    9.30 -9.45. LGAF in General and its Implementation in Croatia   National coordinator
   9.45 -10.15. Coffee break
                Presentation on future policy proposals based on    National coordinator and panel
  10.15 -11.45.
                priorities                                          leader
                                                                    National coordinator/World Bank
  11.45 -12.15. Discussions and conclusions on priorities
                                                                    representative
  12.15 -12.30. Next activities                                     Government representative
      12.30     Closure                                             Government representative
                Lunch


A record will be made of the workshops and the conclusions will be part of the final LGAF
report for the Republic of Croatia.
After the workshops, participants will be able to additionally submit their suggestions in
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    68

written format within 15 days. Suggestions can be submitted by e-mail to the national
coordinator or entered online in the intranet project which was established in the previous
implementation phases.
Workshops can be held in the Zagreb World Bank office or in some other more suitable
rented space.
Since the government of the Republic of Croatia is currently still being formed, and it is not
expected that it will assume duty before the end of January, I suggest that the workshops are
held in late March or afterwards, depending on the availability of the World Bank
representative who will take part in the work.
Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                      Croatia                                    69
     Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                           Croatia                                    70

References
Land regulations
1.     Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (OG 56/90, 135/97, 8/98, 113/00, 124/00, 28/01, 41/01,
       55/01, 76/10, 85/10, 05/14)
2.     Arbitration Act (OG 88/01)
3.     Roads Act (OG 84/11, 22/13, 54/13, 148/13, 92/14)
4.     State Survey and Real Estate Cadastre Act (OG 16/07, 124/10)
5.     Building Act (OG 153/13)
6.     Construction Products Act (OG 76/13, 30/14)
7.     Act on the Expropriation and Determination of Compensation (OG 74/14)
8.     Agricultural Land Redistribution Act (51/15)
9.     Act on the Chamber of Architects and the Chamber of Civil Engineers and Physical Planning (OG
       78/15)
10.    Utilities Act (26/03, 36/95, 70/97, 128/99, 57/00, 129/00, 59/01, 82/04, 178/04, 38/09, 79/09, 49/11,
       144/12, 147/14)
11.    Local and Regional Self-Government Act (OG 33/01, 60/01, 129/05, 109/07, 125/08, 36/09, 36/09,
       150/11, 144/12, 19/13)
12.    Hunting Act (OG 140/05, 75/09, 153/09, 14/14)
13.    Conciliation Act (OG 18/11)
14.    Marine Fisheries Act (OG 81/13, 14/14, 152/14)
15.    National Spatial Data Infrastructure Act (OG 56/13)
16.    Apartment Lease Act (OG 91/96, 48/98, 66/98, 22/06)
17.    Act on Restitution of Property Expropriated During Yugoslav Communist Rule (OG 92/96, 39/99,
       42/99, 92/99,43/00, 131/00, 27/01, 34/01, 65/01, 118/01, 80/02, 81/02),
18.    Settlements Act (OG 54/88)
19.    Inheritance Act (OG 48/03, 163/03, 35/05, 127/13, 33/15)
20.    Geodetic Activity Act (OG 152/08, 56/13)
21.    General Administrative Procedure Act (OG 47/09)
22.    Islands Act (OG 34/99, 149/99, 32/02, 33/06)
23.    Act on Navigation and Inland Ports (OG 109/07 and 132/07)
24.    Act on the Areas and Seats of Courts (OG 128/14)
25.    Agriculture Act (OG 30/15)
26.    Agricultural Land Act (OG 39/13, 48/15)
27.    Maritime Demesne and Seaports Act (OG 158/03, 100/04, 123/11,141/06, 38/09)
28.    Profit Tax Act (OG 177/14).
29.    Income Tax Act (OG 177/14).
30.    Real Estate Transfer Tax Act (OG 69/97)
31.    Act on Tasks and Activities of Physical Planning and Building (OG 78/15)
32.    Act on Procedures Concerning Illegally Built Buildings (OG 86/12, 143/13)
33.    Agriculture and Rural Development Support Act (OG 80/13)
34.    Act on the Right of Access to Information (OG 25/13)
35.    Act on the Right of Access to Information (OG 25/13)
36.    Real Estate Appraisal Act (OG 78/15)
37.    Physical Planning Act (OG 153/13)
38.    Regional Development Act (OG 153/09)
39.    Mining Act (OG 56/13, 14/14)
40.    Act on Strategic Investment Projects of the Republic of Croatia (OG 133/13, 152/14)
41.    Courts Act (OG 28/13, 33/15, 82/15)
42.    State Administration System Act (OG 150/11 and 12/13)
43.    Forestry Act (OG 140/05, 82/06, 129/08, 80/10, 124/10, 25/12, 68/12, 148/13, 94/14)
44.    Companies Act (OG 111/93, 34/99, 121/99, 52/00, 118/03, 107/07, 146/08, 137/09, 125/11, 152/11,
       111/12, 68/13)
45.    Act on the Management and Disposal of Assets Owned by the Republic of Croatia (OG 94/13)
46.    Administrative Fees Act (OG 8/96, 80/13)
47.    Administrative Disputes Act (OG 20/10, 143/12, 152/14)
  Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                        Croatia                                    71
48. Act on Ownership and Other Real Rights (OG 91/96, 68/98, 137/99, 22/00, 73/00, 129/00, 114/01,
    79/06, 141/06, 146/08, 38/09, 153/09, 143/12, 152/14).
49. Water Act (OG 153/09, 63/11, 130/11, 56/13, 14/14)
50. Lease and Sale of Business Premises Act (OG 91/96, 124/97, 174/04 and 38/09)
51. Act on the Protection and Preservation of Cultural Goods (OG 69/99, 151/03, 157/03, 100/04,
    87/09, 88/10, 61/11, 25/12, 136/12, 157/13, 152/14)
52. Nature Protection Act (OG 80/13)
53. Land Register Act (OG 91/96, 68/98, 137/99, 114/01, 100/04, 107/07, 152/08, 126/10, 55/13, 60/13)
54. Railways Act (OG 94/13, 148/13)
55. Ordinance on the Establishment and Keeping of the Register of Deposited Contracts (OG 42/91)
56. Ordinance on the Internal Structure and Maintenance of Land Registers and the Execution of Other
    Tasks in Court Land Registry Departments. Land Register Rules of Procedure (OG 81/97, 109/02,
    123/02, 153/02, 14/05, 60/10 and 55/13)
57. Ordinance on Topographical Surveying and Development of State Maps (OG 109/08)
58. Ordinance on the Content, Organisation and Manner of Keeping the Database of Public Roads and
    Structures Thereon (OG 56/15)
59. Ordinance on the Contents and Required Spatial Indicators in Reports on the Spatial Status (OG
    48/14 and 19/15)
60. Ordinance on the Contents and the Manner of Conducting the National Inventory of Forest
    Resources (OG 53/06 and 137/08)
61. Ordinance on the Vineyards Register, Mandatory Statements, Supporting Documents, Records of
    Stocks and Production Potential (OG 48/14)
62. Ordinance on the Implementation of Direct Payments and IACS Measures for Rural Development
    (OG 145/12)
63. Ordinance on the Licence for Conducting Commercial Fishing at Sea and the Licence Register (OG
    130/13, 99/14, 127/14, 37/15 i 46/15)
64. Ordinance on Connecting the Land Register with the Register of Deposited Contracts(OG 121/13)
65. Ordinance on Connecting the Land Register with the Register of Deposited Contracts and the
    Registration of Ownership of the Special Part of the Real Estate (OG 60/10)
66. Ordinance on the Tendering Procedure for the Selection of the Economically Most Advantageous
    Tenderer at the Public Call for Granting the Lease of Agricultural Land owned by the Republic of
    Croatia and Fish-Pond Lease (OG 120/13, 98/15)
67. Ordinance on the Initial Lease Amount for the Lease of Agricultural Land owned by the Republic of
    Croatia and Fish-Pond Lease, and the Water Fee for Fish-Ponds (OG 107/13)
68. Ordinance on the Manner of Keeping the Register of Common Pastures Owned by the Republic of
    Croatia (OG 18/14)
69. Ordinance on the Manner of Keeping the Records on the Change of Use of Agricultural Land (OG
    149/13)
70. Ordinance on the Manner of Establishing the Volume of a Building for the Purposes of Calculating
    the Utility Contribution (OG 136/06, 135/10, 14/11, 55/12)
71. Ordinance on the Manner of Designation of the Names of Settlements, Streets and Squares and
    the Numerical Marking of Buildings (OG 4/90, 91/11)
72. Ordinance on the Methodology for Monitoring of the Status of Agricultural Land (OG 43/14)
73. Ordinance on the Methodology for Determining the Market Price for the Sale of Agricultural Land
    owned by the Republic of Croatia by Direct Contracting (OG 141/13)
74. Ordinance on the Methods of Real Estate Value Appraisal (OG 79/14)
75. Ordinance on the Use of Road Land and Performance of Supporting Activities on a Public Road
    (OG 78/14)
76. Ordinance on Cadastral Measurements and Technical Revision (OG 147/08)
77. Ordinance on Land Cadastre Act (OG 84/07, 148/09)
78. Ordinance on the Register of Territorial Units (OG 37/08)
79. Ordinance on the Establishment and Keeping of the Register of Deposited Contracts (42/91 and
    16/94)
80. Regulation on the Disposition of Real Estate Owned by the Republic of Croatia (OG 127/13)
81. Regulation on the Manner and Criteria for the Lease of Agricultural Land Owned by the Republic
    of Croatia (OG 108/06 and 73/09)
  Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                        Croatia                                    72
82. Regulation on the Model Form and the Manner of Valuation of the Economic Programme Regarding
    the Use of Agricultural Land Owned by the Republic of Croatia (OG 66/13)
83. Regulation on the Procedure and Criteria for the Establishment of Easement Rights in Forests
    and/or Forest Land Owned by the Republic of Croatia for the Exploitation of Mineral Resources
    (OG 133/07 and 9/11)
84. Regulation on the Procedure and Criteria for the Establishment of Easement Rights in Forests or
    Forest Land Owned by the Republic of Croatia for the purpose of Performing Tourism Activities
    (OG 69/07)
85. Decision on recording all real estate on the territory of units of local self-government and updating
    the data on the utility fee payers (OG 87/15)
86. Decision on the appointment of the JIS Coordinator
87. Decision on the appointment of the JIS Manager
88. Decision on the establishment and appointment of the Steering Working Group for the management
    of JIS
89. Decision on the classification of public roads (OG 66/15)
90. Decision on the classification of public roads (OG 94/14)
91. Decision on the amount of fee for the establishment of rights of easement and building rights on a
    public road (OG 87/14)
92. Decision of the Government of the Republic of Croatia on the coordination and management of JIS
93. Maritime Development and Integrated Maritime Policy Strategy of the Republic of Croatia for the
    Period from 2014 to 2020
94. Transport Development Strategy of the Republic of Croatia for the Period from 2014 to 2030 (OG
    131/14)
95. Rural Development Programme 2014 - 2020


Other references
1. Brežanski, J. 2009): Dosjelost kao način stjecanja stvarnih prava. Supreme Court of the Republic
    of Croatia, Zagreb.
2. Deininger K., Selod H. and Burns A. 2012): “The Land Governance Assessment Framework:
    Identifying and Monitoring Good Practice in the Land Sector. The World Bank.
3. FAO (2012): Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries
    and Forests in the Context of National Food Security. Rome.
4. Gavella, N., Josipović, T., Gliha, I., Belaj, V., Stipković, Z. 1998): Stvarno pravo. Informator, Zagreb.
5. Josipović, T. 2006): Zajednička načela registarskog materijalnog prava. Hrvatsko registarsko
    pravo, Narodne novine, Zagreb, 1–28.
6. Kontrec, D. 2007): Jedinstvena baza zemljišnih podataka i zajednički informacijski sustav zemljišne
    knjige i katastra. Dvanaesti forum poslovanja nekretninama – Zbornik radova, Hrvatska
    gospodarska komora, Zagreb.
7. Kontrec, D., Končić, A. M., Končić, F. 2014): Vodič za rješavanje imovinsko -pravnih odnosa na
    nekretninama u Republici Hrvatskoj u provedbi projekata EU, Zagreb.
8. Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Croatia (2015): Mjesečno izvješće o stanju zemljišnoknjižnih
    predmeta u općinskim sudovima RH za ožujak 2015. godine, Zagreb.
9. Roić, M. 2012): Upravljanje zemljišnim informacijama - katastar, University of Zagreb, Faculty of
    Geodesy, ISBN 978-953-6082-16-2, Zagreb.
10. Roić, M., Fjalestad, J. B., Steiwer, F. 2008): Regionalna studija o katastru/Regional Cadastral
    Study. State Geodetic Administration, Zagreb.
11. Roić, M., Medić, V., Fanton, I.: Katastar zemljišta i zemljišna knjiga - skripta, Faculty of Geodesy,
    Zagreb 1999.
12. Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of Croatia. State Bureau of Statistics. 2014
13. UN–ECE (2004): Guidelines on Real Property Units and Identifiers. New York/Geneva.
14. World Bank: “The Land Governance Assessment Framework Implementation Manual. October
    2013.


Institutions that provided the information:
Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                      Croatia                                    73

    Ministry of Justice
    State Geodetic Administration
    Tax Administration
    Agricultural Land Agency
    Paying Agency for Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural Development
    Ministry of Construction and Physical Planning
    State Property Management Administration
    Administrative Courts in Zagreb, Split, Rijeka and Osijek
    Ministry of Public Administration
    Ministry of Agriculture
    Croatian Institute for Spatial Development
    Ministry of Environmental and Nature Protection
    Environmental Protection Agency
    Ministry of Culture
    Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Transport and Infrastructure
    Ministry of Regional Development and EU Funds
           Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                                 Croatia                                    74

        Table 1: Assessment table
        REPUBLIC OF CROATIA – Assessment of the land governance environment –
        assessment table
                                                                                                                                       Assessment
Panel-LGI-                                                               Panel                                                   A        B C D
Benchmark
PANEL 1: Recognition of Land Rights

LGI 1: Continuum of rights guaranteed by regulations
1 1       1 Individual legal tenure in rural land are prescribed and protected in practice.                                       x
1 1       2 Legal tenure based on customary law are prescribed and protected in practice.                                         x
               Rights of indigenous population regarding the land and forests are prescribed and protected in practice.           n/
1 1       3
                                                                                                                                 a
1 1       4 Legal tenure in urban land are prescribed and protected in practice.                                                  x
LGI 2: Respect and enforcement of rights
1 2       1 There are attainable possibilities for individualization of tenure.                                                   x
1 2       2 Private land in rural areas is entered and shown in the cadastral plan.                                              x
1 2       3 Private land in urban areas is entered and depicted in the cadastral plan.                                            x
1 2       4 The number of illegal sales of land is low.                                                                           x
1 2       5 The number of illegally contracted leases is low.                                                                     x
1 2       6 The land rights exercised by women pursuant to the relevant regulations are registered.                               x
1 2       7 The land rights exercised by women are the same as the land rights exercised by men.                                 x
PANEL 2: Community forest and communal land rights and regulations on the use of rural land

LGI 1: Rights in forest and communal lands
                Forest and communal lands are clearly defined by law, and the responsibility for their use is clearly                         x
2 1         1
                stipulated.
2 1         2 Rural common rights are formally stipulated and can be enforced.                                                                x
2 1         3 Rights to key natural resources in the land (including fisheries) prescribed and protected in practice.                     x
2 1         4 Different rights on communal land and rights on natural resources in that land can legally coexist.                        x
2 1         5 Different rights on a parcel of land and rights to its resources (e.g. trees) can legally coexist.                          x
                Different rights on land and rights to mining or other resources under the Earth's surface on the same                    x
2 1         6
                parcel of land can legally coexist.
2 1         7 There are possibilities for entry and depiction of communal rights in the cadastral plan.                                       x
2 1         8 Demarcation of communal land boundaries                                                                            x
LGI 2: Efficiency and fairness of regulations on the use of rural land
2 2         1 Limitations with regard to the use of rural land are justified and are implemented.                                             x
                Limitations with regard to the possibility of purchase and sale of rural land efficiently serve the objectives   x
2 2         2
                of public policy.
                Rural land use plans are drawn up/amended by way of a public procedure, and the incurred costs are               x
2 2         3
                shared.
2 2         4 Rural lands with changed purpose are quickly brought to use.                                                                    x
2 2         5 New zoning of rural land is performed by way of a public procedure that protects existing rights.                          x
                The protected rural land (forests, pastures, swamps, national parks etc.) management plans correspond                         x
2 2         6
                to the actual use.
PANEL 3: Urban Land Use, Planning and Development

LGI 1: Limitations of rights
                Limitations with regard to ownership and the possibility of purchase and sale of urban land efficiently                  x
3 1       1
                serve the objectives of public policy.
                Limitations with regard to the use of urban land (disaster risk) efficiently serve the objectives of public              x
3 1       2
                policy.
LGI 2: Transparency of land use limitations
                The process of urban spatial expansion/infrastructure development is transparent and takes the existing                  x
3 2        1
                rights into consideration.
          Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                                Croatia                                    75

                The changes in urban land use plans are based on a clear public procedure and input from all                   x
3    2     2
                stakeholders.
                Approved applications for changes in the purpose of urban land are immediately implemented with                              x
3 2         3
                regard to these parcels of land.
LGI 3: Efficiency of drafting urban land use plans
3 3         1 Policy that ensures cheap housing and services is in place and is implemented progressively.                               x
3 3         2 Land use planning effectively controls urban spatial expansion in the largest city.                                   x
3 3         3 Land use planning effectively controls urban development in the next four largest cities.                             x
3 3         4 Planning procedures are able to cope with urban growth.                                                          x
LGI 4: Speed and predictability of enforcement of restricted land uses
3 4         1 The issuance of building permits for a residential dwelling is appropriate, affordable and harmonized.                x
3 4         2 Building permit for a residential dwelling can be obtained in a short time period and at low cost.                    x
LGI 5: Forms of tenure regulation in urban areas
3 5         1 Formalization of urban residential housing is feasible and affordable.                                           x
                In cities with informal tenure, there is a sustainable strategy for the safety of tenure, infrastructure and   x
3 5         2
                residential housing.
3 5         3 The tenant ownership regime allows efficient management and registration of urban real estate.                   x
PANEL 4: Public Land Management

LGI 1: Identification of public land and clear management
                 The criteria for public land ownership are clearly defined and assigned to the appropriate level of                     x
4 1        1
                 government.
4 1        2 All public lands are registered.                                                                                            x
4 1        3 Public land information is publicly accessible.                                                                        x
4 1        4 The management responsibility for different types of public land is unambiguously assigned.                                 x
4 1        5 Responsible public institutions have sufficient resources to perform their land management obligations.                         x
4 1        6 All important information on allocation of public land to private users is publicly accessible.                        x
LGI 2: Justification and time-efficiency of acquisition procedure
4 2        1 A minimal amount of expropriated land is used for private purposes.                                                x
4 2        2 The expropriated land is transferred to its destined purpose in a timely manner.                                  x
4 2        3 The threat of land expropriation does not cause resistance from private parties.                                       x
LGI 3: Transparency and fairness of acquisition procedure
4 3        1 Compensation is provided for the acquisition of all rights regardless of the registration status.                      x
4 3        2 The change in land purpose resulting in a selective loss of land rights is compensated.                           x
4 3        3 Compensation is promptly paid to the owners.                                                                      x
4 3        4 Independent avenues for complaint against expropriation exist and are accessible by those affected.               x
4 3        5 Complaints against expropriation decisions are handled within a reasonable time frame.                                      x
PANEL 5: Allocation of Large Tracts of Land to Investors

LGI 1: Allocation of public land for private use follows a clear, competitive process with payments collected
5 1        1 Public land allocation follows an open and transparent process.                                                        x
5 1        2 Public lease collection is implemented.                                                                                     x
                 Public land allocation is carried out at market prices, except in cases where such allocation is a means           x
5 1        3
                 of achieving fairness.
5 1        4 The public captures benefits arising from changes in permitted land use.                                                    x
                 The policy of improving equality in the access to the resources by the poor and their use is in place and          x
5 1        5
                 is efficiently implemented and monitored.
LGI 2: Private investment strategy
                 Land that is made available to investors is identified in a transparent and public process, in agreement                x
5 2        1
                 with right holders
                 Investments are selected in an open procedure based on economic, social, cultural and environmental           x
5 2        2
                 impact.
5 2        3 Public institutions for allocation of land to investors are clearly identified and are regularly monitored.             x
                 Public bodies competent for the allocation of land to investors share information and coordinate in order          x
5 2        4
                 to reduce and resolve overlapping (including below the Earth's surface)
                 The compliance with contractual obligations is regularly monitored and, where necessary, corrective                     x
5 2        5
                 actions are performed.
          Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                                Croatia                                    76

5    2     6    Safeguards efficiently reduce the risk of adverse effects of big land investments.                                 x
                The area for relocation is clearly limited, but there are ways how to control it in accordance with the best                               x
5    2     7
                practice.


LGI 3: Implementation policy is efficient, consistent and transparent
5 3        1 Investors provide sufficient information that allow a strict assessment of proposed investments.                                  x
5 3        2 Acceptance of investment plans is carried out in a clear procedure with reasonable deadlines.                             x
               There are free and direct negotiations between right holders and investors with full access to relevant                 x
5 3        3
               information.
5 3        4 Contractual provisions regarding profit sharing are available to the public.                                                      x
LGI 4: Contracts including public land are public and accessible
5 4        1 Information on the spatial scope and the duration of granted concessions are publicly accessible.                             x
               The concession holder's compliance with guarantees is monitored and efficiently and consistently                                    x
5 4        2
               implemented.
               There are methods for dealing with non-compliance that provide the possibility of reaching a timely and                     x
5 4        3
               fair decisions.
PANEL 6: Provision of Public Information on Land: Land Register and Cadastre

LGI 1: Land rights recognition mechanisms
                 Land possession by the poor can be formalized in accordance with local regulations in an efficient and                x
6 1        1
                 transparent procedure.
6 1        2 Non-documentary forms of evidence are efficiently used as assistance in establishing rights.                              x
6 1        3 There is formal recognition of long-term, unchallenged possession.                                                x
6 1        4 First-time registration includes safeguards and is not restricted by payment of high fees.                                x
6 1        5 First-time registration does not entail significant informal fees.                                                x
LGI 2: Completeness of land registries
6 2        1 Total cost of registering real estate transfer is low.                                                            x
6 2        2 Information in the list are linked to cadastral plan that reflects the current status.                                             x
6 2        3 All relevant encumbrances are recorded.                                                                                           x
6 2        4 All relevant public restrictions or charges are recorded.                                                                         x
6 2        5 There is a timely response to a request for access to land registry data.                                         x
6 2        6 Land registries are searchable.                                                                                                   x
6 2        7 Land information is easily accessible.                                                                            x
LGI 3: Reliability of land registry data
                 Information in public land registries are harmonized in order to ensure the integrity of rights and reduce                            x
6 3        1
                 transfer costs.
6 3        2 Land registry information are up-to-date and reflect the actual state in the field.                                               x
LGI 4: Cost-effectiveness and sustainability of land management system
6 4        1 Land registries are financially sustainable through collection of fees for financing their operation.                                     x
6 4        2 Land management investments meet the needs by way of quality service requirements.                                                x
LGI 5: Fees are determined in a transparent manner.
6 5        1 Fees are reasonable, their amount is known and all payments are shown.                                            x
6 5        2 Informal payments are discouraged.                                                                                        x
6 5        3 Service standards are published and are regularly monitored.                                                              x
PANEL 7: Land Valuation and taxation

LGI 1: Transparency of valuation
7 1         1 Clear process of real estate valuation.                                                                                          x
7 1         2 Valuation rolls are publicly accessible.                                                                                                 x
LGI 2: Efficiency of collection
7 2         1 Exemptions to the payment of real estate taxes are justified and transparent.                                    x
7 2         2 All real estate holders liable to pay real estate tax are listed on the tax roll.                                 x
7 2         3 Assessed real estate taxes are collected.                                                                         x
7 2         4 Receipts from real estate taxes exceed the costs of collection.                                                   x
PANEL 8: Dispute Resolution
           Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                                 Croatia                                    77

LGI 1: Distribution of responsibilities
8 1        1 There is a clear assignment of responsibility for dispute resolution.                                               x
8 1        2 Dispute resolution mechanisms are publicly accessible.                                                             x
8 1        3 Mutually accepted agreements reached by informal dispute resolution systems are encouraged.                                        x
8 1        4 There is an available, accessible and timely process for appealing disputed rulings.                                       x
LGI 2: Proportion of land in unresolved disputes is low and declining.
8 2        1 Land disputes constitute an insignificant proportion of cases in the formal legal system.                                  x
8 2        2 Disputes in the formal system are resolved in a timely manner.                                                             x
8 2        3 The number of long-standing (>5 years) land disputes is insignificant.                                                         x
PANEL 9: Organization of Institutions and Policies

LGI 1: Clear competences and practice
                Land policy formulation, implementation and arbitration are separated in order to avoid the conflict of                 x
9 1        1
                interests.
9 1        2 Responsibilities of ministries and land agencies do not overlap (horizontal overlap).                                      x
9 1        3 There is no administrative (vertical) overlap                                                                      x
                Public authorities share information on rights and land use; key facts are regularly reported and they are              x
9 1        4
                publicly accessible.
                The overlapping of rights (based on land interest typology) is minimal and does not cause disagreements                     x
9 1        5
                or disputes.
                The lack of designation of institutional competences (based on institutional review) does not cause                             x
9 1        6
                problems.
LGI 2: Equity and non-discrimination in the decision-making process
                Land policies and regulations are developed in a participatory manner that involves all relevant                            x
9 2        1
                stakeholders.
                Equality and reduction of poverty are objectives of land policies; progress in that direction is publicly                   x
9 2        2
                monitored.
                Ecology and environmental protection are objectives of land policies; progress in that direction is publicly                x
9 2        3
                monitored.
9 2        4 Land policy implementation is calculated, in accordance with gains and appropriately financed.                                 x
9 2        5 Regular and public reporting on the progress in policy implementation is in place.                                             x
9 2        6 Land policies help to improve the use of land by the poor and those who have suffered injustice.                               x
9 2        7 Land policies proactively and efficiently reduce the future disaster risk.                                                         x
PANEL 10: Coastal Zone Management

LGI 1: Marine use right for the purpose of fisheries
10 1          1 Marine use right for the purpose of fisheries enjoys legal recognition and is protected in practice.                    x
10 1          2 Mixed marine use in particular zones (e.g. fisheries, tourism and transport) can legally exist.                         x
                   License to use the marine area may be obtained at affordable cost following a detailed and transparent               x
10 1          3 assessment of compatibility with the existing marine plans, including environmental impact assessment
                   and taking into consideration the opinions and interests of all stakeholders
LGI 2: Efficiency of the process of drafting land use plans in coastal zones
10 2          1 Land use planning effectively controls coastal urban development                                                        x
10 2          2 Planning procedures are able to cope with coastal urban growth.                                                         x
 LGI 3: Efficiency of the process of marine use planning
10 3          1 Marine use plans are drawn up/amended by way of a public procedure                                                  x
10 3          2 License for sea area use can be obtained in a short time period                                                         x
                   Designation of mariculture zones in marine use plans is ensured and includes measures for avoiding               x
10 3          3 conflicts with neighbouring purposes (e.g. tourism), and the opinions and interests of stakeholders are
                   taken into consideration
                   Marine use plans efficiently set out the spatial and time allocation of marine use and ensures sustainable           x
10 3          4
                   use of marine resources
10 3          5 Use planning process must ensure coherence between marine and coastal strategies and plans                              x
 Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of
                                       Croatia                                    78



Table 2 List of panel participants
      Panel                                 Panel participant
 1    Recognition of land rights           1.   Ivica Anaković, Ministry of Justice
      (29 June)                            2.   Željka Pilipović, attorney-at-law, representative of the Croatian Bar Association
                                           3.   Ingrid Jurcan Lakičević, attorney-at-law, Vukić i partneri d.o.o.
                                           4.   Marinko Bosiljevac, State Geodetic Administration
                                           5.   Josip Bienenfeld, Ministry of Construction and Physical Planning
 2    Community forest and communal        1.   Tajana Radić, Croatian Chamber of Agriculture
      land rights and regulations on the   2.   Ksenija Grgurić Kontić, Croatian Forests Ltd, Delnice Forest Administration
      use of rural land                    3.   Damir Delač, Croatian Forestry Society
      (30 June)                            4.   Jasna Molc, Croatian Forests Ltd
                                           5.   Sabina Čanjevac, Ministry of Justice
                                           6.   Zdenko Bogović, Croatian Union of Private Forest Owners' Associations
 3    Urban land use, planning and         1.   Srećko Pegan, Faculty of Architecture of the University of Zagreb
      development                          2.   Irena Matković, Croatian Institute for Spatial Development
      (2 July)                             3.   Ivona Jerković, Grgurević i partneri d.o.o.
                                           4.   Tea Horvat, LOG-URBIS d.o.o.
                                           5.   Darko Šiško, City Office of Strategic Planning
                                           6.   Ljerka Marić, State Geodetic Administration
                                           7.   Josip Bienenfeld, Ministry of Construction and Physical Planning, partially
 4    Public land management               1.   Sonja Marohnić Horvat, Union of the Association of Towns in the Republic of Croatia
      (6 July)                             2.   Miroslav Kovač, UnionAssociation of Family-Run Farms in Croatia "Život"
                                           3.   Toni Raić, Baby Beef Breeders Association
                                           4.   Nikola Ćopić, entrepreneur
                                           5.   Jakov Pavičić, Vetkop d.o.o.
                                           6.   Antonio Šustić, State Geodetic Administration
                                           7.   Zlata Hrvoj Šipek, State Attorney's Office
                                           8.   Alen Čičak, State Property Management Administration
                                           9.   Lidija Majcan Horvat, Ministry of Construction and Physical Planning
                                           10. Ivica Anaković, Ministry of Justice
 5    Allocation of large tracts of land   1.   Sani Ljubunčić, Ministry of Entrepreneurship and Crafts
      to investors                         2.   Žaklina Čolaković, Ministry of Justice
      (8 July)                             3.   Violeta Ajhner Bolfan, Paying Agency for Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural Development
                                           4.   Dario Perešin, Paying Agency for Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural Development
                                           5.   Andrej Bolfek, Bolfek Law Office
                                           6.   Melida Ivković. Agency for Investments and Competitiveness
                                           7.   Snježana Španjol, Ministry of Agriculture
                                           8.   Mladen Pejnović, State Property Management Administration
 6    Provision of public information on   1.   Antonio Šustić, State Geodetic Administration
      land: land register and cadastre     2.   Jelena Jurišić, Ericsson Nikola Tesla d.d.
      (13 July)                            3.   Irena Džunić, City of Zagreb
                                           4.   Ana Marija Končić, Municipal Civil Court in Zagreb, Permanent Office in Sesvete
                                           5.   Damir Pahić, Zavod za fotogrametriju d.d.
                                           6.   Sanja Vurin, Implementation Unit for the Integrated Land Administration System (IISZA) Project
                                           7.   Ivica Anaković, Ministry of Justice
 7    Land valuation and taxation          1.   Branimir Majčica, City of Zagreb
      (10 July)                            2.   Darko Štefančić, Croatian Chamber of Economy/PBZ Real Estate
                                           3.   Siniša Mastelić Ivić, Faculty of Geodesy of the University of Zagreb
                                           4.   Vladimir Majetić, State Geodetic Administration
                                           5.   Vladimir Lasić, Croatian Association of Valuers
 8    Dispute resolution                   1.   Nada Rendić Gregurić, Ministry of Justice
      (14 July)                            2.   Ivica Anaković, Ministry of Justice
                                           3.   Josip Šurjak, Croatian Bar Association
                                           4.   Jozo Jurčević, State Attorney's Office of the Republic of Croatia
                                           5.   Jadranka Liović Merkaš, Municipal Civil Court in Zagreb
                                           6.   Stjepan Šaškor, Croatian Notaries Chamber
 9    Organization of institutions and     1.   Silvio Bašić, University of Zagreb, Faculty of Civil Engineering
      policies                             2.   Tatjana Josipović, University of Zagreb, Faculty of Law
      (25 August)                          3.   Damir Kontrec, Supreme Court of the Republic of Croatia
                                           4.   Blaženka Mičević, Agricultural Land Agency
                                           5.   Ivan Novak, Aksiom d.o.o.
                                           6.   Hrvoje Tomić, University of Zagreb, Faculty of Geodesy
                                           7.   Ivica Trumbić, independent consultant
                                           1.   Gojko Berlengi, GISPLAN d.o.o.
      Coastal Zone Management              2.   Maja Madiraca, URBOS d.o.o.
      (24 August)                          3.   Ines Merčep, Ministry of Construction and Physical Planning
 10                                        4.   Dagmar Šurmanović, Croatian Waters Ltd.
Table 3: Policy suggestions - discussion proposal for the technical inspection workshop
This suggestion comes from panel discussions.
NOTE: All panels have come to the same conclusion: an outdated cadastre and land register (16) and too many restrictions of ownership rights
(legal regimes) in many of them.
     Findings                           Recommendation                                         Competent institution                  Monitoring
                                                                                                                                      indicator
 Panel 1 recommendations
 1   Land regulations are overly        Reduce the number of acts dealing with land            All institutions of the land sector    The number of acts
     fragmented, the existing                                                                  (Ministry of Justice, the State        dealing with land
                                        Modernize legislation, especially the implementing
     legislation has been written for                                                          Geodetic Administration, Ministry of
                                        one, in the way that electronic data form is
     books, forms and the analogue                                                             Finance, the Agricultural Land
                                        accepted as official
     format                                                                                    Agency, Paying Agency for
                                                                                               Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural
                                                                                               Development, Ministry of
                                                                                               Construction and Physical
                                                                                               Planning, State Property
                                                                                               Management Administration,
                                                                                               Ministry of Public Administration,
                                                                                               Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of
                                                                                               Environmental and Nature
                                                                                               Protection, Ministry of Culture,
                                                                                               Ministry of Maritime Affairs,
                                                                                               Transport and Infrastructure,
                                                                                               Ministry of Regional Development
                                                                                               and EU funds ...)
 2   Slow entry of transformed social   Accelerate the procedures and introduce a              State property managers: Ministry      The number of
     ownership                          conciliation possibility for parties in the process,   of Justice, the State Geodetic         cadastral plots
                                        especially the state and local self-government units   Administration, Ministry of Finance,   registered as part of
                                                                                               the Agricultural Land Agency, State    "social ownership"
                                        Oblige public land managers to produce registration
                                                                                               Property Management
                                        documents for the cadastre and land register, and
                                                                                               Administration , local self-
                                        ensure funds
                                                                                               government units
                                        Make the Land Database certificate a condition for
                                        having land/real estate at one's disposal.
                                             Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of Croatia                         80


3   There are too many legal                  Restrictions of ownership rights should be reduced     Institution responsible for a          Number of legal
    restrictions of ownership rights          to a reasonable level and aligned with public goals    particular legal regime, Ministry of   regime restrictions
    (legal regimes) which sometimes           by re-examining the justification of every legal       Justice, State Geodetic
    serve no public goal, while the           regime or protected area, and restrictions should be   Administration
    overlaps slow down the decision           reduced
    making process due to the
                                              Amend regulations and procedures for the entry of
    involvement of numerous
                                              legal regimes into the cadastre and land register so
    institutions The justification for the
                                              that institutions responsible for a particular legal
    number and surface area of
                                              regime commit to reporting changes in the
    protected areas is questionable
                                              cadastre/land register
                                              Consider providing fair compensation for
                                              restrictions
Panel 2 recommendations
4   Difficulties in identifying land          Harmonize regulations and application in practice      Umbrella institution in charge of      A drafted common
    types in regulations and in                                                                      land governance, Ministry of           glossary and land
                                              Standardize types of use, utilization and purpose of
    practice, overlapping of                                                                         Justice, the State Geodetic            typology for all
                                              real property
    agricultural and forest                                                                          Administration                         sectors
5   Excessive regulation of                   Revision of misdemeanour liabilities and               Ministry of Justice and competent      Number of
    misdemeanours which are not               inspections                                            ministries                             misdemeanours
    sanctioned in practice
6   The lack of a national strategy           Adopt a rural development strategy                     Umbrella institution in charge of      Adopted strategy
    regarding rural development, the                                                                 land governance, Ministry of Rural
    same for both agriculture and                                                                    Development and Ministry of
    forestry                                                                                         Agriculture
Panel 3 recommendations
7   Monitoring of the land situation is       Set up a spatial monitoring system within the JIS,     The institution in charge of the JIS   Number of linked
    inadequate, real relevant                 develop analytical functions in land data storage      and the National Spatial Data          systems, number of
    economic and demographic data             systems, connect storages                              Infrastructure (NIPP) Council, the     analytic functions
    for spatial planning is lacking.                                                                 central government body in charge
                                              Ensure the interoperability of the JIS and other
    Insufficient standardization of                                                                  of e-Croatia operations, Central
                                              information systems
    terminology and data between                                                                     Bureau of Statistics, public
    land governance sectors                   Draw up an adequate glossary of terms and              authorities and professional NGOs
                                              definitions and their translations
                                              Implementation of the INSPIRE Directive and other
                                            Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of Croatia                           81


                                             relevant standards
8    Unjustified expansion of building       Revise the existing capacities, i.e. examine the       Ministry of Construction and              Surface area of
     areas, slow re-zoning of land           needs for building areas that are not put to use       Physical Planning and the local           building areas
                                                                                                    units of self-government
9    Frequent fundamental changes of         Stabilise the legal framework in the long term,        Ministry of Construction and              Number of common
     the spatial regulation and              improve communication between stakeholders in          Physical Planning, professional           administration and
     construction system cause               the procedures of drafting and adoption of             organisations and units of local self-    private sector
     problems in the implementation          regulations, and the communication between the         government                                workshops
     and non-transparency in the             administration and the private sector
     procedure. Poor communication
     between different stakeholders
     (formal and professional) in the
     procedures of the drafting of land
     use plans and over-regulation of
     expert operations.
Panel 4 recommendations
10   Underutilization of public land,        An umbrella institution needs to be designated for     Government and competent                  Surface area of
     agricultural, urban and maritime        the purposes of land governance                        institutions                              allocated public land
     domain
                                             Available public land needs to be publicly disclosed
                                             and offered for lease/concession
11   Data on expropriated land is            Publicly disclose structural data on expropriated      Institution in charge of the JIS, state   Number of published
     neither public nor transparent          land within the framework of official registers and    offices in the counties                   expropriations
                                             information systems
12   Inadequate efficacy of institutions'    Improve efficacy of the institutions responsible for   a government and an umbrella              Conducted training
     capacities                              public land management                                 institution for land governance
                                             Combine institutions for land management
                                             Conduct relevant staff training
Panel 5 recommendations
13   There are no (sufficient) large         Implement measures for land consolidation              Umbrella institution for land             Number of
     tracts of land                                                                                 governance, the Agricultural Land         conducted
                                             Enable individual consolidation under favourable
                                                                                                    Agency, units of local self-              consolidations
                                             conditions
                                                                                                    government
                                            Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of Croatia                              82


14   Procedures for the allocation of        Review the procedures for the allocation of              Umbrella institution for land           Amended
     public land are complex                 leases/concessions                                       governance and competent                procedures
                                                                                                      institutions
15   Data on allocated public land has       Publish data on allocated public land and the            The umbrella institution for land       Developed payment
     been partially published, and the       conditions under which they were allocated               governance and the institution in       and agreement
     monitoring of the collection of                                                                  charge of the JIS, the central          monitoring
                                             Develop procedures for collection control, common
     payments for the use of public                                                                   government body in charge of e-         procedures
                                             for all sectors
     land is inadequate                                                                               Croatia operations, Agricultural
                                             Increase efficiency in sanctioning non-compliance        Land Agency, State Property
                                             with contractual obligations                             Management Administration
Panel 6 recommendations
16   All land is entered in the              Enable a faster registration of actual situations        Ministry of Justice, State Geodetic     Percentage of
     cadastre/land register, but the         using land registry procedures instead of court          Administration, the institution in      outdated entries
     status often does not correspond        proceedings                                              charge of the JIS
     to the actual situation
                                             Implement the possibility of individual updating
                                             (individual implementation and individual re-design)

                                             Introduce the obligation to register every transaction
                                             in the land register

                                             Oblige competent institutions to update their public
                                             land entries
17   Cadastre/land register institutional    Cadastre/land register and, possibly, other key          The government                          Institutions
     organization is inadequate              registers should be placed under a single                                                        combined
                                             administrative institution-agency
                                             Establish a single and clear management structure
18   The situation of interests on the       Define procedures of legal regime registration           Ministry of Justice, State Geodetic     Registered legal
     land registered with the cadastre                                                                Administration, institution in charge   regimes, public
     and the land register is                Amend with public communal infrastructure and the        of the JIS and ministries               communal
     incomplete                              address system and integrate in the JIS                                                          infrastructure and
                                                                                                                                              special parts of real
                                             Transfer maintenance of data on special parts of                                                 estate
                                             real estate from the Register of Deeds to the Land
                                             Database
                                           Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of Croatia                          83


                                            Amend with data on real estate value from sales
                                            agreements
                                            Ensure the interoperability with other factors of the
                                            NIPP by establishing an exchange service
19   Lack of harmonization between          Speed up the establishment of the Real Estate           Ministry of Justice, State Geodetic     Aligned borders of
     cadastre, land register and            Cadastre and EDP Land Register                          Administration, institution in charge   spatial units
     administrative organisation                                                                    of the JIS, Ministry of Public
                                            Integrate the Register of Spatial Units in the JIS      Administration

                                            Align the borders of cadastral municipalities in the
                                            cadastre/land register with settlement borders and
                                            other spatial units of higher level
Panel 7 recommendations
20   Taxation is sectoral and               Introduce tax on all real estate based on market        Institution in charge of the JIS,       Published lists
     unsystematic, value lists are          value                                                   central government body in charge
     usually not published                                                                          of e-Croatia operations, Ministry of
                                            Publish value lists                                     Finance and units of local self-
                                                                                                    government
21   Available land data is insufficient    Introduce a mass real property valuation system         Ministry of Finance, institution in     Mass real property
     for value estimations                                                                          charge of the JIS                       valuation system
                                                                                                                                            established
22   Insufficiently trained human           Improve valuer training                                 Ministry of Finance and                 Assessor training
     resources and insufficient training                                                            professional organisations              conducted
     offer
Panel 8 recommendations
23   A significant share of proprietary     Enable a faster registration of actual situations       Ministry of Justice                     Share of proprietary
     cases in the legal system              using land registry procedures instead of court                                                 cases
                                            proceedings ("formal" lawsuits)

                                            Introduce the possibility of informal dispute
                                            resolution in proceedings involving establishment,
                                            renewal and amendment of land registers

                                            Prevent unskilled persons from submitting
                                            applications
                                           Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of Croatia                          84


24   State of play with regards to          Align procedures with additional staff education and    Ministry of Justice                     Uniform speed of
     dispute resolution differs from one    re-organisation                                                                                 dispute resolution
     Croatian region to another
Panel 9 recommendations
25   Land governance is spread              Establish an umbrella institution for land              The government                          Land governance
     across the sectors, there are too      governance by combining the current ones into a                                                 strategy adopted
     many institutions involved. There      single institution
     is no comprehensive strategy or
     policy                                 Adopt a land governance strategy which will cover
                                            all sectors and develop the missing sector
                                            strategies

                                            Define land and housing policy
26   Almost every public                    Restructure various registers and abolish the           Institution in charge of the JIS,       Number of
     administration body maintains its      redundant ones, foster data exchange between            central government body in charge       institutional users of
     own land/real estate database,         institutions                                            of e-Croatia operations, Ministry of    the JIS
     which are mostly not linked to the                                                             Justice, State Geodetic
     cadastre/land register.                Remove redundant registers/databases                    Administration, Ministry of Public
                                                                                                    Administration
                                            Ensure the interoperability of key land registers
Panel 10 recommendations
27   A lack of adequately standardized      Stimulate standardization of official data and update   Central government body in charge       Available data on
     data concerning marine areas           existing official registers/information systems         of e-Croatia operations, institution    marine areas
     and the fishing industry                                                                       in charge of the JIS, Ministry of
                                                                                                    Construction and Physical
                                                                                                    Planning, Ministry of Maritime
                                                                                                    Affairs, Transport and Infrastructure
28   A lack of development programs         Draft development programs and new plans taking         Ministry of Regional Development        Development
     based on sustainable                   into account realistic needs and potentials for         and EU funds, units of regional and     programs for marine
     development as the basis for the       sustainable development                                 local self-government                   areas created
     development of maritime spatial
     planning
29   Insufficient coordination between      Improve coordination between institutions               Ministry of Maritime Affairs,           Coordination bodies
     competent institutions,                competent for land and marine areas                     Transport and Infrastructure,           established
     jurisdictions usually start/end at                                                             Ministry of Construction and
                                            Provide integrated management of the marine area        Physical Planning, Ministry of
             Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF) in the Republic of Croatia   85


coastlines                                                  Regional Development, Ministry of
                                                            Agriculture, Ministry of
                                                            Environmental and Nature
                                                            Protection
