              Stunting Reduction
            in Sub-Saharan Africa




CHAPTER 1 The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa	   1
Contents




Acknowledgments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

Executive Summary.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 5

Chapter 1. The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa .   .   .   .   .  8

Chapter 2. Investing in the Early Years: Nutrition in Africa .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  25

Chapter 3. Benin: An Investment Framework for Nutrition.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 41

Chapter 4. Cote d’Ivoire: An Investment Framework for Nutrition.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  55

Chapter 5. Ethiopia: An Investment Framework for Nutrition.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .                                    69

Chapter 6. Niger: An Investment Framework for Nutrition .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 83

Chapter 7. Rwanda: An Investment Framework for Nutrition.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 97

Annex 1. Income Elasticity Tables.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  112

Annex 2. Brief Review of Empirical Evidence on the Determinants of Undernutrition.   . 120

Annex 3. Levels of Malnutrition and World Bank Investment, by Country .  .  .  .  .  .  . 123




TABLE OF CONTENTS	                                                                                                                                     3
Acknowledgments

Task Team Leaders (TTLs) for the analytics are Patrick Eozenou and Meera Shekar. Patrick Eozenou led the
work on Chapter 1 and Meera Shekar led Chapters 2 through 7. The team consisted of Jonathan Kweku
Akuoku, Julia Dayton Eberwein, Jakub Kakietek, Michelle Mehta, Parendi Mehta, Linda Schultz, and Dylan
Walters.

For Chapter 1, Patrick Eozenou conceived the study, prepared the first draft of the report, and conducted the
econometric analysis; Parendi Mehta constructed the aggregate dataset, prepared descriptive statistics tables,
reviewed the empirical literature, and provided inputs to the draft report; and Jakub Kakietek contributed to
background section and provided key inputs to the report.

For Chapters 2 through 7, Meera Shekar defined the overall parameters for the analyses and the selection of the
five high-burden countries, and she provided overall quality-control and guidance. Jakub Kakietek undertook
the regional costing and impact analysis for stunting and wasting and wrote parts of that section with Michelle
Mehta and Julia Dayton Eberwein. Jonathan Kweku Akuoku prepared the financing and costing analysis for
stunting and wasting for the five country studies and drafted most of those sections. Dylan Walters prepared
the costing and impact analysis for anemia and breastfeeding for the regional analyses and the five country
studies. The background sections for the country studies were drafted by Linda Schultz. Julia Dayton Eber-
wein and Michelle Mehta provided technical guidance and overall management of the country studies and the
regional brief.

The team is grateful to Lisa Saldanha, who provided useful inputs for the Ethiopia country analysis, and
Menno Mulder-Sibanda, who provided helpful inputs to the Benin analysis. The report was edited by Hope
Steele and designed by Nicole Hamam.

Peer reviewers Andrew Dabalen (Practice Manager, GPV07), Lars Sondergaard (Program Leader, EACTF),
Emmanuel Skoufias (Lead Economist, GPV04), Omar Arias (Lead Economist, GSPDR), and Erika Lutz (Senior
Nutrition Specialist, GHN07) provided invaluable comments that contributed to strengthen the final report.

Trina Haque and Lynne Sherburne-Benz provided overall guidance toward this work. The authors are grateful
for support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.




4 	                                                                                                in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                Stunting Reduction 
Executive Summary

Reducing all forms of malnutrition, including stunting, is central to the World Bank Group's twin goals of end-
ing extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity, as well as building resilience and preventing instability.
Maternal and child undernutrition is estimated to be responsible for about 45 percent of child mortality and 11
percent of the global disease burden. Conversely, reductions in stunting are estimated to potentially increase
overall economic productivity, as measured by GDP per capita, by 4 to 11 percent in Africa and Asia – mak-
ing investments in early nutrition one of the most cost-effective development actions to yield permanent and
inalienable benefits.

Since 2000, progress in stunting reduction has been slower in Africa than in other regions. While both Asia and
Latin America and Caribbean have managed to reduce stunting rates by over one third, Africa saw a reduction
of only one sixth during the same period. In 2016, over 40 percent of the 159 million stunted children globally
were in Africa (UNICEF, WHO, and World Bank, 2016).

Accelerating the reduction of stunting in Africa will be key to maximizing the return on investments in early
childhood development, in education, and more broadly in policies aimed at fostering and enhancing human
capital accumulation and job creation. Investing in the Early Years now in Africa is even more critical to the
extent that the region is entering a demographic transition process with an expected increase in the working
age population share from 54% in 2010 to a peak of 64% in 2090. Scaling up investments today in effective inter-
ventions and policies to reduce stunting will be a necessary condition to harness the potential benefits of the
demographic dividend in the region.

This report consists of seven chapters. The first chapter focuses on the income elasticity of stunting reduction
in Sub-Saharan Africa. Chapters 2 through 7 focus on the potential financing needs and impacts of investing
in scaling up stunting reduction interventions in the Africa region as a whole, and in five of the high-burden
countries in Africa (Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Niger, and Rwanda). While the first chapter offers a broad
assessment of the empirical relationship between income and stunting reduction at the aggregate level across
countries, the subsequent chapters focus on country specific policy recommendations designed to accelerate
progress in stunting reduction.



The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa
The first chapter of the report estimates the income elasticity of stunting reduction and compares elasticities
in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) to countries in other regions. Using cross-country panel data for 151 countries
the income elasticity of stunting reduction is estimated to be, on average, close to −0.44. The statistical dif-
ference in income elasticity between SSA countries and non SSA countries is formally tested. Although a 10
percent increase in income is associated with a 5.5 percent reduction in the stunting rate in non-SSA countries,
the return of stunting reduction to income is more than 2.5 times lower in SSA countries (−0.2). These results
are robust to endogeneity bias, to unobserved country-specific heterogeneity, and to alternative modeling
assumptions. Differences in access to water and sanitation account for about half of the gap in the magnitude of
income elasticities between non-SSA and SSA countries. Differences in the degree of control of corruption and
of government effectiveness between SSA and non-SSA countries account for a sizeable part of the difference
in the estimated income elasticity. Projecting these results forward to 2030 implies that the number of stunted
children is likely to increase in Sub-Saharan Africa—from about 52 million in 2015 to approximately 60 million
in 2030—while the global target endorsed at the 65th World Health Assembly called for a 40 percent reduction
in the number of stunted children between 2010 and 2025. These results, together with the existing body of
empirical evidence on intervention effectiveness, suggest that scaling up a set of high-impact nutrition-specific
interventions is needed to accelerate the pace of reduction and to achieve progress against the United Nations’
2030 Sustainable Development Goal targets in the region.




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY	                                                                                                 5
Investing in Nutrition in the Africa Region
The report then estimates the expected impacts and financing needs for scaling up a set of high-impact nutri-
tion-specific interventions for the Africa region as a whole (Chapter 2) and in five countries (Benin, Côte d’Ivo-
ire, Ethiopia, Niger, and Rwanda) in Chapters 3 to 7.

In 2012, the World Health Assembly endorsed six global targets for improving nutrition in an effort to boost
investments in cost-effective interventions, spearhead better implementation practices and catalyze prog-
ress toward decreasing malnutrition. Scaling up a package of high-impact nutrition-specific interventions in
Africa to address four of the six global nutrition targets of stunting, anemia, breastfeeding, and wasting would
require, on average, an additional $2.7 billion per year over the next 10 years and would provide substantial
health and economic benefits: It would prevent nearly 17 million cases of child stunting and 2 million child
deaths. The economic benefits generated over the productive lives of beneficiaries would be enormous: the
region would gain $67 billion from investments in preventing stunting, $16 billion from preventing anemia,
$20 billion from increased breastfeeding, and $13 billion from treating severe wasting (acute malnutrition)1
. Returns on every dollar invested in this set of interventions range from $4 for stunting to $12 for wasting,
$13 for anemia, and $18 for investing in exclusive breastfeeding. Without these investments, the numbers of
stunted children will continue to rise in Africa, depriving economies of future growth potential. Mobilizing
the required resources for nutrition is possible, but it will require the coordinated efforts of African govern-
ments, traditional multilateral and bilateral donors, and innovative sources of financing such as the Power of
Nutrition. Over the next 10 years, African governments would need to increase their collective average annual
expenditure on nutrition by $0.8 billion, an amount equal to about 2.4 percent of the current government
expenditure on health. International donors would need to increase average annual allocations to nutrition in
Africa by $1.8 billion, an amount equivalent to about 4.3 percent of total official development assistance (ODA),
and innovative financing sources would need to leverage these domestic and ODA resources. The Power of
Nutrition is already committed to providing such innovative financing in at least two countries in Africa: Tan-
zania ($20 million) and Ethiopia ($20 million), with several other African countries in the pipeline.

The regional perspective is followed by country studies for five high-burden countries: Benin, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ethiopia, Niger, and Rwanda. Four of these countries (the exception is Benin) are in the first wave countries for
the Investing in the Early Years (IEY) initiative. They have stunting rates ranging from 40 percent in Niger to
38 percent in Rwanda and Ethiopia and 30 percent in Côte d’Ivoire. Benin carries a high burden as well, with
child stunting rates at 34 percent. Each country study estimates the financing needs and the health, nutrition,
and economic impacts of scaling up a set of high-impact nutrition-specific interventions to meet the global
nutrition targets. The cost-effectiveness of both the package of interventions as a whole and for each interven-
tion individually is assessed. Finally, two lower-cost financing packages are estimated for each country. In an
environment of constrained resources, one of these alternative financing packages could be a strong first invest-
ment, but it would need to be followed by increased investments, along with investments in strengthening the
national platforms for service delivery, to contribute to meeting the global nutrition targets.




1
    All economic gains reported throughout this report are net gains.




6 	                                                                                                 in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
CHAPTER 1:

The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa

Introduction
Stunting—being short for one’s age—is defined as height-for-age ratio z-score (HAZ) lower than 2 standard devi-
ations below the World Health Organization (WHO) Growth Standard median (WHO 2009). Stunting is a mani-
festation of chronic malnutrition, resulting from an inadequate quantity and quality of food intake and repeated
bouts of infection (WHO 2015). It occurs early in life, with the highest risk during a child’s first two years of
life, and after that period is largely irreversible (Black et al. 2013). Stunting is associated with weaker immune
responses, and stunted children have elevated morbidity and mortality risk. Meta-analytic studies reported that
stunted children (HAZ<2) have a two times higher risk and severely stunted children (HAZ<3) a six times higher
risk of dying from common childhood infections—including acute respiratory infections, diarrheal disease, and
measles—than children who were not stunted (McDonald et al. 2013). It is estimated that malnutrition is an
underlying cause of about 45 percent of all deaths in children under age five globally (Black et al. 2008) and that
about 14 percent of all deaths of children under five can be attributed directly to stunting (Danaei et al. 2016).

The negative consequences of stunting extend beyond increased mortality and morbidity. Stunted physical
growth is strongly associated with slower cognitive development, with delays in school enrollment (Fink et al.
2016), and with lower educational attainment (Adair et al. 2013). Furthermore, stunting has long-lasting eco-
nomic impact. A recent systematic review showed a 1 centimeter increase in adult height was associated with a
median 4 percent increase in wages in men and about a 6 percent increase wages in women, and that the wages
of adults who were stunted in childhood were, on average, 20 percent to 40 percent lower than the wages of
their peers who were not stunted as children (McGovern et al. 2017). Cohort studies also suggest that adults
who were not stunted as children had a 21 percent higher household consumption and a 10 percent lower risk
of living in poverty (Hoddinot et al. 2013).

The 2013 Lancet series on maternal and child nutrition presented a conceptual framework describing the causes
of malnutrition, including stunting, and strategies to improve it. According to the framework, the direct causes
of malnutrition include inadequate food intake (inadequate quantity and quality of food) and repeated bouts of
disease that compromise nutrient intake and absorption. The more distal (underlying) causes of malnutrition
include food security—that is, food availability and food diversity; access to and use of health services; and a
safe and hygienic environment. Finally, the basic causes of malnutrition impacting the underlying and direct
causes include macro-level economic, social, political, and environmental factors such as national wealth, pov-
erty and wealth distribution, ubiquity of armed conflict, climate events, and so forth (Walker et al. 2011).



Global Nutrition Targets
In 2012, the World Health Assembly (WHA) established a set of six global nutrition targets to address key
dimensions of maternal and child malnutrition including stunting. The stunting target has subsequently been
incorporated into the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) framework under SDG 2: “End hunger, achieve
food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture; and SDG target 2.2: By 2030, end
all forms of malnutrition, including achieving, by 2025, the internationally agreed targets on stunting and
wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and
lactating women and older persons.”1

The WHA stunting target calls for reducing the number of children who are stunted worldwide by 40 percent
from the 2010 baseline of 171 million to approximately 100 million in 2025. The target is based on an analysis
of global trends in the prevalence of stunting among pre-school-age children from 1990 through 2020 (de Onis
et al. 2011). In the context of this report it is important to note that the WHA targets, including the stunting
target, are set at the global level and are not accompanied by regional or national targets.



8 	                                                                                                 in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
 Stunting in Sub-Saharan Africa
 Since 1990, the global prevalence of stunting has declined from 39.5 percent to 22.9 percent and the number of
 stunted children in the world has declined by over 100 million, from 254 million in 1990 to about 155 million
 in 2015 (UNICEF, WHO, and World Bank 2017). However, progress in reducing stunting has been slower in
 Africa than in other regions. Among all World Bank regions, the average annual decline in stunting preva-
 lence has been the lowest in Africa (see Figure 1.1 and Figure 2.1 on page 27).

 Figure 1.1: Stunting Trends by Region, 1990–2015


                                 60


                                 50
Stunting prevalence (%)




                                 40


                                 30


                                 20


                                 10




                                       1990             1995                 2000               2005                 2010                                      2015

                                      SAR
 Source: UNICEF−WHO−World Bank Joint Malnutrition                   SSA
                                                  Estimates, Global Database on Child Growth EAP
                                                                                             and Malnutrition (2017)
                                                                 MENA                        LAC

 Figure 1.2: Stunting Prevalence and the Number of Stunted Children in Sub-Saharan Africa, 1990–2015

                                                                                                                 56.6
                                 60                                                                 55.2                    60
                                                                                      52.9
                                                                      50.1
                                                        47.3
                                 50           45.2                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                 Number of stunted children (million)




                                         49%
                                                     46%
       Stunting prevalence (%)




                                 40                                43%                                                      40
                                                                                    40%
                                                                                                 38%
                                                                                                              35%
                                 30                                                                                         30


                                 20                                                                                         20


                                  10                                                                                        10


                                  0                                                                                         0

                                              1990       1995         2000            2005          2010            2015

                                                     Stunting prevalence                     Number of stunted children

    Source: UNICEF−WHO−World Bank Joint Malnutrition Estimates, Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition (2017)




CHAPTER 1 The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa	                                                                                            9
Consequently, although the East Asia and Pacific region managed to reduce stunting prevalence by almost two-
thirds, Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) achieved a reduction of only one-quarter during the same period. Further-
more, because of high fertility and population growth, the number of stunted children on the continent within
that time frame increased by about 12 million (see Figure 1.2).

If population over that period of time did not grow, rather than the 57 million stunted children currently living
in Africa, there would be only about 32 million stunted African children. This suggests that the high rate of
population growth alone is responsible for about 24 million cases of stunting in Africa today.

Although there is some variation, in virtually all African countries more than one in five children is stunted,
and in nine countries (the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Niger, and Zambia) stunting prevalence exceeds 40 percent, or two in five
children (see Figure 2.3 on page 27).



Empirical Evidence
Annex 2 provides a brief overview of the existing empirical evidence by looking at the determinants of
undernutrition.

This section of the report focuses on the role of growth in income per capita to contribute to reducing stunting.
Estimating the income elasticity of stunting reduction has important policy implications. A low income elas-
ticity of stunting reduction would provide a strong rationale for increasing investments in targeted nutrition
interventions to complement broader growth-promoting policies. A substantive body of evidence exists to
suggest that a set of nutrition-specific interventions is highly cost-effective (Bhutta et al. 2013). The potential to
improve nutritional outcomes through nutrition-sensitive interventions (i.e., interventions in non-health sectors
such as agriculture, social safety nets, early child development, water and sanitation, and schooling) also exists,
but the body of evidence to date is not as strong as it is for nutrition-specific interventions (Ruel, Alderman,
and The Maternal and Child Nutrition Group 2013).

Overall, the review of existing evidence shows that income per capita has a significant effect on the nutritional
status of children (Alderman et al. 2001; Headey 2012; Heltberg 2009; Smith and Haddad 2000, 2002, 2015).
Using all available data on stunting and on constant gross national income (GNI) per capita suggests that there
is a significant negative relationship between these two variables (Figure 1.3). Based on existing cross-country
analyses, the estimated income elasticities fall in the range of [−1.26; −0.17] depending on the sample used and
the modeling approach adopted (see Table A.1 in Annex 1).

Since progress in terms of stunting reduction has been weaker in SSA than it has in other world regions, this
analysis looks more closely at the income elasticity of stunting reduction in SSA. One of the key contributions
of this section of the report is to test empirically whether the relation between income growth and stunting
reduction differs significantly in SSA compared to non-SSA countries. Another contribution is that it assesses
the extent to which the estimated income elasticity of stunting reduction differs across SSA subregions and
across different levels of stunting. A third contribution of this work is to use the estimated income elasticities
and project forward the expected changes in stunting at the 2030 horizon to assess how far SSA countries
would lie from the global SDG targets on stunting. A wide range of parametric regression models is adopted
to assess the robustness of the results to alternative modeling assumption. In particular, the robustness of the
results to potential endogeneity bias using instrumental variables methods is assessed, as well as their robust-
ness to unobserved country-specific heterogeneity by modeling country fixed and random effects.

The dataset is presented in the next section, and the estimation strategy is described in the following one. The
subsequent section details the main results, and is followed by a discussion of their implications.




10 	                                                                                                  in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                   Stunting Reduction 
  Figure 1.3: Stunting and Income per Capita

                     100
                                                    LOWER            UPPER
                              LOW INCOME           MIDDLE           MIDDLE            HIGH INCOME
                                                   INCOME           INCOME
                     80
Stunting rate (% )




                     60



                     40



                     20



                      0

                             270           1,025            4,035            12,475                 100,000

                                               GNI per capita (USD, constant)
  Source: World Development Indicators.
                                                      Non−SSA         SSA

  The Data
  The dataset is constructed at the country-year level, and the primary outcome variable of interest is the preva-
  lence of stunting. Specifically, the stunting rate is the percentage of children under age five whose height-for-
  age z-score is less than 2 standard deviations below the median of the global reference population of children.
  Stunting data originating from the Joint Malnutrition Estimates (JME) were prioritized (UNICEF, WHO, and
  World Bank 2017). This source of data was complemented with data from the World Bank’s World Develop-
  ment Indicators (WDI), WHO, or from country Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) when data points
  were missing in the JME dataset.

  All countries with available data are included, unlike most of the previous studies that focus on developing
  countries. Several sources of data were explored that contain relevant variables in the following categories:
  basic determinants—macro-fiscal, inclusiveness, governance, and conflicts; and underlying determinants—food
  security and household environment.

  The key variables used in this analysis are summarized in Annex 1 in Table A.1 and Table A.2. Table A.1
  includes a detailed definition as well as each variable’s source. As specified in the table, most variables come
  from the World Development Indicators. The government health expenditures, governance, conflict, and food
  availability indicators originate from other databases that are freely available for public use.

  Variables capturing some key elements of the macroeconomic environment, such as the number of economic
  recessions (episodes for which annual economic growth is negative), the degree of diversification of the economy,
  the share of natural rents on GDP, and the degree of trade openness are included. On the policy side are variables
  related to the share of public spending allocated to social sectors (health and education).

  Variables related to the degree of inclusiveness—such as the degree of income inequalities (Gini index) and
  the share of total consumption of the poorest 40 percent of the population—are also included. The female-to-
  male life expectancy ratio and the proportion of females having completed lower secondary education are also
  considered.




CHAPTER 1 The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa	                                          11
Indicators capturing different dimensions of the quality of governance and exposure to violence and conflicts
are also factored in the analysis.

Finally, variables related to the aggregate food supply are included, as well as those related to the coverage of
key interventions such as vitamin A supplementation and improved water and sanitation.

Table A.1 shows the sample mean for each variable of interest, as well as the SSA and non-SSA mean. The mean
difference between SSA and non-SSA is formally tested for by using two-sample Student tests. Almost all the
variables of interest are shown to be statistically different between the two groups. Overall, Table A.2 confirms
that income is lower, closer, more concentrated (especially in natural rents and in agriculture), more volatile, and
less inclusive in SSA than in other regions in the world. Indicators related to the quality of governance are lower
in the region and so are coverage of key interventions and aggregate food supply.



Estimation Strategy
The objective of this section is fourfold:

1.	 Estimate the average income elasticity of stunting for all available country points.

2.	 Estimate the average income elasticity for SSA countries and test whether this elasticity differs from non-
    SSA countries.

3.	 Assess whether the income elasticity differs (i) across SSA subregions and (ii) across countries with differ-
    ent rates of stunting.

4.	 Assess the extent to which country characteristics contribute to explaining the heterogeneity in estimated
    income elasticity parameters.

To answer these four questions, the following mixed effects 2-level model specification is used:2

Ln(Stuntirt )=α+β1*Ln(Yirt )+β2*Ln(Yirt )*SSA+β3*SSA +β4*Xirt+μt+ui..+uir.+εirt			                          (1)

with

			ui..~N(ui.., γ²)							                                                                                  (2)




			uir.~N(uir., τ²)							                                                                                  (3)




			                         εirt~N(0,σ²)							                                                             (4)

where

        Ln(Stuntirt ) is the log of the stunting rate in country i, region r in year t;

        Ln(Yirt ) is the log of income per capita expressed in the same constant currency unit across
        countries;

        the dummy variable SSA marks countries belonging to the Sub-Saharan Africa region;




12 	                                                                                                         in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                          Stunting Reduction 
         Xirt is a set of control variables capturing key country characteristics such as macroeconomic
         conditions, governance, conflicts, and underlying nutritional determinants;

         α, β1, β2, β3, and β4 are fixed parameters to be estimated;

         a random parameter is included to capture unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity at coun-
         try level (ui..);

         unobserved heterogeneity at regional level where country effects are nested in region effects;

         γ², τ², and σ² are the estimated variance residuals for (respectively) the country effect, the
         regional effect, and the error term;

         γ² measures the dispersion of the country specific effects around their country specific mean
         ui..; and

         τ² measures the dispersion of the region effects around their respective means uir..

A mixed effects multilevel model is chosen because it is the most flexible specification to address the key
questions with the data structure at hand (i.e., repeated longitudinal observations for countries that belong
to specific regional groups). The empirical strategy used is to first impose specific constraints on the model
parameters and then to relax each of these constraints in sequence by testing their significance.

To answer the first question—what is the average income elasticity across all countries?—the following con-
straints are first imposed on the model: β2=β3=β4=0. Since the model is specified in log-log, β1 can be directly
interpreted as the income elasticity of stunting—that is, the average expected percentage change in the depen-
dent stunting rate caused by one percentage change in income.

The second question—what is the average income elasticity for SSA countries, and does this elasticity differ
from that of non-SSA countries?—is addressed by relaxing the constraint on β2 and β3 and testing whether the
resulting income elasticity for the SSA countries differs significantly from the income elasticity estimated for
non-SSA countries.

The third question—does the income elasticity differ (i) across SSA subregions and (ii) across countries with
different rates of stunting?—is addressed similarly, but instead of creating an interaction variable between
the log of income and the whole set of SSA countries, the interactions are constructed with respect to different
subregions (south, west, central, and east SSA). To assess the extent to which the estimated income elasticities
also vary according to the degree of stunting, the same model is estimated using quantile regressions. The focus
is on the 25th percentile, the median, and the 75th percentile, which allows for a test of whether countries with
a relatively low incidence of stunting (25th percentile) have different income elasticities than countries with a
relatively high incidence of stunting (75th percentile).

Finally, the fourth question—to what extent do country characteristics contribute to explaining the heterogene-
ity in estimated income elasticity parameters?—is addressed by relaxing the constraint on β4 and by allowing
other control variables to enter the model. Although the constrained model allows the overall income elastic-
ity to be estimated, irrespective of the specific channels through which income causes stunting to change, the
unconstrained specification enables an evaluation of how specific characteristics or policy instruments affect
stunting, independently of changes in aggregate income.

To examine these four questions, the model is first estimated using pooled ordinary least squares (pooled OLS).
This is equivalent to imposing a set of distributional assumptions and parameter constraints on Equation (1).
More specifically, the pooled OLS model assumes that μt=ui..=uir.=0, or that the constant α is common across all
countries. Under this specification, the error term is supposed to be independently and identically distributed,




CHAPTER 1 The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa	                                       13
and longitudinal observations within countries are supposed to be uncorrelated. Observations related to coun-
tries embedded in a similar region are also assumed to be uncorrelated.

Next, these restrictions are relaxed by allowing country-specific and time-invariant effects to be modeled to
control for country-specific unobserved heterogeneity. This is done by estimating the main specification using
a random effects (RE) model and a fixed effects (FE) model. The main distributional assumption that differs
between the random effects and the mixed effects is the correlation between the country effects and the residu-
als. While the RE model imposes zero correlation between the country effects and the error term, the FE model
relaxes this assumption. Another important difference between the FE and the RE models is that the FE model
is estimated based exclusively on the within-country (longitudinal) variation in the data. The distributional
assumption between the country effects and the error term can be tested empirically using a Hausman test.

Finally, the mixed effects (ME) model allows the estimation to be generalized further by allowing both fixed
and random effects to be modeled, and by allowing observation to be correlated across countries within com-
mon regional boundaries.



Results
The main variables of interest for the income elasticity estimation are the stunting rates and a measure of
income. To measure income, GDP per capita in constant international dollars at 2011 PPP as well as constant
GNI per capita are used.3 The average stunting rate in the sample lies at around 30 percent, and it is signifi-
cantly higher in SSA (39 percent) than in non-SSA countries (26 percent) (see Table A.2).


Pooled OLS-Instrumental Variable Results
Results for the pooled OLS and instrumental variable (IV) results are reported in Table A.4. The overall income
elasticity is estimated to lie around −0.5. These parameters are estimated first in column (1) and (2). The only
difference between these estimates is the fact that column (2) controls for a time trend. It is worth noting that
income alone accounts for over 60 percent of the overall variance in stunting. For both variables, the variation
in the sample is driven mostly by variation between countries. Within-country variation represents 25 per-
cent or less of total variance in stunting and income. The point estimate suggests that, over the long run, a 10
percent change in GDP per capita is associated with a reduction in stunting of about 5 percent, and the effect is
statistically significant.

An important issue to consider when estimating the income elasticity of stunting is potential reverse causal-
ity. Improvements in stunting rates are indeed expected to contribute to stronger economic growth over the
long run (Fogel 1994). Endogeneity would translate into biased estimates of the income elasticity parameter.
To address this concern, IV estimates are performed by treating income as an endogenous variable. Money
and quasi-money (M2) in percentage of GDP, and the capital share in the economy, are used as instrumental
variables.4 The underlying identification restriction here is that these variables affect stunting only in so far as
they influence GDP per capita. The results are reported in column (3) of Table A.4. The point estimates for the
income elasticity drops slightly but remains significant. Statistical tests are conducted to assess (i) the validity
and (ii) the relevance of the instruments. The Sargan-Hansen statistic is reported and the null hypothesis that
the instruments are valid cannot be rejected. The under-identification and weak identification tests are rejected,
suggesting that the instruments are also relevant and cannot be rejected. Finally, the endogeneity of GDP per
capita is tested. Two endogeneity tests are reported in Table A.4, and neither can reject the null hypothesis
that income per capita is exogenous. The analysis is therefore pursued by assuming that GDP per capita is
exogenous.

Next, whether the estimated income elasticity differs between SSA and non-SSA countries is tested. This is
done by relaxing the hypothesis that the coefficient associated with the interaction term between (log) GDP per
capita and (log) stunting (β2) is equal to zero. The income elasticity for non-SSA countries is given by β1 and




14 	                                                                                                 in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                  Stunting Reduction 
the income elasticity for SSA countries by β1+β2. The standard errors for the income elasticity in SSA countries
is not directly reported by Stata (StataCorp 2015), but can be derived by constructing std(β1+β2 )=√([Var(β1)+-
Var(β2)+2*Cov(β1,β2 )]). The coefficient of the interaction term is statistically significant, suggesting that the
income elasticity of SSA countries differs from that of non-SSA countries (see column (4) of Table A.4). The
point estimate for the income elasticity in non-SSA countries is −0.57. In SSA countries, the elasticity is still
negative, but three times lower (−0.19) in magnitude. This implies that a 10 percent increase in per capita GDP
is associated with a 5.7 percent decrease in stunting rates in non-SSA countries, but with only a 1.9 percent
decrease in SSA. The same logic is followed in the fifth column of Table A.4, but instead of considering the
region as a whole, the parameter heterogeneity is assessed at the subregional level. The elasticity for south SSA,
west SSA, central SSA, and east SSA is tested to determine whether they differ from that of non-SSA countries.
The interaction terms are all statistically significant, suggesting different magnitudes in the income elasticity of
stunting between subregions. The region with the lowest response of stunting to changes income is the south
SSA region. For the countries in south SSA,5 a 10 percent increase in GDP per capita is associated on average
with a reduction in stunting rates of about 0.9 percent. For countries located in east SSA, however, the point
estimate of the income elasticity of stunting lies around −0.24, which is still more than twice as low as it is for
non-SSA countries.

Figure 1.4 summarizes the estimated elasticity parameters across regions and subregions, with their associated
95 percent confidence intervals.


Figure 1.4: Estimated Income Elasticity of Stunting (OLS)


                                0
 Income elasticity estimates




                               −.2


                               −.4


                               −.6


                               −.8
                                                                 SA
                                 A




                                                                                     A
                                     A




                                               A




                                                                                            A
                               SS




                                                                                 SS
                                     SS




                                               SS




                                                                                           SS
                                                              tS
                               n−




                                                                                al
                                          uth




                                                                                           st
                                                             es



                                                                               ntr
                        No




                                                                                         Ea
                                                            W
                                          So




                                                                           Ce




                                           Point estimate                 95% CI

Source: Authors calculations from WDI.




Fixed, Random, and Mixed Effects Models
Next, some important assumptions imposed on the model are relaxed by taking into account the structure
of the dataset and allowing more flexibility in the estimation. More specifically, first the common intercept
assumption imposed by the pooled OLS model to introduce country-specific effects is relaxed. These coun-
try-specific effects allow the model to control for any source of unobserved and time-invariant country
heterogeneity.




CHAPTER 1 The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa	                                      15
First a random effects (RE) model is estimated; this assumes zero correlation between the country-specific
effects and the residuals. The main results for the RE model are reported in column (1) of Table A.5. The main
coefficients of interest—β1 and β2—both remain statistically significant. The point estimates for the non-SSA
income elasticity (−0.55) and for the SSA income elasticity (−0.20) are also both statistically significant and are
similar to those obtained with pooled OLS regression.

A fixed effects (FE) model is then estimated. This relaxes the zero correlation assumption between the coun-
try effects and the residuals. FE models are estimated by taking the first difference of the variables expressed
in level. As a result, the estimated elasticities rely on within-country variation only, and can be interpreted as
representing short- to medium-term elasticities in comparison to the long-term elasticity estimated in pre-
vious models. The non-SSA income elasticity drops to −0.5, and the SSA income elasticity to −0.18 (column
(3)). A Hausman test is conducted to assess the validity of the zero correlation assumption imposed under the
RE specification. Under the null hypothesis, both the RE and FE estimates are consistent. In that case, the RE
estimates are more efficient. Under the alternative hypothesis, however, the RE model delivers inconsistent
estimates. The Sargan-Hansen statistic is reported in columns (1) and (2) with their associated p-values. In both
cases, the null hypothesis that both models are consistent cannot be rejected.

Finally, the empirical specification is generalized further, and the nested structure of the dataset is factored in by
estimating an ME model with nested effects (2-level) in which countries are nested into regions (i.e., non-zero
correlation is allowed between countries within the same region). The main results are preserved: the point esti-
mate for the non-SSA income elasticity is around −0.55 and around −0.20 for SSA countries (column (5)).

For all the three panel models considered here, the price to pay for a more flexible set of imposed assumptions
is a loss in the precision of estimates. This is visible if the subregional elasticity parameters are considered;
these are now not as precisely estimated as they used to be under the pooled-OLS model—see columns (2),
(4), and (6). The key result, however—that the income elasticity for SSA countries is negative but substan-
tially lower in magnitude than it is in non-SSA countries—remains robust to changes in the underlying model
assumptions. Figure 1.5 shows the estimated elasticities with 95 percent confidence interval from the mixed
effects (ME) model.


Figure 1.5: Estimated Income Elasticity of Stunting (ME Model)

                                .2
 Income elasticity estimates




                                 0



                               −.2



                               −.4



                               −.6
                                                                   A
                                     A




                                                                                     A
                                         A




                                                       A




                                                                                              A
                                                                   SS
                                SS




                                                                                 SS
                                         SS




                                                     SS




                                                                                          SS
                               n−




                                                                  t



                                                                                al
                                                  uth




                                                                                         st
                                                               es



                                                                               ntr
                    No




                                                                                         Ea
                                                               W
                                                So




                                                                           Ce




                                              Point estimate          95% CI
Source: Authors calculations from WDI.




16 	                                                                                                             in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                              Stunting Reduction 
Quantile Regression Results
The analysis of parameter heterogeneity for the income elasticity of stunting is pursued by allowing the
estimated parameter to vary with the distribution of stunting. Quantile regression methods are used to ask
whether countries with a relatively low incidence of stunting have a different average elasticity than countries
with a relatively large incidence of stunting. Quantile regression models are estimated for the 25th percentile
of the stunting distribution, its median, and the 75th percentile. The 25th percentile of the stunting distribution
regroups countries for which the incidence is lower or equal to 17.4 percent. The median of the distribution is
similar to the mean (30.1 percent). Countries with relatively high incidence (75th percentile) are countries for
which the rate of stunting is equal to 42.1 percent or more.

The results are reported in Table A.6 and a similar logic is followed: first a distinct parameter is estimated for
SSA as a whole, and then the region is broken down into subregions.

The income elasticity estimates are larger on the lower side of the stunting distribution. For non-SSA, the income
elasticity is around −0.66 at the lower part of the stunting distribution (column (1)), and −0.42 at the higher part
of the stunting distribution (column (5)). For SSA countries, the elasticity is around −0.22 at the 25th percentile of
the stunting distribution, and around −0.16 at the larger part. The median estimates are similar in magnitude to
the OLS results (column (3)). Income elasticity estimates for SSA are three times lower than for non-SSA coun-
tries for countries with low stunting incidence, and about 2.6 times lower for countries with relatively higher
distribution in stunting. As one might expect, disaggregation across moments of the stunting distribution and
across SSA subregions yields imprecise estimates, although the point estimates are ranked similarly to the esti-
mated OLS elasticities (columns (2), (4), and (6)).


Augmented Regression Results
Finally, additional control variables are introduced to the main specification to assess the extent to which the
difference between the estimated income elasticity in non-SSA countries and in SSA countries can be accounted
for by factors related to the different country characteristics that differ significantly between SSA and non-SSA
countries (see Table A.2) with indicators that characterize the broad macroeconomic environment, the degree
of inclusion in the economy, the share of public spending allocated to the social sectors, the quality of gover-
nance, the exposition to violence and conflicts, and to coverage of key interventions.

The results for these augmented mixed effects regressions are reported in Table A.7a and in Table A.7b. In each
of these tables, column (1) represents the baseline (no additional control) specification to which subsequent
estimates are compared.

Economic diversification, measured by a Herfindhal index based on the share of GDP accounted for by the
agriculture, industry, and service sectors, is associated with lower stunting rates, above and beyond the effect
of economic diversification on GDP per capita (column (2), Table A.7a).

The share of public spending allocated to health and education is also associated with lower stunting rates,
after controlling for income (column (4), Table A.7a).

Improved food availability and access to improved sanitation induce lower incidence of stunting, still con-
trolling for income differences across countries (columns (7) and (8), Table A.7a).

Although some of the additional control variables are associated with changes in stunting rates, the main result
remains stable. The income elasticity of stunting is negative, and substantially lower in SSA countries than it is
in non-SSA countries. Controlling for access to improved sanitation has the larger effect on the relative magni-
tude of the estimated income elasticities. Differences in access to water and sanitation account for about half of
the gap in income elasticities between non-SSA and SSA countries. By comparison, differences in the degree of
economic diversification account for only 6 percent of the difference in income elasticity estimates.




CHAPTER 1 The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa	                                         17
        Turning now to governance and exposure to violence and conflicts, Table A.7b shows that a lower degree of
        corruption (column 2), improved government effectiveness (column 3), and a stronger rule of law (column
        6) are associated with lower incidence of stunting, independently of the effect of these variables on GDP per
        capita. An increase in the state fragility index is also associated with higher rates of stunting. Again, controlling
        for these additional variables does not alter the main result. Differences in the degree of control of corruption
        and of government effectiveness between SSA and non-SSA countries account for about 20 percent each of the
        difference in the estimated income elasticity.



        Discussion
        Using the estimated income elasticity parameters, the expected changes in stunting induced by changes in per
        capita income are projected forward, using the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (WEO)
        projections for GDP growth between 2016 and 2022.6 These projections are extended to 2030 by estimating a
        simple Solow growth model and assuming steady state growth. The United Nations Department of Economic
        and Social Affairs (UN-DESA) World Population Prospects, based on a medium fertility assumption, are used
        to derive population projections to 2030.

        Based on the dataset, the global number of stunted children is estimated to be about 155 million in 2015, 51.9
        million of whom (33 percent) are in SSA. Relying on current income and population projections, and applying
        the estimated income elasticities for SSA and non-SSA countries, the number of stunted children is estimated to
        decrease in non-SSA countries from 115.8 million in 2010 to about 64.5 million in 2030 (representing a decrease
        of about 44 percent). For SSA, however, the number of stunted children is estimated to increase slightly to 60.3
        million in 2030 (Figure 1.6). If the income elasticity of stunting in SSA was equal to the global average (−0.44),
        then the projected number of stunted children would still remain slightly higher than in 2015 at 52.5 million.
        Even in the case where the income elasticity of SSA countries was the same as in non-SSA countries (−0.55), the
        number of stunted children in SSA would fall only slightly below its 2015 level, to 49.3 million, quite far from
        the implicit WHA target of 33.1 million in 2025.

        Figure 1.6: Projections of the Number of Stunted Children (SSA versus non-SSA)

                                100

                                 90
Stunting population (million)




                                 80

                                 70

                                 60

                                 50

                                 40

                                 30

                                 20
                                      2015                    2020                                 2025                                  2030

                                             SSA countries (status quo)                         Non−SSA countries
                                             SSA countries (avg. elasticity)                    SSA countries (Non−SSA elasticity)
                                             SSA countries (WHA target)                         Non−SSA countries (WHA target)

        Source: Authors calculations from the modeled income elasticities (mixed effects multilevel model). GDP growth projections are taken from the IMF until 2020 and extrapo-
        lated using a Solow growth model after. Population projections from UN−DESA World Population Prospects.




     18 	                                                                                                                                           in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
 These projected trends would correspond to a reduction in the stunting rate in SSA countries from 34.7 percent
 in 2015 to 30.7 percent in 2030 under a status quo scenario (25 percent if the income elasticity was the same in
 SSA countries and in non-SSA countries). Again, this is far from the implicit WHA target, which would cor-
 respond to a stunting rate of 18.2 percent in 2025 (Figure 1.7). For non-SSA countries however, the projected
 stunting rate for 2030 would fall close to the implicit WHA target of about 16.9 percent (for 2025).

 Figure 1.7: Projections of the Stunting Rate, SSA versus non-SSA countries, 2015–30

                    36
                    34
                    32
                    30
                    28
Stunting rate (%)




                    26
                    24
                    22
                    20
                    18
                    16
                    14
                    12
                    10
                         2015                          2020                                     2025                                    2030

                                 SSA countries (status quo)                                  Non−SSA countries
                                 SSA countries (avg. elasticity )                            SSA countries (Non−SSA elasticity )
                                 SSA countries (WHA target)                                  Non−SSA countries (WHA target)
 Source: Authors calculations from the modeled income elasticities (mixed effects multilevel model). GDP growth projections are taken from the IMF until 2020 and extrapo-
 lated using a Solow growth model after. Population projections from UN−DESA World Population Prospects.




 Conclusion
 Income growth is associated with a reduction in stunting. On average, a 10 percent increase in GDP per capita
 translates into a 4.4 percent decrease in stunting rates. In SSA, however, not only are stunting rates higher and
 income per capita growth rates lower, but this report shows that the income elasticity of stunting reduction in
 this region is substantially lower (more than 2.5 times lower) than in non-SSA countries. Although a 10 percent
 increase in income would be associated with a reduction of about 5.5 percent in the stunting rate in non-SSA
 countries, the same increase in income would translate into only a 2 percent reduction in stunting in SSA.
 Moreover, and consistent with the previous result, the income elasticity of stunting is lower in countries where
 the stunting rate is the highest.

 These results have important policy consequences. First, income growth alone will clearly not be sufficient to
 reach the 2025 target for stunting established in 2012 by the 65th World Health Assembly (WHA) and adopted
 by the global community for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Based on estimated elasticity param-
 eters and on current income and population projections, the number of stunted children is expected to increase
 in SSA countries from 51.9 million in 2015 to 60.3 million in 2030, while the implicit WHA target would call for
 a reduction to about 33.1 million by 2025. Second, these results highlight the importance of scaling up invest-
 ments in targeted nutrition-specific interventions to accelerate the pace of reduction in stunting worldwide,
 and even more so in SSA where current coverage of key effective interventions is lower than it is in other
 regions of the world. Third, these results suggest that relying on income growth alone would not only trigger
 efficiency concerns for stunting reduction in SSA, but it would also contribute to increasing inequalities in




CHAPTER 1 The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa	                                                                                             19
stunting between countries. Therefore, scaling up targeted nutrition-specific interventions is necessary not only
because of an efficiency argument, but also with an objective of reducing inequalities between countries. In
addition to bringing nutrition-specific interventions to scale in SSA, a set of nutrition-sensitive interventions
might also contribute to the global community target of stunting reduction, especially if one considers the
important synergies across sectors to reduce stunting rates (Skoufias et al. 2017).



Endnotes
Note: All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.

1
 Information about the Sustainable Development Goals can be found at https://sustainabledevelopment.
un.org/topics/sustainabledevelopmentgoals .

2
    See Rabe-Hesketh and Skrondal (2012) for a detailed exposition on multilevel and longitudinal modeling.

3
 The results presented in this section of the report are based on GDP per capita. All results were robust to the
inclusion of GNI per capita instead of GDP. GDP per capita is used as the main income variable because the
implied sample size is larger than if GNI were used.

4
    These are similar to the instruments used for income in Smith and Haddad (2015).

5
 The countries belonging to southern Africa include Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, and
Zimbabwe.

6
 See the World Economic Outlook Database, 2017, available at https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/
weo/2017/01/weodata/index.aspx.




References
Aguayo, V. M., R. Nair, N. Badgaiyan, and V. Krishna. 2016. “Determinants of Stunting and Poor Linear Adair,
L. S., C. H. Fall, C. Osmond, A. D. Stein, R. Martorell, M. Ramirez-Zea, H. S. Sachdev, et al. 2013. “Associations
of Linear Growth and Relative Weight Gain during Early Life with Adult Health and Human Capital in Coun-
tries of Low and Middle Income: Findings from Five Birth Cohort Studies.” The Lancet 382 (9891): 525–34.

Alderman, H., H. Hoogeveen, and M. Rossi. 2006. “Reducing Child Malnutrition in Tanzania: Combined
Effects of Income Growth and Program Interventions.” Economics & Human Biology 4(1).

Alderman, H., S. Appleton, L. Haddad, L. Song, and Y. Yohannes. 2001. “Reducing Child Malnutrition: How
Far Does Income Growth Take Us?” Centre for Research in Economic Development and International Trade,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham.

Bhutta, Z. A., J. K. Das, A. Rizvi, M. F. Gaffey, N. Walker, S. Horton, P. Webb, et al. 2013. “Evidence-based inter-
ventions for improvement of maternal and child nutrition: what can be done and at what cost?” The Lancet 382
(9890): 452–77.

Black, R. E., C. G. Victoria, S. P. Walker, Z. A. Bhutta, P. Christian, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, et al. 2013. “Maternal
and Child Undernutrition and Overweight in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries.” The Lancet 382
(9890): 427–51.




20 	                                                                                                   in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                    Stunting Reduction 
Black, R. E., L. H. Allen, Z. A. Bhutta, L. E. Caulfield, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, C. Mathers, J. Rivera, and The
Maternal and Child Undernutrition Study Group. 2008. “Maternal and Child Undernutrition: Global and
Regional Exposures and Health Consequences.” The Lancet 371 (9608): 243–60.

Brown, C., M. Ravallion, and D. van de Walle. 2017. Are Poor Individuals Mainly Found in Poor Households? Evi-
dence Using Nutrition Data for Africa. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper 8001.

Christiaensen, L., and H. Alderman. 2001. Child Malnutrition in Ethiopia: Can Maternal Knowledge Augment the
Role of Income? Washington, DC: The World Bank, Africa Region Working Paper 22.

Danaei, G., K. Andrews, C. Sudfeld, G. Fink, D. McCoy, E. Peet, A. Sania, M. S. Smith Fawzi, M. Ezzati, and
W. W. Fawzi. 2016. “Risk Factors for Childhood Stunting in 137 Developing Countries: A Comparative Risk
Assessment Analysis at Global, Regional, and Country Levels.” PLoS Medicine 13 (11): 1–18.

de Onis, M., A. Onyango, E. Borghi, A. Siyam, M. Blössner, C. Lutter, and for the WHO Multicentre Growth
Reference Study Gro. 2011. “Worldwide implementation of the WHO Child Growth Standards.” Public Health
Nutrition 1–8.

Delpeuch, F., P. Traissac, Y. Martin-Prevel, J. P. Massamba, and B. Maire. 2000. “Economic Crisis and Malnu-
trition: Socioeconomic Determinants of Anthropometric Status of Preschool Children and their Mothers in an
African Urban Area.” Public Health Nutrition: 3 (1): 39–47.

Fink, G., E. Peet, G. Danaei, K. Andrews, D. C. McCoy, C. R. Sudfeld, M. C. Smith Fawzi, M. Ezzati, and W. W.
Fawzi. 2016. “Schooling and Wage Income Losses Due to Early- Childhood Growth Faltering in Developing
Countries: National, Regional, and Global Estimates.” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 104 (1): 104–12.

Fogel, R. W. 1994. “Economic growth, population theory, and physiology: The bearing of long-term processes
on the making of economic policy.” American Economic Review 84 (3): 369-395.

Frongillo, Jr., E. A., M. de Onis, and K. M. P. Hanson. 1997. “Socioeconomic and Demographic Factors Are Asso-
ciated with Worldwide Patterns of Stunting and Wasting of Children.” The Journal of Nutrition 2302–09.

Glewwe, P., S. Koch, and B. L. Nguyen. 2004. “Chapter 10: Child Nutrition, Economic Growth, and the Provi-
sion of Health Care Services in Vietnam.” Economic Growth, Poverty, and Household Welfare in Vietnam (The World
Bank), 351–89.

Haddad, L., H. Alderman, S. Appleton, L. Song, and Y. Yohannes. 2002. Reducing Child Undernutrition: How Far
Does Income Growth Take Us? Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute, Food Consumption
and Nutrition Division, Discussion Paper 137.

Headey, D. D. 2012. “Developmental Drivers of nutritional Change: A Cross-Country Analysis.” World Develop-
ment 42: 76–88.

Heltberg, R. 2002. Does Economic Growth Reduce Child Malnutrition? Studiestr 6, 1455 København K, Denmark:
Institute of Economics University of Copenhagen.

Heltberg, R. 2009. “Malnutrition, Poverty and Economic Growth.” Health Economics 18 (Supp): S77–S88.

Hoddinot, J., H. Alderman, J. R. Behrman, L. Haddad, and S. Horton. 2013. “The Economic Rationale for Invest-
ing in Stunting Reduction.” Maternal and Child Nutrition 9 (2): 69–82.




CHAPTER 1 The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa	                                        21
Kabubo-Mariara, J., G. K. Ndenge, and D. M. Kirii. 2006. “Determinants of Children’s Nutritional Status in
Kenya: Evidence from Demographic and Health Surveys.” Conference on Reducing Poverty and Inequality: How
Can Africa Be Included? Oxford: Centre for the Study of African Economies (CSAE).

Marini, A., and M. Gragnolati. 2003. Malnutrition and Poverty in Guatemala. Washington, DC: The World Bank,
Policy Research Working Paper 2967.

McDonald, C., I. Olofin, S. Flaxman, W. W. Fawzi, D. Spiegelman, L. E. Caulfield, R. E. Black, M. Ezzati, and G.
Danaei. 2013. “The Effect of Multiple Anthropometric Deficits on Child Mortality: Meta-Analysis of Individual
Data in 10 Prospective Studies from Developing Countries.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 97 (4): 896–901.

McGovern, M. E., A. Krishna, V. M. Aguayo, and S. V. Subramanian. 2017. “A review of the evidence linking
child stunting to economic outcomes.” International Journal of Epidemiology 1–21.

Milman, A., E. A. Frongillo, M. de Onis, and J. Hwang. 2005. “Differential Improvement among Countries in Child
Stunting is Associated with Long-Term Development and Specific Interventions.” The Journal of Nutrition 1415–22.

Rabe-Hesketh, S., and A. Skrondal. 2012. Multilevel and Longitudinal Modeling Using Stata, Volumes I and II.
USA: Stata Corporation.

Ruel, M. T., H. Alderman, and The Maternal and Child Nutrition Group. 2013. “Nutrition-Sensitive Interven-
tions and Programmes: How Can They Help to Accelerate Progress in Improving Maternal and Child Nutri-
tion.” The Lancet 382 (9890): 536–51.

Sahn, D. E. 1994. “The Contribution of Income to Improved Nutrition in Côte d’Ivoire.” Journal of African Econo-
mies 3 (1): 29–61.

Skoufias, E. 2017. “Laying the Groundwork for More Effective Multi-Sectoral Action for the Reduction of
Undernutrition in Africa” (forthcoming report).

Smith, L. C. and L. Haddad. 2000. “Explaining Child Malnutrition in Developing Countries: A Cross-Country
Analysis.” International Food Policy Research Institute.

Smith, L. C. and L. Haddad. 2002. “How Potent Is Economic Growth in Reducing Undernutrition?” Economic
Development and Cultural Change 51 (1): 55–76.

Smith, L. C. and L. Haddad. 2015. “Reducing Child Undernutrition: Past Drivers and Priorities for the Post-
MDG Era.” World Development 68: 180–204.

StataCorp. 2015. Stata Statistical Software: Release 14. College Station, TX: StataCorp LP.

Subramanyam, M. A., I Kawachi, L. F. Berkman, and S. V. Subramanian. 2011. “Is Economic Growth Associated
with Reduction in Child Undernutrition in India?” PLoS Medicine 8 (3): e1000424.

Tiwari, S., H. Zaman, and J. Saavedra. 2013. “Chapter B: Economic Growth, Poverty, and Nutrition.” Improving
Nutrition Through Multisectoral Approaches (The World Bank), 45–57.

UNICEF, WHO, and World Bank. 2017. “Joint Child Malnutrition Estimates. Global Database on Child Growth
and Malnutrition.”

Vollmer, S., K. Harttgen, M. A. Subramanyam, J. Finlay, S. Klasen, and S. V. Subramanian. 2014. “Association
between economic growth and early childhood undernutrition: Evidence from 121 Demographic and Health
Surveys from 36 low-income and middle-income countries.” The Lancet Global Health, Vol 2 e225–34.




22 	                                                                                                   in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                    Stunting Reduction 
Walker, S. P., T. D. Wachs, S. Grantham-McGregor, M. M. Black, S. A. Nelson, S. L. Huffman, H. Baker-Henning-
ham, et al. 2011. “Inequality in Early Childhood: Risk and Protective Factors for Early Child Development.”
The Lancet 378 (9799): 1325–38.

Webb, P., and S. Block. 2012. “Support for Agriculture during Economic Transformation: Impacts on Poverty
and Undernutrition.” PNAS (Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences) 109 (31): 12309–14.

WHO. 2009. WHO Child Growth Standards and the Identification of Severe Acute Malnutrition in Infants and Chil-
dren: A Joint Statement by the World Health Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund. Geneva: WHO.

WHO. 2015. Global Targets Tracking Tool. Geneva: WHO.




CHAPTER 1 The Income Elasticity of Stunting Reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa	                                     23
CHAPTER 2


INVESTING IN THE EARLY YEARS: Nutrition in Africa

                                                                                                                       Benefits of Investing
   Key Messages                                                                                                        in Nutrition in Africa
   •	     About 56.6 million children under age five in Africa are stunted.
          If no action is taken, even if the prevalence of stunting remains
          unchanged, the number of stunted children on the continent will                                              16.9 MILLION
          increase by 12 million over the next decade because of the region’s
          high fertility rates.
                                                                                                                 cases of stunting prevented
                                                                                                                           in 2025
   •	     Economic growth alone is insufficient to address the challenge of
          maternal and child malnutrition in Africa. The impact of economic
          growth on the prevalence of stunting is weaker in Africa than in any
          other region in the world (a 1 percent increase in gross national
          income is associated with 0.2 percent reduction in stunting in Africa                                         1.9 MILLION
          vs. 0.6 percent in other regions): even among the richest households,                                child deaths prevented in 2025
          as many as one-fifth of children are stunted.

   •	     Scaling up a package of high-impact nutrition-specific interventions
          in Africa to address the global nutrition targets of stunting, anemia,
          breastfeeding, and wasting would require on average an additional
          $2.7 billion per year over the next 10 years and would provide
                                                                                                                     56.9 MILLION
          enormous benefits (see panel on right), including preventing nearly 17                              case-years of anemia in women
          million cases of child stunting.                                                                          prevented in 2025
   •	     The economic benefits generated over the productive lives of
          beneficiaries would be enormous: the region would gain $67 billion
          from investments in stunting, $16 billion for anemia, $20 billion for
          breastfeeding, and $13 billion for the treatment of severe wasting.                                          20.8 MILLION
   •	     Mobilizing the required resources for nutrition is possible but                                        babies exclusively breastfed
          would require the coordinated efforts of African governments,
          traditional multilateral and bilateral donors, and innovative
          sources of financing such as the Power of Nutrition. Over the
          next 10 years, African governments would need to increase their
          average annual expenditure on nutrition by $0.8 billion, an amount
                                                                                                                       11.4 MILLION
          equal to about 2.4 percent of the current government expenditure                                    cases of severe wasting treated
          on health. International donors would need to increase average
          annual allocations to nutrition in Africa by $1.8 billion, an amount
          equivalent to about 4.3 percent of total official development
          assistance (ODA), and innovative financing sources would need to
          leverage these domestic and ODA resources.                                                                       $4–$18
                                                                                                               return for every dollar invested
   •	     Returns on every dollar invested in this set of interventions range
          from $4 for stunting to $12 for wasting, $13 for anemia, and $18 for
          investing in exclusive breastfeeding.


                                                                                                                        $67 BILLION
                                                                                                                 generated from investments
                                                                                                                     to reduce stunting*
*The economic benefits are calculated over the productive lives of the children benefiting from the interventions that prevent stunting.



CHAPTER 2 Investing in the Early Years: Nutrition in Africa	                                                                                    25
Investment Case for Nutrition
Ensuring optimum nutrition—particularly during the 1,000-day period from pregnancy to a child’s second
birthday—can alter an individual’s development trajectory and maximize her or his productive potential.
Chronic malnutrition has important lifelong consequences for health and cognitive development. Losses to
cognitive development in early childhood resulting from chronic malnutrition are irreversible. Being stunted
(low height-for-age) in early childhood is associated with a delayed start at school, reduced schooling attain-
ment, and substantially decreased adult incomes at both the individual and country level (Daniels and Adair
2004; Fink et al. 2016; Hoddinott et al. 2008; Martorell et al. 2010). These consequences add up to overall gross
domestic product (GDP) losses of 4 to 11 percent in Africa and Asia (Horton and Steckel 2013). Importantly,
chronic undernutrition can be transmitted through an inter-generational cycle, where malnourished mothers
are more likely to have stunted children (Aguayo et al. 2016; Ozaltin et al. 2010).

Investments in nutrition are highly cost-effective and among the best value-for-money development actions
(Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). An Investment Framework for Nutrition developed
by the World Bank in partnership with R4D, 1000 Days, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation estimated
high returns on every dollar invested in nutrition: from $4 in returns for treating acute malnutrition (wasting)
to $11 for preventing stunting, $12 for the treatment and prevention of anemia, and $35 for increasing the prev-
alence of exclusive breastfeeding (Shekar et al. 2017). Not only do investments in nutrition produce substantial
economic benefits, but they also lay the groundwork for the success of investments in other sectors.

Investments in the early years—including early life nutrition in the first 1000 days, early learning and stimula-
tion, and nurturing care and protection from stress—ensure that all children reach their human potential and
contribute to the economic growth of their nation. The analysis presented below focuses on high-impact nutri-
tion-specific interventions with strong evidence of efficacy in reducing malnutrition, and estimates the costs,
impact, and economic benefits of scaling up these interventions in Africa.



Nutrition in Africa
Since 1995, progress in reducing chronic malnutrition and its principal manifestation, stunting, has been slower
in Africa than in other regions. Over the past two decades, among all World Bank regions, the Africa region has
seen the lowest average annual decline in stunting prevalence (see Figure 2.1). While both the Europe and Cen-
tral Asia region and the East Asia and the Pacific region have managed to reduce stunting prevalence by almost
two-thirds, Africa achieved a reduction of only one-quarter during the same period. Furthermore, because of
high fertility and population growth, the number of stunted children on the continent within that time frame
actually increased by about 12 million (Figure 2.2) and this upward trend will likely continue in the future. The
analyses show that if population growth had declined to zero during this period, the number of stunted chil-
dren could have declined to 32 million by 2015 instead of increasing to more than 56 million.

Although there is some variation, in virtually all African countries more than one in five children is stunted
and in nine countries stunting prevalence exceeds 40 percent, and in another 14 countries – 30 percent. (see
Figure 2.3). Furthermore, national prevalence figures mask marked differences within countries, with stunting
prevalence in high-prevalence regions being significantly higher than the national average (see chapters 3 to 7
for specific examples).

Household data consistently show that, although stunting prevalence tends to be higher in lower-income quin-
tiles, even among the richest households it is very high, often exceeding 20 percent (Figure 2.4). Recent analyses
show that the association between economic growth and reduction in stunting prevalence is weaker in Africa,
where a 1 percent increase in per capita gross national income (GNI) is associated with a 0.2 percent reduction in
stunting prevalence, than it is in other regions, where the same increase in GNI is associated with a 0.6 percent
decrease in the prevalence of stunting (Eozenou et al. 2017). In fact, based on these estimates, economic growth
would not be enough to offset the impact of rapid population growth; despite increasing the purchasing power




26 	                                                                                                in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
            Figure 2.1: Reduction Rates by Region, 1990–2015 	                                                                                                                            Figure 2.2: Trends in Stunting Prevalence and the Number
                                                                                                                                                                                          of Stunted Children in the Africa Region, 1990-2015
                                                                    4   3.8
              Average annual reduction in stunting prevalence (%)




                                                                                                                                              3.8%           3.8%

                                                                                        South Asi                                                                                                                           60                                                      52.9          55.2           56.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50.1
                                                                    3                       2.8                                                                                                                                       45.2             47.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                  STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)
                                                                                        Sub-S h r n                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                        2.8%
                                                                                        Afric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40        49%
                                                                                        E st Asi +                 2.2                                                                                                                                 46%            43%
                                                                                                                                                     2.2%                                                                                                                           40%
                                                                                        th P ciﬁc                                       1.9                                                                                 30                                                                    38%            35%
                                                                    2                                                    1.9%                                                                                                         45.2             42.4
                                                                                        Middl E st +                                                                                                                                                                  39.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20                                                      37.0          34.5
                                                                                        North Afric                                                                                                                                                                                                              31.9
                                                                                                                                 1.3%                       1.3
                                                                                        Europ +                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                        C ntr l Asi
                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                        L tin Am ric +
                                                                                        th C rribb n                                                                                                                                  1990             1995           2000         2005           2010          2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Stuntin Pr v l nc                  Numb r of stunt d childr n
                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Numb r of stunt d childr n if no poul tion rowth
                                                                              EAP                 LAC                    MENA                  SAR                SSA




                            Source: UNICEF, WHO and World Bank. 2015



                                         Figure 2.3: Prevalence of Stunting in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2015




                                                                              CABO
                                                                              VERDE                     MAURITANIA

                                                                                                                                MALI                   NIGER                                                                SUDAN             ERITREA
                                                                                              SENEGAL                                                                          CHAD
                                                                               THE GAMBIA                                       BURKINA
                                                                                                                                 FASO                                                                                                                      DJIBOUTI
                                                                               GUINEA-BISSAU              GUINEA                          BENIN
                                                                                                                                                      NIGERIA
                                                                                                                       CÔTE                                                                                                                   ETHIOPIA
                                                                                        SIERRA LEONE                 D’IVOIRE GHANA                                        CENTRAL AFRICAN                                  SOUTH
                                                                                                                                                                              REPUBLIC                                      SUDAN
                                                                                                         LIBERIA                                            CAMEROON                                                                                             SOMALIA
                                                                                                                                  TOGO
                                                                                                                       EQUATORIAL GUINEA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UGANDA
                                                                                                                    SÃO TOMÉ AND PRÍNCIPE                          REP. OF                                                                   KENYA
                                                                                                                                                             GABON CONGO
                                                                                                                                                                                               RWANDA
                                                                                                                                                                                      DEM. REP.                                  BURUNDI
                                                                                                                                                                                      OF CONGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TANZANIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SEYCHELLES

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COMOROS
                                                                                                                                                                          ANGOLA
                                                                                    Prevalence of stunting                                                                                                                            MALAWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZAMBIA
                                                                                    in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2014
                                                                                           <20                                                                                                              ZIMBABWE MOZAMBIQUE                                                    MAURITIUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MADAGASCAR
                                                                                           20 – 29.9                                                                    NAMIBIA
                                                                                                                                                                                       BOTSWANA
                                                                                           30 – 39.9
                                                                                           ≥40                                                                                                                                       SWAZILAND

                                                                                                                                                                                      SOUTH                                         LESOTHO
                                                                                                                                                                                      AFRICA
                                                                                    Sources: UNICEF, WHO, World Bank, 2015.




             IBRD 42988 | JUNE 2017 These maps were produced by the Cartography Unit of the World Bank Group. The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
             shown on these maps do not imply, on the part of the World Bank Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any endorsement or acceptance of such
             boundaries.




           CHAPTER 2 Investing in the Early Years: Nutrition in Africa	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 27
IBRD 42988 | JUNE 2017
This map was produced by the Cartography Unit of the World Bank
Group. The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other
information shown on this map do not imply, on the part of the World
Figure 2.4: Socioeconomic Disparities in Stunting among Select                                                              Figure 2.5: Estimated Impact of Economic Growth on the
African Countries                                                                                                           Number of Stunted Children in Africa, 2015–2025
                                  Ethiopi                                                      Ni     ri
                60                                                           60
PREVALENCE, %




                                                             PREVALENCE, %
                                                                                                                                                                   80




                                                                                                                            NUMBER OF STUNTED CHIDREN (Millions)
                40                                                           40                                                                                                                                                                   67.4
                                                                                                                                                                   70
                20                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                   60
                0                                                            0                                                                                                                                                                    61.7
                                                                                                                                                                   50




                                                                                                              h
                                                                                           d
                                                                                  st




                                                                                                                   st
                                               h
                              d
                     st




                                                        st




                                                                                                 dl


                                                                                                           rt
                                                                                          n
                                    dl


                                            rt
                             n




                                                                                       co
                          co




                                                                                               id


                                                                                                         u
                                                                                  r




                                                                                                                   h
                                  id


                                            u
                     r




                                                    h




                                                                                 o




                                                                                                      Fo
                    o




                                                                                                                                                                   40
                                         Fo




                                                                                               M
                                  M




                                                                              Po
                 Po




                                                                                                                  Hi
                                                   Hi




                                                                                       S
                          S




                                                                                                                                                                   30

                                  K n                                                              DRC                                                             20
                                                                             60
                                                             PREVALENCE, %
PREVALENCE, %




                60
                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                             40
                40
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                             20
                20                                                                                                                                                      2015   2016   2017    2018      2019   2020   2021   2022   2023   2024    2025
                                                                             0
                0




                                                                                                              h
                                                                                           d
                                                                                  st




                                                                                                                       st
                                               h
                              d
                     st




                                                    st




                                                                                                 dl


                                                                                                           rt
                                                                                          n                                                                                    Ch n in numb r of                         Ch n in numb rs of stunt d
                                    dl


                                            rt
                             n




                                                                                       co


                                                                                               id


                                                                                                          u
                                                                                  r




                                                                                                                   h
                          co


                                  id


                                            u
                     r




                                                                                 o
                                                    h




                                                                                                       Fo
                                                                                               M
                    o




                                         Fo




                                                                              Po




                                                                                                                                                                               stunt d childr n if no                    childr n du to GDP rowth lon
                                  M




                                                                                                                  Hi
                                                                                       S
                 Po




                                                   Hi
                          S




                                                                                                                                                                                ction is t k n


Data source: UNICEF, WHO and World Bank. 2015 and World Bank 2017.




of households, the absolute number of stunted children on the continent would continue to rise (Figure 2.5). This
low income elasticity is likely due to the ubiquity of the risk factors—such as food insecurity, lack of access to
clean water and improved sanitation, the low socioeconomic status of women, and political instability, among
others—which attenuate the impact of higher incomes. At the same time, some countries with relatively low
income levels, such as Senegal, have been able to achieve dramatic reductions in stunting prevalence, while
relatively rich countries, such as Nigeria, have seen only small declines. In sum, the evidence from within-coun-
try and cross-country analyses demonstrates that economic growth alone will not be sufficient to substantially
reduce stunting in Africa and that direct action and specific interventions are needed.


 Other aspects of malnutrition in Africa are equally alarming. Wasting (low weight for height, an indicator of
acute malnutrition) prevalence is higher than in any other region in the world with the exception of South Asia
and, in 2015, about 13 million (7.8 percent) of children under age five on the continent suffered from wasting. In
a number of countries, largely in the Sahel region (Burkina Faso, Chad, Eritrea, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Soma-
lia, South Sudan, and Sudan), the prevalence of wasting permanently exceeds the World Health Organization
(WHO) public health emergency threshold of 10 percent. Similarly, the prevalence of maternal anemia remains
very high—about 40 percent of all pregnant women in Africa are anemic (UNICEF et al., 2015; data from 2011).
No recent data exist on the prevalence of other micronutrient deficiencies in Africa. However, the historical
data suggest that the prevalence and the associated burden of disease is high. In 2007, about 57.7 million (33
percent) of school-aged children in Africa suffered from iodine deficiency (de Benoits, 2008). In 2005, about 2
percent of all school-aged children in Africa suffered from night blindness as a result of vitamin A deficiency
(WHO, 2009). This meant that Africa also had the highest absolute number of children suffering from night
blindness – about 2.5 million, roughly half of all children suffering from night blindness worldwide. Similarly,
about 3 million (9.8 percent) of pregnant women in Africa were estimated to suffer from night blindness, about
a third of the global burden (WHO, 2009).

The prevalence of exclusive breastfeeding tends to be higher in Africa than in other regions. In 18 African
countries, more than 50 percent of children are exclusively breastfed (Figure 2.6). However, recent analyses
suggest that breastfeeding is inversely associated with income and, as incomes rise, fewer women breastfeed
their children (Victora et al., 2016). This in turn implies that, in the absence of interventions aimed at promoting
breastfeeding, its prevalence in Africa will decline in the coming years, with a detrimental impact on physical
and cognitive development of children on the continent.




28 	                                                                                                                                                                                                              in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                               Stunting Reduction 
   Figure 2.6: Prevalence of Exclusive Breastfeeding in Africa




                                           CABO
                                           VERDE                        MAURITANIA

                                                                                           MALI                NIGER                                  SUDAN             ERITREA
                                                                    SENEGAL                                                     CHAD
                                             THE GAMBIA                                    BURKINA
                                                                                            FASO                                                                                   DJIBOUTI
                                             GUINEA-BISSAU                GUINEA                      BENIN
                                                                                                              NIGERIA
                                                                                       CÔTE                                                                             ETHIOPIA
                                                           SIERRA LEONE              D’IVOIRE GHANA                            CENTRAL AFRICAN         SOUTH
                                                                                                                                  REPUBLIC             SUDAN
                                                                         LIBERIA                                  CAMEROON                                                              SOMALIA
                                                                                                 TOGO
                                                                                      EQUATORIAL GUINEA
                                                                                                                                                            UGANDA
                                                                                   SÃO TOMÉ AND PRÍNCIPE                 REP. OF                                      KENYA
                                                                                                                   GABON CONGO
                                                                                                                                                RWANDA
                                                                                                                                       DEM. REP.            BURUNDI
                                                                                                                                       OF CONGO
                                                                                                                                                               TANZANIA
                                                                                                                                                                                              SEYCHELLES

                                                                                                                                                                                      COMOROS
                                                                                                                              ANGOLA
                                                    Prevalence of exclusive breastfeeding                                                                       MALAWI
                                                                                                                                                   ZAMBIA
                                                    in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2016
                                                           ≥50                                                                                     ZIMBABWE MOZAMBIQUE                                     MAURITIUS
                                                                                                                                                                                   MADAGASCAR
                                                           20 – 49.9                                                         NAMIBIA
                                                                                                                                        BOTSWANA
                                                           10 – 19.9
                                                           <10                                                                                                  SWAZILAND
                                                           No data                                                                     SOUTH                  LESOTHO
                                                                                                                                       AFRICA
                                                    Sources: WHO 2016




   IBRD 42989 | JUNE 2017 This map were produced by the Cartography Unit of the World Bank Group. The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
   shown on these maps do not imply, on the part of the World Bank Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any endorsement or acceptance of such
   boundaries.

IBRD 42989 | JUNE 2017
This map was produced by the Cartography Unit of the World Bank
Group. The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other
information shown on this map do not imply, on the part of the World
Bank Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




   Global Targets for Nutrition
   Substantial improvements in the nutritional status of women and children can be realized if adequate invest-
   ment is made in a set of evidence-based nutrition-specific interventions that ensure optimum nutrition during
   the critical 1,000-day window between the start of a woman’s pregnancy and the child’s second birthday (Black
   et al. 2008, 2013). For women, these include interventions to prevent anemia before and during pregnancy
   as well as those aimed at improving protein energy intake during pregnancy. Interventions targeted toward
   children and their mothers aim to improve breastfeeding and complementary feeding practices, micronutrient
   status of children, and to treat acute malnutrition in children.

   In 2012—to rally the international community around improving nutrition—the 176 members of the World
   Health Assembly endorsed the first-ever global nutrition targets, focusing on six areas: stunting, anemia, low
   birthweight, childhood overweight, breastfeeding, and wasting (Table 2.1).1 These targets aim to boost invest-
   ments in cost-effective interventions, spearhead better implementation practices, and catalyze progress toward
   reducing malnutrition. The targets for stunting and wasting are enshrined within the United Nations’ Sustain-
   able Development Goal 2 (SDG 2), which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year 2030.




 CHAPTER 2 Investing in the Early Years: Nutrition in Africa	                                                                                                                                                          29
Table 2.1: Four Global Targets for Nutrition


   1
                    STUNTING*                                   f stunted children under five by 40%
                                             Reduce the number o
        Stuntin


   2
                    ANEMIA                                      f women of reproductive age with anemia by 50%
                                             Reduce the number o
        An mi



   5
                    BREASTFEEDING            Increase the rate of exclusive breastfeeding in the first six months up to at least 50%
        Exclusiv
   br     stf din

   6
                    WASTING*                 Reduce and maintain childhood wasting (acute malnutrition) to less than 5%
        W stin


Source: WHO 2014.
*Stunting and wasting are included within the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 2 (SDG 2), which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year 2030.


Despite evidence regarding their effectiveness and cost-effectiveness (see the next section), coverage of key
nutrition-specific interventions in Africa remains largely inadequate. Although coverage rates are higher for
some childhood interventions, they remain well below the levels necessary to progress in reducing malnutrition.
Table 2.2 and Figure 2.7 summarize the current coverage of and delivery platforms available for nutrition-spe-
cific interventions in Africa.

It should be noted that the analysis presented here does not capture some important, high-impact nutrition
interventions, including zinc and oral rehydration solution (ORS) for the treatment of diarrhea, iodization of salt
for the prevention of iodine deficiency disorders, calcium supplementation in pregnancy for the prevention of
pregnancy-related hypertensive disorders, and others. This is because this report focuses on high-impact inter-
ventions with effectiveness ratios for reaching the four specific global nutrition targets adopted by the WHA and
included among the SDGs (for stunting and wasting). However, it needs to be noted that addressing malnutri-
tion in a comprehensive manner will require expanding the coverage of those high-impact interventions as well.


Table 2.2: Delivery Platforms for Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Africa
 INTERVENTION                                                                                                                  PLATFORMS

 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation (iron and folic acid only)                                                    Health facility and community

 Complementary feeding education                                                                         Health facility, community, and communication campaigns

 Breastfeeding promotion                                                                                 Health facility, community, and communication campaigns

 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women                                              Health facility, community, and social safety net programs

 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic regions                                 Health facility and community

 Vitamin A supplementation                                                                                    Health facility, community, and food fortification

 Public provision of complementary foods                                                                 Health facility, community, and social safety net programs

 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition                                                                                Health facility and community

 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women of reproductive age                              School, community, health facility, and marketplace

 Staple food fortification                                                                                                      Marketplace

 Pro-breastfeeding social policies                                                                                          Government policies

 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns                                                                                        Media



30 	                                                                                                                                         in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                          Stunting Reduction 
Figure 2.7: Coverage of Key Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Africa, Weighted Average

                                                                     Antenatal micronutrient
                                                                         supplementation -
                                                                     (iron and folic acid only)
                                                Pro-breastfeeding                                        Complementary
                                                  social policies                                       feeding education
                                                                    100



                                                                          80



                                                                               60

                           Staple food                                                                                            Breastfeeding
                           fortiﬁcation                                             40
                                                                                                                                   promotion

                                                                                         20




           Iron and folic acid                                                                                                           Balanced energy
    supplementation for non-pregnant                                                                                                 protein supplementation
       women of reproductive age                                                                                                       for pregnant women




                          Treatment of severe                                                                               Intermittent presumptive
                           acute malnutrition                                                                                 treatment of malaria
                                                                                                                                 in pregnancy in
                                                                                                                            malaria-endemic regions


                                                          Public provision of                    Vitamin A
                                                         complementary foods                  supplementation




Financing Needs, Impacts, and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling Up High-Impact
Nutrition-Specific Interventions
Using the methodology detailed in An Investment Framework for Nutrition (Shekar et al. 2017), this brief pres-
ents estimates of the resources needed to scale up a package of 12 high-impact nutrition-specific interven-
tions in Africa to contribute toward achieving the global nutrition targets for stunting, anemia, breastfeeding,
and wasting, along with their estimated nutrition, health, and economic impacts.

To scale up the package of key interventions to reach the global nutrition targets, an investment of about
$70 billion is needed over the next 10 years, in addition to what low- and middle-income countries currently
spend on nutrition. About 39 percent of this total, or an additional $27.4 billion, needs to be invested in
Africa. Interventions to reduce stunting will require the most resources, accounting for nearly 80 percent of
the total amount required for scale-up. However, some of the stunting interventions would also affect breast-
feeding and anemia targets. Figure 2.8 represents the distribution of total cost across interventions to address
the four targets.




CHAPTER 2 Investing in the Early Years: Nutrition in Africa	                                                                                                   31
Figure 2.8: Ten-Year Financing Needs to Scale Up Interventions ($, billions)
                                                                                    1.4
                                            South Asi                         2.8
                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                            Sub-S h r n                                                                        2.4
                                                                        4.9
                                            Afric                                                                                                                    Stuntin

                                            E st Asi +                                                                   2.3
                                            th P ciﬁc                                                                                                               W stin
                                                                                                  27.3
                                            Middl E st +         16.8
                                            North Afric                                                                                                             An mi

                                            Europ +
                                                                                                                                                                    Br   stf din
                                            C ntr l Asi
                                                                                                                                            23.3
                                            L tin Am ric +                          16.8
                                            th C rribb n


                                                        ALL LOW & MIDDLE INCOME COUNTRIES                                             AFRICA

Note: For Africa, some costs for anemia, breastfeeding, and stunting are shared across interventions.



Combined with investments over the next decade in water and sanitation envisaged under the Water, Sanita-
tion and Hygiene (WASH) SDG goals, and with improvements in other underlying determinants of malnutri-
tion (such as food availability and diversity and women’s health, education, and empowerment), investing in
the nutrition-specific interventions in Africa would reduce the number of children on the continent who would
be stunted in 2025 by 30 percent compared to the 2015 baseline (Figure 2.9). In addition, the scale up of this
package of high-impact interventions would prevent over 1.9 million child deaths and 56.9 million case-years
of anemia in women of reproductive age. It would also allow the treatment of 11.4 cases of severe acute malnu-
trition in children and result in 20.8 million of babies being exclusively breastfed.


Figure 2.9: Impact of the 10-Year Scale-Up of Nutrition-Specific Interventions, Africa
STUNTED CHILDREN UNDER AGE FIVE, MILLIONS




                                              70


                                                                                                                Und rl in d t rmin nts of stuntin
                                             60
                                                                                                                                                   WASH        17 million f w r
                                                                                                                                                                    childr n
                                                                                                                                                               childr n stunt d
                                             50                                                                                                                     in 2025
                                                                                                                       Nutrition-sp ciﬁc int rv ntions


                                             40


                                                     40% r duction in numb r
                                             30      of stunt d childr n b 2025


                                                          2015   2016         2017         2018   2019   2020   2021     2022        2023     2024      2025

Note: a. Includes food availability and diversity, women’s education, women’s empowerment and health, and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH).




Among the set of proposed interventions, prophylactic zinc supplementation would be the most effective for
stunting reduction, preventing more than 4.8 million cases of stunting over 10 years (Table 2.3). However, it
needs to be emphasized that this is an expensive intervention that lacks tested delivery platforms, and WHO
has not as yet issued global guidelines for scaling it up, so it will most likely not be possible to deliver it at
scale. Vitamin A supplementation and educating mothers about correct complementary feeding practices are
the most cost-effective interventions for stunting prevention with a cost per case of stunting prevented of $333
and $429, respectively. Vitamin A supplementation is also the most cost-effective intervention from the point



32 	                                                                                                                                                                  in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                                   Stunting Reduction 
Table 2.3: Estimated 10-Year Financing Needs and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling Up Nutrition-Specific Interventions, Africa

                                                                                        TOTAL 10-YEAR                                               COST PER CASE
                              INTERVENTION                                                                          COST PER DEATH
                                                                                      FINANCING NEEDS                                                OF STUNTING
                           (NUTRITION TARGET)                                                                       AVERTED (US $)
                                                                                           (US $M)                                                  AVERTED (US $)

                                                          For pregnant women and mothers of infants
 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation (stunting, anemia)                                     1,051                        11,815                         7,250
 Infant and young child nutrition counseling (complementary feeding
                                                                                                2,410                        6,681                           778
 education and breastfeeding promotion combined)
 Complementary feeding education (stunting)                                                     1,255                        13,419                          429
 Breastfeeding promotion (stunting, breastfeeding)                                              1,156                        4,324                          6,491
 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women (stunting)                          4,347                       45,896                          41,123
 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-
 endemic regions (stunting, anemia)
                                                                                                466                          4,981                           1,531

                                                                   For infants and young children
 Vitamin A supplementation (stunting)                                                            327                         3,557                           333
 Prophylactic zinc supplementation (stunting)                                                   5,767                        18,420                         1,201
 Public provision of complementary food (stunting)                                              8,958                       62,902                          2,158
 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition (wasting)                                               2,316                        4,047                           n.a.

                                                       For non-pregnant women and general population
 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women (anemia)                             119                                                         n.a
                                                                                                                             13,527
 Staple food fortification (anemia)                                                              94                                                          n.a
 Pro-breastfeeding social policies (breastfeeding)                                               30                            n.a                           n.a
 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns (breastfeeding)                                      193                           n.a                           n.a

                                                                          TOTAL:               27,442                       19,139                          1,616
Note: Financing needs and impacts assume a linear scale-up of interventions from current coverage level to 90 percent over five years, then maintained at 90 percent for an
additional five years. Unit costs for each intervention were drawn from available unit costs from neighboring countries, global costs, or estimates available in the literature.
The estimated costs include an additional 12 percent (11 percent for pro-breastfeeding social policies and promotion campaigns) to account for monitoring, evaluation, capac-
ity and policy development that may be necessary to reach full scale-up of the interventions. The Lives Saved Tool (LiST; see LiST 2015) was used to estimate the impact
of interventions that target pregnant women and children. The impact of interventions that target the general population or non-pregnant women was estimated using a
Microsoft Excel model. It should be noted that the LiST model does not capture potential synergies between specific interventions (e.g. the fact that the impact of behavior
change communication interventions may be higher in populations that have access to affordable and diversified foods or in populations with higher levels of educational
attainment). Therefore, it is possible that the impact estimates generated using LiST in fact underestimate the true impact of the interventions in some contexts.

n.a. = not applicable




of view of mortality prevention, with the cost of $3,557 per death prevented. However, its absolute impact is
modest because, among other factors, vitamin A supplementation has already been scaled-up in many coun-
tries in Africa—the further scale up of vitamin A supplementation to 90 percent coverage would, over 10 years,
prevent about an additional 92,000 deaths (about 8 percent of the total mortality reduction from all interven-
tions combined), but it is critical to keep the high coverage rates to prevent back-sliding. Breastfeeding pro-
motion through counseling of mothers is projected to increase the number of infants exclusively breastfed by
20.8 million, and prevent nearly 270,00 deaths. For preventing maternal anemia, blanket iron/folic acid supple-
mentation for all women of reproductive age would be the most cost-effective strategy, at a cost of $2.2 for each
case of anemia prevented. However, this intervention, like prophylactic zinc supplementation, currently lacks a
delivery platform that would allow to reach all women and therefore cannot be rapidly scaled up. In contrast,
fortification of staple foods like wheat and maize is also relatively cost effective, with the cost of $9.9 per case of
anemia prevented, but has well established and easily scalable delivery platforms.



CHAPTER 2 Investing in the Early Years: Nutrition in Africa	                                                                                                                 33
Economic Benefits of Investing in Nutrition
There is a strong body of evidence that shows high economic returns to investing in nutrition (Alderman et al.
2016; Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). Scaling up these proven nutrition-specific
interventions can ensure that mothers are healthy and well nourished and that they can provide optimal nutri-
tion to their children, that children realize their full physical and cognitive development potential, and that
women’s productivity is not hampered by illness, especially anemia (Figure 2.10).


Figure 2.10: How Reaching the Global Nutrition Targets Generates Economic Benefits

                                                                                                                                                      Co nitive
                                                                                                                                                      Development

                                                            STUNTING

                                                                                           Childr n’s H lth &                                         Le rnin &
                                                                                                                                                      Educ tion l
                                                                                            Nutrition St tus                                          Att inment
                                                            WASTING
          Glob l Nutrition
          T r ts R ch d                                                                                                                               Adult
                                                                                                                                                      Productivit

                                                         EASTFEE
                                                       BRE     EDING


                                                                                                                                                     W     es


                                                             ANEMIA

                                                                                                                                                      Econom
                                                                                             Wom n’s H lth &                                          (GDP)
                                                                                             Nutrition St tus


In Africa, scaling up the package of nutrition-specific interventions would produce substantial economic ben-
efits over the productive lifetimes of the affected women and children (Figure 2.11). Additional health system
cost-savings would also be likely because many of these investments reduce the burden of childhood illnesses
such as diarrhea and pneumonia.


Figure 2.11: Investments in Africa to Meet the Global Nutrition Targets Have Enormous Economic Returns
                                                     Total Economic                                                         $1 Invested
                                                    Beneﬁts (Billions)a                                                       Yieldsb

                                       STUNTING                66.8                                                              $4
                                                                                                                    $
                                                               20.0                                                             $18
                                                                                                       1
                              BREASTFEEDING                                              $
                                                                                                                        $

                                          ANEMIA                16.1                         $                                  $13

                                        WASTING                13.0                                                             $12

a. Total economic benefits over 10 years for women and over the productive lives of children who benefit from these interventions, defined as the period between the age of 18
and a “retirement” age - the life expectancy or the age of 65, whichever is lower.
b. Benefit calculation assumes a 3 percent discount rate for both financing needs and benefits and a GDP growth rate of 3 percent.




34 	                                                                                                                                           in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                            Stunting Reduction 
Financing the Scale-Up of Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Africa
The global investment framework estimates that about $0.7 billion is currently allocated to nutrition-specific
interventions in Africa (see D’Alimonte et al. 2017 for detailed methodology). This includes allocations from
official development assistance (ODA) ($0.55 billion; 79 percent of the total) and from national governments
($0.15 billion; 21 percent of the total).2 A very small contribution from household purchasing of nutrition com-
modities was assumed, largely by nonpregnant women above the poverty line for purchase of iron and folic
acid supplementation through private retailers. Although most of these costs are borne by the public sector and
donors, some scale-up costs would theoretically be offset by household spending over time (see Shekar et al.
2017 for more details). In order to cover the estimated cost of the scale-up, the annual allocation for nutrition
from all sources would need to be increased sevenfold (to about $4.5 billion) by 2025 (Figure 2.12). Mobilizing
the required resources for nutrition is possible but would require a coordinated effort of African governments,
traditional multilateral and bilateral donors, and innovative sources of financing such as the Power of Nutri-
tion initiative.3 Over the next 10 years, African governments would need to increase their average annual
expenditure on nutrition by 0.8 billion, an amount equal to about 2.4 percent of current government expen-
diture on health. International donors would need to increase average annual allocations to nutrition by $1.8
billion, an amount equivalent to about 4.3 percent of the current ODA contribution and innovative financing
sources would need to catalyze these contributions.

The investment framework proposes that, given the current constrained fiscal space for nutrition in Africa, the
bulk of the investment would initially come from international donors. In subsequent years, ODA for nutrition
would be gradually replaced by domestic resources. According to this financing scenario, in 2025 about 57 per-
cent of the financing would come from domestic public sources, about 40 percent from ODA, and the remain-
ing 3 percent from the innovative financing sources (e.g., the Power of Nutrition initiative and the Global
Financing Facility in Support of Every Woman Every Child)4, and from the households. In order to achieve this
level of financing, the average government expenditure for nutrition in Africa would need to reach an amount
equivalent to about 7 percent of its current public expenditure on health by 2025. Similarly, but by 2021, the
ODA allocated for nutrition would need to reach about 6 percent of the current total ODA and then taper to
about 3 percent of ODA.

The World Bank Group is making significant efforts to accelerate nutrition investments under the umbrella of
the Investing in the Early Years agenda across the Africa region. Annex 3 provides a list of World Bank Group
on-going and planned investments in nutrition as of September 1, 2017.


Figure 2.12: Financing Required to Scale-Up Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Africa, by Source
                                                                                                                                       4.5           4.5
                                                                                                          4.3            4.4
                                                                                            4.2
                                                                              3.6
                                                               3.0
        $US BILLIONS




                                                 2.4
                                    1.8
                        1.2




                       2016         2017        2018          2019          2020           2021          2022          2022           2023          2024



                          B s lin                      Addition l donor                      Addition l dom stic                        Innov tiv sourc s
                                                                                                                                                                 !"


Source: Regional analysis prepared for D’Alimonte et al. 2017. Note: Annual average household contributions are small relative to other contributions and, as such, are not
pictured.




CHAPTER 2 Investing in the Early Years: Nutrition in Africa	                                                                                                                  35
Two Alternative Investment Packages
In an environment of constrained resources in which it will not be possible to raise $27 billion over the next 10
years, two alternative investment packages are laid out for consideration.

The Priority Package: The first—the “priority package”—includes interventions that are the most cost-effec-
tive; that is, that have the lowest cost per health outcome (e.g., case of stunting averted), and that have well-es-
tablished global policy guidelines and delivery platforms. Based on those two criteria, the priority package
includes antenatal micronutrient supplementation, infant and young child nutrition counseling, intermittent
presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic regions, vitamin A supplementation, treat-
ment of severe acute malnutrition, intermittent weekly iron and folic acid supplementation for girls 15–19 years
of age attending school, and fortification of wheat and maize flour with iron and folic acid. These interventions
would be scaled up to full program coverage in the first five years and maintained at full coverage levels for
the last five years. This priority package would require an estimated $721 million annually, on average (see
Table 2.4).


Table 2.4: Benefits and Cost-Effectiveness by Investment Package, Africa

         GLOBAL                                                             PRIORITY                     CATALYZING                      FULL PACKAGE:
                                           BENEFIT                                                                                    All interventions needed
         TARGET                                                             PACKAGE                   PROGRESS PACKAGE                     to meet targets
                                                                          7.2 billion over
                                                                                                      13.1 billion over 10 years      27.4 billion over 10 years
                                                                             10 years


        STUNTING                   Cases of stunting prevented               5.7 million                      9.0 million                    16.9 million



                                 Case-years of anemia in women
         ANEMIA                            prevented
                                                                            39.6 million                      52.5 million                   56.9 million




    BREASTFEEDING                Babies breastfed over 10 years             20.8 million                      20.8 million                   20.8 million


                                    Child deaths averted
                                                                             1.2 million                      1.4 million                    1.9 million
                                        over 10 years
       ALL TARGETS                  Cost per death averted                     5,865                             9,357                          19,139
                                       Cost per case of
                                                                                1,254                            1,456                          1,616
                                       stunting averted

a. Total impacts of proposed intervention package combined with other health and poverty reduction efforts.



During the 10 years of scale-up, this package would prevent more than 5.7 million cases of stunting and avert
1.2 million deaths in children under five years of age. It would also prevent more than 39.6 million case-years
of anemia in women in 2025 and would result in 20.8 million children under six months of age being exclu-
sively breastfed.

The Catalyzing Progress Package: The second package—the “catalyzing progress package”—includes
scale-up of all interventions in the priority package, plus a phased approach to scaling up public provision
of complementary foods, balanced energy protein supplementation, prophylactic zinc supplementation, and
weekly iron-folic acid supplementation for women outside of schools. It is assumed that, for the latter set of



36 	                                                                                                                                        in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                         Stunting Reduction 
interventions, during the first five years emphasis will be placed on establishing global guidelines and on
operational research to develop effective delivery platforms, or to develop less expensive products or more
cost-effective technologies. Costs are approximated as the cost of scaling up this set of interventions from 0 to
10 percent coverage only in the first five years. In the subsequent five years, it is assumed that the coverage
expansion of those interventions will accelerate and reach 60 percent by 2025. This package would require,
on average, $1.3 billion per year (Table 2.4), a total of $13.1 billion over 10 years. It would prevent 1.4 million
deaths and more than 9 million cases of stunting among children under age five, increase the number of exclu-
sively breastfed children under six months of age by 20.8 million, and prevent more than 52.5 million case-
years of anemia in women in 2025.

In comparing the relative cost-effectiveness of the three investment packages, the two alternative packages are
more cost-effective in preventing deaths and stunting. However, neither is as effective as the full package in
making progress toward achieving the stunting, wasting, and anemia targets. The priority and catalyzing prog-
ress packages would prevent 1.2 million and 1.4 million deaths respectively, compared with 1.9 million deaths
prevented with the full package over 10 years. Under the full package scenario, almost 17 million cases of
childhood stunting would be prevented, compared with 9 million cases under the catalyzing progress scenario
and fewer than 6 million cases under the priority package scenario. Furthermore, there would be nearly 28 mil-
lion and 9 million more case-years of anemia prevented in women under the priority package and catalyzing
progress package, respectively.



A Call to Action
As the world stands on the cusp of the new Sustainable Development Goals, there is an unprecedented oppor-
tunity to save children’s lives, build future human capital and cognitive development, and drive faster eco-
nomic growth. Scaling up key nutrition interventions during the critical 1,000 day window of early childhood
will pay lifelong dividends, translating to healthier societies and more robust economies. If this window is
missed, it is missed for life.

The additional financing required to reach the global nutrition targets will require coordinated efforts by all
stakeholders and a supportive policy environment. To achieve these targets, Africa will need to increase the
funding allocated to nutrition by $2.7 billion annually, in addition to the region’s current spending. Although
this amount may seem high, they are much lower than other types of investments with much lower rates of
return. For example, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimated that in 2015 alone Africa’s governments
have spent over $26 billion on fossil fuel subsidies (Coady et al. 2015; Whitley and van der Burg 2015).

Accelerating the reduction of stunting in Africa will be essential for maximizing the return on investments in
early childhood development, in education, and more broadly in policies aimed at fostering and enhancing
human capital accumulation and job creation. Investing in the early years is even more critical because the
Africa region is entering a demographic transition with an expected increase in the working-age population
from 54 percent in 2010 to 64 percent in 2090. This creates a golden opportunity for the continent to reap the
benefits of the demographic dividend—an acceleration in economic growth resulting from changes in the
structure of the population. As a fertility and population growth rates drop and the share of the working-age
population rises, the dependency ratio will diminish with a potential to raise per capita output, savings, and
investments in human capital.

As mentioned earlier, past high fertility rates in Africa mean that over the last decade, stunting prevalence on
the continent has decreased from 49 percent to 35 percent, but despite this, the number of stunted children has
increased. If population over that period of time did not grow, rather than nearly 57 million stunted children
living Africa currently, there would only be about 32 million stunted children. This suggests that the high rate
of population growth alone is responsible for about 24 million cases of stunting in Africa today. Some of the
factors that precipitate the demographic transition – access to family planning, later marriage, older age at first
birth, longer intervals between births, will contribute to the reduction in child malnutrition (these constitute




CHAPTER 2 Investing in the Early Years: Nutrition in Africa	                                                      37
some of the so-called nutrition-sensitive interventions). At the same time, however, in order for Africa to reap
the benefits of the demographic dividend, it will be imperative to dramatically intensify more targeted efforts
to reduce child malnutrition and stunting. The scale-up of the key nutrition-specific interventions is estimated
to generate considerable returns in economic benefits over the productive lives of beneficiaries, and is a nec-
essary condition to build human capital through investments in the early years and to harness the potential
benefits of the demographic dividend.



Endnotes
Note: All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.

1
 Two of the global nutrition targets—those for low birthweight and for child overweight—were not included
in the analyses because of insufficient data on the prevalence of low birthweight and a lack of consensus on
effective interventions to reach the target for child overweight.

2
 Current financing by source is from the Results for Development Institute and can be found at http://www.
investinnutrition.org/.

3
 Information about the Power of Nutrition initiative is available at https://ciff.org/grant-portfolio/
the-power-of-nutrition/.

4
 More information about the Global Financing Facility in support of Every Woman Every Child program can
be found at https://www.everywomaneverychild.org/2014/10/04/global-financing-facility/.



References
Aguayo, V. M., R. Nair, N. Badgaiyan, and V. Krishna. 2016. “Determinants of Stunting and Poor Linear Growth
in Children under 2 Years of Age in India: An In-Depth Analysis of Maharashtra’s Comprehensive Nutrition
Survey.” Maternal & Child Nutrition 12 (Suppl. 1): 121–40.

Alderman , H ., J. R. Behrman , and C. Puett . 2016 . “ Big Numbers about Small Children: Estimating the Eco-
nomic Benefits of Addressing Undernutrition .” World Bank Research Observer 31 ( 2 ).

Black, R. E., L. H. Allen, Z. A. Bhutta, L. E. Caulfield, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, C. Mathers, J. Rivera, and the
Maternal and Child Undernutrition Study Group. 2008. “Maternal and Child Undernutrition: Global and
Regional Exposures and Health Consequences.” The Lancet 371 (9608): 243–60.

Black, R. E., C. G .Victora, S. P. Walker, Z. A. Bhutta, P. Christian, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, S. Grantham-Mcgregor,
J. Katz, R. Martorell, R. Uauy, and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. “Maternal and Child
Undernutrition and Overweight in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries.” The Lancet 382: 427–51.

Coady, D., I. Parry, L. Sears, and B. Shang. 2015. “How Large Are Global Energy Subsidies?” IMF Working
Paper WP/15/105. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2015/wp15105.pdf

Copenhagen Consensus Center. 2015. Smart Development Goals: The Post-2015 Consensus. http://www.copenha-
genconsensus.com/sites/default/files/outcomedocument_col.pdf

D’Alimonte, M., Rogers, H., de Ferranti, D. 2017. “Financing the Global Nutrition Targets” in Shekar, Kakietek,
Dayton Eberwein, Walters eds. An Investment Framework for Nutrition: Reaching the Global Targets for Stunting,
Anemia, Breastfeeding, and Wasting. Directions in Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-
1-4648-1010-7. https://tinyurl.com/InvestmentFrameworkNutrition




38 	                                                                                                  in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                   Stunting Reduction 
Daniels, M. C. and L. Adair. 2004. “Growth in Young Filipino Children Predicts Schooling Trajectories through
High School.” Journal of Nutrition 134: 1439–46.

Eozenou, P. et al. 2017. Reducing Stunting in Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Fink, G., E. Peet, G. Danaei, K. Andrews, D. C. McCoy, C. R. Sudfeld, M. C. Smith Fawzi, M. Ezzati, and W. W.
Fawzi. 2016. “Schooling and Wage Income Losses Due to Early-Childhood Growth Faltering in Developing
Countries: National, Regional, and Global Estimates.” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 104 (1): 104–12.

Hoddinott, J., H. Alderman, J. R. Behrman, L. Haddad, and S. Horton. 2013. “The Economic Rationale for
Investing in Stunting Reduction.” Maternal and Child Nutrition 9 (Suppl. 2): 69–82.

Hoddinott, J., J. A. Maluccio, J. R. Behman, R. Flores, and R. Martorell. 2008. “Effect of a Nutrition Intervention
during Early Childhood on Economic Productivity in Guatemalan Adults.” Lancet 371 (9610): 411–16.

Horton, S. and R. Steckel. 2013. “Malnutrition: Global Economic Losses Attributable to Malnutrition 1900–2000
and Projections to 2050.” In The Economics of Human Challenges, edited by B. Lomborg, 247–72. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.

LiST (Lives Saved Tool). 2015. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. http:/livessa-
vedtool.org/

Martorell, R., B. L. Horta, L. S. Adair, A. D. Stein, L. Richter, C. H. D. Fall, S. K. Bhargava, S. K. Dey Biswas,
L. Perez, F. C. Barros, C. G. Victora, and Consortium on Health Orientated Research in Transitional Societies
Group. 2010. “Weight Gain in the First Two Years of Life Is an Important Predictor of Schooling Outcomes in
Pooled Analyses from Five Birth Cohorts from Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” Journal of Nutrition 140:
348–54.

Ozaltin, E., K. Hill, and S. V. Subramanian. 2010. “Association of Maternal Stature with Offspring Mortality,
Underweight, and Stunting in Low- to Middle-Income Countries.” JAMA 303 (15): 1507–16.

Shekar, M., J. Kakietek, J. D. Eberwein, and D. Walters. 2017. An Investment Framework for Nutrition: Reaching
the Global Targets for Stunting, Anemia, Breastfeeding, and Wasting. Directions in Development. Washington, DC:
World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1010-7. https://tinyurl.com/InvestmentFrameworkNutrition

UNICEF, WHO, and World Bank (United Nations Children’s Fund, World Health Organization and World
Bank). 2015. Joint Malnutrition Estimates. Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition, http://www.
who.int/growthdb/estimates2014/en/

Victora , C., R. Bahl, A. Barros, G. V. A. Franca, S. Horton, J. Krasevec, S. Murch, M. J. Sankar, N. Walker, and
N. C. Rollins. 2016. “Breastfeeding in the 21st Century: Epidemiology, Mechanisms and Lifelong Effect.” The
Lancet 387 ( 10017 ): 475–90.

Whitley, S. and L. van der Burg. 2015. “Fossil Fuel Subsidy Report in Sub-Saharan Africa: From Rhetoric to
Reality.” The New Climate Economy, ODA Working Paper. http://newclimateeconomy.report/2015/wp-con-
tent/uploads/sites/3/2015/11/FFS-Reform-in-Africa_NCE-ODI_final.pdf

WHO. 2009. “Global prevalence of vitamin A deficiency in populations at risk 1995–2005”de Benoits B, McLean
E, Andersseon M, Rogers L. 2008. Iodine Deficiency in 2007: Global Progress Since 2003. Food and Nutrition
Bulletin 29(3):195-202.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2014. Comprehensive Implementation Plan on Maternal, Infant and Young Child
Nutrition. Geneva: WHO. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/113048/1/WHO_NMH_NHD_14.1_eng.
pdf?ua=1




CHAPTER 2 Investing in the Early Years: Nutrition in Africa	                                                         39
WHO (World Health Organization). 2016. Global Targets Tracking Tool Version 2.3 (November 2016), http://
www.who.int/nutrition/trackingtool/en/

World Bank. 2017. World Development Indicators (database), World Bank, Washington, DC (accessed May 1,
2017), http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators




40 	                                                                                          in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                           Stunting Reduction 
CHAPTER 3



               BENIN: An Investment Framework for Nutrition
                                                                                                                                 Benefits of Investing in Nutrition
  Key Messages
   •	      Thirty-four percent of children in Benin are chronically
           malnourished (stunted). Between 2006 and 2014, those in the
           wealthiest quintiles experienced the fastest rates of decline in
                                                                                                                                               179,000
           stunting prevalence, which remains high across all departments                                                                  cases of stunting
           but is highest in Donga, Alibori, and Plateau, where at least half of                                                           prevented in 2025
           children under five are stunted.

   •	      Benin has succeeded in reaching the global target for reducing
           wasting (acute malnutrition) to below 5 percent, and is currently
           seeing a significant downward trend in stunting prevalence,                                                                    29,000
           which dropped from 45 percent in 2006 to 34 percent in 2014.
                                                                                                                               child deaths prevented in 2025
   •	      Scaling up a package of high-impact nutrition-specific
           interventions in Benin to contribute toward achieving the global
           nutrition targets would require an additional $30.9 million per
           year over 10 years and would yield massive benefits (see panel on
           the right). These investments are over and above those needed for                                                             3.7 MILLION
           improving water and sanitation and for addressing issues around                                                          case-years of anemia in
           women’s empowerment and food security.                                                                                  women prevented in 2025
   •	      This scale-up would require additional financing equivalent to
           a 16 percent increase in current government health expenditures
           and could be financed from a combination of domestic budgets,
           official development assistance (ODA) and innovative financing
                                                                                                                                           433,000
           sources such as the Power of Nutrition.1
                                                                                                                                  babies exclusively breastfed
   •	      The economic benefits generated over the productive lives of
           beneficiaries from this investment would be $2.8 billion for the
           prevention of stunting, $1.9 billion for breastfeeding, $455 million
           for the prevention of anemia, and $272 million for the treatment of
           severe wasting.                                                                                                                121,000
   •	      Returns on every dollar invested in reaching the global nutrition
                                                                                                                               cases of severe wasting treated
           targets range from $14 for stunting and anemia to $23 for wasting
           and $58 for exclusive breastfeeding.

   •	      To finance the nutrition scale-up, two lower-cost scale up
                                                                                                                                          $14–$58
           scenarios are estimated to require between $8 and $15 million
           per year over the next 10 years. In an environment of constrained                                                   return for every dollar invested
           resources, starting with one of these two scenarios would be
           a strong first investment, but it would need to be followed by
           increased investment toward full scale-up to achieve the global
           nutrition targets.                                                                                                         $2.8 BILLION
                                                                                                                               generated from investments to
                                                                                                                                     reduce stunting*

*The economic benefits are calculated over the productive lives of the children benefiting from the interventions that prevent stunting.



CHAPTER 3 Benin: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                          41
Investment Case for Nutrition
Ensuring optimum nutrition—particularly during the 1,000-day period from pregnancy to a child’s second
birthday—can alter an individual’s development trajectory and maximize her or his productive potential.
Chronic malnutrition has important lifelong consequences for health and cognitive development. Losses to
cognitive development in early childhood resulting from chronic malnutrition are irreversible. Being stunted
(low height-for-age) in early childhood is associated with a delayed start at school, reduced schooling attain-
ment, and substantially decreased adult incomes at both the individual and country level (Daniels and Adair
2004; Fink et al. 2016; Hoddinott et al. 2008; Martorell et al. 2010). These consequences add up to overall gross
domestic product (GDP) losses of 4 to 11 percent in Africa and Asia (Horton and Steckel 2013). Importantly,
chronic undernutrition can be transmitted through an inter-generational cycle, where malnourished mothers
are more likely to have stunted children (Aguayo et al. 2016; Ozaltin et al. 2010).

Investments in nutrition are highly cost-effective and among the best value-for-money development actions
(Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). An Investment Framework for Nutrition developed
by the World Bank in partnership with R4D, 1000 Days, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation estimated
high returns on every dollar invested in nutrition: from $4 in returns for treating acute malnutrition (wasting)
to $11 for preventing stunting, $12 for the treatment and prevention of anemia, and $35 for increasing the prev-
alence of exclusive breastfeeding (Shekar et al. 2017). Not only do investments in nutrition produce substantial
economic benefits, but they also lay the groundwork for the success of investments in other sectors.

Investments in the early years—including early life nutrition, early learning and stimulation, and the provision
of nurturing care and protection from stress—ensure that all children reach their human potential and contrib-
ute to the economic growth of their nation. The analysis presented below focuses on high-impact nutrition-spe-
cific interventions with strong evidence of efficacy in reducing malnutrition, and estimates the financing needs,
impacts, and economic benefits of scaling up these interventions in Benin.



Country Context
The Republic of Benin is a small coastal country in Sub-Saharan Africa, with a population of almost 10.9 million
and a population growth rate of 2.7 percent. Benin has a young population, with approximately 15 percent of
the country under age five (UN DESA 2015). Low human capital remains one of the key challenges in reducing
poverty and achieving greater socioeconomic equity.

More than half of the population resides in rural areas (World Bank 2016); agriculture accounts for the majority
of employment in Benin, with cotton being the primary export commodity. Over 98 percent of young people are
employed, largely in the agriculture sector, with less than 8 percent of those between ages 15 and 34 working in
non-agriculture salaried jobs (World Bank 2014). Poverty rates are moderately higher in rural areas (39.7 percent)
than in urban centers (31.4 percent), and the data show income disparities between districts as well as between
rural and urban households. In 2011, 64.4 percent of the rural population subsisted on less than $1.25 per day,
nearly double the rate observed in urban areas. Similarly, the poverty headcount in 2011 was estimated at over
75 percent of the population in Atacora compared to 7 percent in Littoral (World Bank 2014).

The Human Development Index (HDI) showed Benin ranked 167 out of 188 countries in 2016 (UNDP 2016).
High income inequality exacerbates vulnerability and prevents poor households from meeting basic needs.
Child malnutrition, an underlying cause of up to 45 percent of deaths of children under age five (Black et al.
2013), has emerged as one of the key markers of poverty and vulnerability as well as one of the key challenges in
ensuring optimal accumulation of human capital in the country.




42 	                                                                                                in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
                                To address these issues, the Benin government developed the Third Poverty Reduction Strategy (SCRP), covering
                                the period 2011–15. This strategy aimed to improve the quality of life in Benin through health and education and
                                to place the country on the road to emerging-market status by 2025 by strengthening human capital (as its third
                                pillar) and making gains toward sustainable regional development (as its fifth pillar) (IDA and IMF 2011). Progress
                                has been made in reducing total fertility rates (TFR) in Benin, which through the 1990s was up above 6.0 and is now
                                declining, with a current TFR of 4.8. Declining TFR can be a positive contributor to improved health and nutrition
                                outcomes (World Bank 2016).3



                                Nutritional Status in Benin
                                Persistently high rates of undernutrition remain a serious human development challenge in Benin. More than a
                                third of children (34 percent) under five years of age are stunted and 4.5 percent are wasted (low weight-for-height)
                                (UNICEF 2015). Between 1996 and 2006, data from Benin Demographic and Health Surveys (BDHS) showed an
                                increasing trend in stunting prevalence, from 39.1 percent to 44.7 percent. However, the latest data from the 2014
                                Benin Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) showed promising declines in both chronic and acute malnutrition
                                (Figure 3.1), albeit the different surveys—BDHS and MICS—may not be comparable because of their varying meth-
                                odologies. Nevertheless, Benin ranks 103rd of 130 countries ranked from lowest to highest stunting prevalence (IFPRI
                                2016).

                                National estimates mask socioeconomic and geographic and disparities in stunting prevalence. Significant differences
                                in stunting prevalence remain among children in poorer and wealthier households, and similarly among children
                                in rural and urban households. Between 2006 and 2014, stunting declined at a faster rate among children living in
                                households in the wealthiest quintile when compared with those in the poorest quintile (Figure 3.2). In the wealthiest
                                households, nearly one in five children is stunted, as compared to the poorest quintile where almost half of children
                                are stunted. Not only was the decline less dramatic among children in the poorest quintile but rates of stunting in this
                                group remain much higher in 2014 as compared with 1996 (46 percent versus 36 percent).

                                The highest stunting prevalence rates are concentrated in the north where two departments have stunting prev-
                                alence of over 40 percent (Figure 3.3). This is in stark contrast to the stunting prevalence in the southernmost
                                department, Littoral, at 17.8 percent. Given the regional variation in stunting prevalence, it would be important to
                                understand the key drivers of undernutrition in these highest prevalence regions, and to design targeted interven-
                                tions to address them.


                                  Figure 3.1: Trends in Undernutrition in Benin, 1996–2014                                              Figure 3.2: Disparities in Stunting by Wealth Quintile, 1996–2014
                            70                                            64.3
                                                                                      61.3
                                                                70                 64.3                                                                                         60
                                                                                                    61.3
                            60
AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                                                                                                                                                                                                60
                                                                                                                                        AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                                                                60
                                                                                                                                                                                50
                                 AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                                                                                                                                         STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)



                                                                                                                                                                    AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                            50                                                           44.7           41.4                                                                                    50
                                                                                                                                                                     STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)
    PREVALENCE (%)




                                                             39.1
                                                               50         39.1                       44.7            41.4                                                       40
                                     PREVALENCE (%)




                            40                                          39.1       39.1                                     34
                                                                40                                                                34                                                            40
                            30                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                               30                                                                                                                               30
                                                             17.1
                            20                                          17.1                                                                                                    20
                                                                20                                                                                                                              20
                                                                           9.3           8.4
                                                                                    9.3              8.4                    4.5                                                  10
                            10                                                                                                    4.5                                                           10
                                                                10
                            0                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                0                                                                                                                                 0
                                                             1996        2001
                                                                        1996
                                                                                 2006
                                                                                  2001
                                                                                               2011-12
                                                                                                2006
                                                                                                              2014
                                                                                                           2011-12     2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1996 1996     2001 2001     2006 2006      20142014


                                                                     Stunting Stunting Wasting Wasting               Anemia Anemia                                                              Poorest quintile
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Poorest quintile   Richest quintile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Richest quintile              National
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               National


                                 Sources for Figures 3.1 and 3.2: BDHS for 1996, 2001, 2006, and 2011–2012; Benin MICS 2014




                             CHAPTER 3 Benin: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                                                                              43
                            30                                                                                             COTE D’LVOIRE                                                                      Swaziland




  STUNTING PREV
                             25                                                               Kenya
                                                                                                                           Mauritania
                            20                                                                                                                                    Congo
                                                                                                                                 Ghana
                               15
                                                                                           Sao Tome and Principe
                              10
                                    5
        Figure
             0
               3.3: Number of Stunted Children and Stunting Prevalence in Benin by Region, 2014–2015
                                              500                   1500                   2500               3500                4500             5500              6500               7500                  8500        9500

                                                                                                                 GDP PER CAPITA (INTERNATIONAL $ PPP)
                                                                                                           ALIBORI                                                                                  ALIBORI



                                                                                       ATAKORA                                                                                   ATAKORA




                                                                                                        BORGOU                                                                                   BORGOU
                                                    Stunting Prevalence                                                                                Total Children
                                                    By Region (%)                          DONGA
                                                                                                NIGER                                                  Stunted By Region              DONGA

                                                    50          ≥ 40%: Very high
                                                                                                                                                               86,672
                                                                                                                                                               65,000
                                                                30–39%: High                                                                                   45,000

                                                                20–29%: Medium
                                                                               DRC                   Mozambique                                                35,000
                                                                                                                                                               20,000
                                                                                                                                                                         Chad
                                                                                                                                      Ethiopia
                          STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                                                                <20%: Low                                                                                      19,250
                                                    40                                          COLLINES
                                                                                                                                                   Rwanda                                COLLINES
                                                               Department Boundaries                                                                          Department Boundaries
                                                                                                  Malawi
                                                                                                                               Sierra Leone                                                                    Tanzania
                                                                                                  ZOU
                                                                                                                                                                        Benin              ZOU
                                                                                                                     PLATEAU                                                                                  PLATEAU
                                                    30                         COUFFO                                                              Uganda                  COUFFO
                                                                                                           Guinea
                                                                                                                OUÉMÉ                                                                                    OUÉMÉ
                                                                                   MONO
                                                                                                                                            Zimbabwe                           MONO

                                                                                                       LITTORAL
                                                                                                                                                                                       Senegal   LITTORAL
                                                    20                                        ATLANTIQUE                                                                                ATLANTIQUE


   Data source: Benin MICS 2014. IBRD 42940 | MAY 2017 These maps were produced by the Cartography Unit of the World Bank Group. The boundaries, colors, denom-
   inations and any other information shown on these maps do not imply, on the part of the World Bank Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
           IBRD 42940 | JUNE 2017
   endorsement      acceptance of such boundaries.
                 or10

                                                         500                                  1000                             1500                         2000                              2500                        3000
    The prevalence of stunting in Benin is comparable to the average in the region (35.2 percent) (World Bank
    2017). Nevertheless, some African countriesGDP PER
                                                with   CAPITA
                                                     lower    (INTERNATIONAL
                                                            per              $ PPP) as Guinea, Uganda, and Zim-
                                                                 capita income—such
    babwe—exhibit similar or lower prevalence of child stunting, which belies the fact that economic development
    needs to be coupled with other investments to attain improvements in childhood nutrition (Figure 3.4).


    Figure 3.4: Prevalence of Stunting and GDP per Capita: Benin and Selected Low-Income Countries
                          50

                                                                    DRC                        Mozambique
                                                                                                                                                                        Chad
STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                                                                                   Niger                                         Ethiopia
                          40
                                                                                                        Malawi                                   Rwanda
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tanzania
                                                                                                                          Sierra Leone

                          30
                                                                                                                                              Uganda                       BENIN
                                                                                                   Guinea
                                                                                                                                         Zimbabwe
                          20                                                                                                                                                          Senegal



                           10
                                              500                                      1000                               1500                            2000                             2500                           3000

                                                                                                                GDP PER CAPITA (INTERNATIONAL $ PPP)
    Sources: Benin MICS 2014; World Bank 2017.



    Wasting, also known as acute malnutrition, is typically classified as either severe or moderate. Wasting can
    result from food insecurity in resource-poor settings with insufficient dietary quality, quantity and diversity,
    suboptimal breastfeeding, and recurrent episodes of illness such as diarrhea. Wasting prevalence across Sub-Sa-
    haran Africa is second highest in the world, after South Asia, with 13 million children (7.8 percent) suffering



 44 	                                                                                                                                                                                              in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                Stunting Reduction 
from acute malnutrition. However, this varies at country level. In 2014, Benin exceeded their goal to reduce
wasting to under 5 percent with a downward trending wasting prevalence of 4.5 percent (Benin MICS 2014).

Micronutrient deficiencies (a form of malnutrition that relates to a deficiency in essential vitamins and minerals
needed for body functions and is sometimes referred to as hidden hunger) are highly pervasive in Benin. Anemia,
a condition caused by inadequate dietary intake of iron, helminth infections, and malaria, among other causes,
has cross-generational impacts. Approximately 41 percent of women of reproductive age in Benin are anemic
(BDHS 2011–2012), which affects not only women’s own health, but also contributes to the intergenerational cycle
of undernutrition. Over half (58 percent) of children aged 6 to 59 months are anemic, with one department having
an anemia prevalence of over 85 percent (BDHS 2011–2012). Although overall anemia has declined significantly
from more than 80 percent in 2001 (BDHS 2001), largely as a result of malaria prevention measures, maintaining
and promoting dietary diversity with iron-rich foods to prevent micronutrient deficiencies in women of reproduc-
tive age is essential to set the stage for their children to achieve optimal nutrition and development.

Benin has made some gains in child survival and maternal health, including reduced maternal and child
mortality ratios and improvements in the essential package of services for maternal and newborn health,
such as deliveries in a health facility, but significant challenges remain in improving nutrition outcomes and
addressing the multiple determinants of undernutrition. At the underlying level, stunting in Benin is associated
with insufficient access to a nutritionally rich and diverse diet, inadequate hygiene and sanitation practices,
and suboptimal care and feeding practices, among other causes. Demand- and supply-side barriers influence
optimum feeding practices such as breastfeeding, appropriate food consumption, and dietary diversity. An
analysis conducted in 2014 looked at household surveys and found that 11 percent of households were food
insecure, with the Couffo, Mono, and Atacora departments experiencing the highest prevalence of food inse-
curity (exceeding 25 percent of households) (WFP 2014). Similarly, the rate of food insecurity is estimated to be
twice as high in rural areas (approximately 15 percent) as in urban settings (8 percent). Households with poor
food consumption were found to have a limited diversity of diet, which consisted mainly of cereals and starchy
roots. More than 85 percent of families are dependent on markets, making them vulnerable to climatic and
economic shocks as well as seasonal and price fluctuations. The increase in market rate for staple crops in times
of crisis translates to a reduction in purchasing power for the most vulnerable families (WFP 2014). Recogniz-
ing that factors other than poverty and food insecurity put children at risk of chronic malnutrition, effective
multisectoral strategies are needed to address undernutrition across the country.



Political Commitment to Reduce Malnutrition
The policy environment around nutrition is gaining momentum in Benin. For several decades the institutional
leadership responsible for implementing and overseeing nutrition policies moved between various ministries.
In 2007, Benin, with the support of the World Bank, undertook reforms related to food and nutrition. Since
2009, Benin has adopted several nutrition-specific policies and plans, beginning with the Strategic Plan for
Food and Nutrition Development (PSDAN) and the National Policy for the Protection, Encouragement, and
Promotion of Breastfeeding (UN SCN Secretariat 2013).

Following on these achievements, Benin established a multisector national Council on Food and Nutrition
(CAN) platform in 2011 to bring together all sectors involved in nutrition to improve food, health, and nutrition
outcomes. CAN is attached to the Presidency of the Republic and fosters synergies between nutrition research
and policy recommendations (SUN 2016). Also in 2011, Benin joined the SUN movement, solidifying the coun-
try’s commitment to ending malnutrition.

Food and nutrition is increasingly seen as a development priority at the commune level as well, evidenced by
the integration of nutrition within the National Association of Communes of Benin (ANCB) support funds.
Benin is implementing a common results framework to align actions to address chronic malnutrition at the
commune level (SUN 2016).




CHAPTER 3 Benin: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                         45
Benin has also integrated nutrition within agriculture policy by establishing the Law on Agriculture and Food
and Nutrition Security (SUN 2016). The growing association of nutrition and agriculture is further grounded
in the Actions for Environment and Development (ACED) strategic plan, which includes an arm designed to
improve nutrition security of vulnerable communities by adapting agriculture production to nutrition needs
(AECD-Benin, No date).



Current Financing for Nutrition
In 2015 in Benin, the government and foreign donors spent a total of $1.64 million on interventions that will
contribute to reaching the global targets for nutrition.2 Of that amount, $383,000 came from the government
and $1.26 million came from ODA. This contribution from ODA included $876,000 for stunting, $106,000 for
anemia, $183,000 for breastfeeding, and $256,000 for wasting.3 These estimates reflect the current spending
on nutrition, and the following sections detail additional financing needed in order for Benin to contribute to
reaching the global targets on nutrition.



Global Targets for Nutrition
Substantial improvements to the nutritional status of women and children can be realized if adequate invest-
ment is made in a set of evidence-based nutrition-specific interventions that ensure optimum nutrition during
the critical 1,000-day window between the start of a woman’s pregnancy and the child’s second birthday (Black
et al. 2008, 2013). For women, these include interventions to prevent anemia before and during pregnancy
as well as those aimed at improving protein energy intake during pregnancy. Interventions targeted toward
children and their mothers aim to improve breastfeeding and complementary feeding practices, enhance the
micronutrient status of children, and treat acute malnutrition in children.

In 2012—to rally the international community around improving nutrition—the 176 members of the World Health
Assembly endorsed the first-ever global nutrition targets, focusing on six areas: stunting, anemia, low birthweight,
childhood overweight, breastfeeding, and wasting. These targets aim to boost investments in cost-effective inter-
ventions, spearhead better implementation practices, and catalyze progress toward reducing malnutrition. The tar-
gets for stunting and wasting are enshrined within the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 2 (SDG 2),


 Table 3.1: Four World Health Assembly Targets for Nutrition and Benin’s Contribution toward Meeting Them
                                                                                                            RANK                 PREVALENCE               PROGRESS

                                              Reduce the number of stunted children
   1
                    STUNTING*                                                                               103/132                      34
                                                       under five by 40%
        Stuntin


                                                 Reduce the number of women of
   2
                    ANEMIA                                                                                  177/185                     41.4
                                              reproductive age with anemia by 50%
        An mi


                                           Increase the rate of exclusive breastfeeding 
   5
                    BREASTFEEDING                                                                           55/141                      41.4
                                             in the first six months up to at least 50%
        Exclusiv
   br     stf din

                                             Reduce and maintain childhood wasting
   6
                    WASTING*                                                                                64/130                      4.5
                                                      alnutrition) to less than 5%
                                              (acute m
        W stin



                             LEGEND:          Off course, no progress             Off course, some progress               On course, good progress
*Stunting and wasting are included within the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 2 (SDG 2), which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year 2030.
Sources: Nutrition targets from WHO 2014; Rank and progress from IFPRI 2016; Prevalence data from BDHS 2011-2012.




46 	                                                                                                                                         in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                          Stunting Reduction 
which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year 2030. The 2016 Global Nutrition Report ranked
each country’s progress in contributing toward achieving the global targets (Table 3.1) (IFPRI 2016).4

Coverage of key nutrition-specific interventions in Benin is low and remains well below the levels necessary to
advance progress in reducing malnutrition among Beninese children. Table 3.2 and Figure 3.5 summarize the
current coverage of and delivery platforms for nutrition-specific interventions in Benin.


Table 3.2: Delivery Platforms of Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Benin
 INTERVENTION                                                                                                                           PLATFORM
 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation (iron and folic acid only)                                                          Health facility and community
 Complementary feeding education                                                                               Health facility, community, and communication campaigns
 Breastfeeding promotion                                                                                       Health facility, community, and communication campaigns
 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women                                                     Health facility, community, and social safety net programs
 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic regions                                       Health facility and community
 Vitamin A supplementation                                                                                          Health facility, community, and food fortification
 Public provision of complementary foods                                                                        Health facility, community, and social safety net programs
 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition                                                                                      Health facility and community
 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women of reproductive age                                       School, community, facility, and marketplace
 Staple food fortification                                                                                                              Marketplace
 Pro-breastfeeding social policies                                                                                                Government policies
 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns                                                                                                Media



Figure 3.5: Coverage of Key Nutrition-Specific Interventions: Benin and Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                Antenatal micronutrient
                                                                                    supplementation -
                                                                                (iron and folic acid only)
                                                           Pro-breastfeeding                                         Complementary
                                                             social policies                                        feeding education
                                                                               100



                                                                                     80



                                                                                          60

                                      Staple food                                                                                             Breastfeeding
                                      fortiﬁcation                                             40
                                                                                                                                               promotion

                                                                                                    20




                  Iron and folic acid                                                                                                                  Balanced energy
           supplementation for non-pregnant                                                                                                        protein supplementation
              women of reproductive age                                                                                                              for pregnant women




                                     Treatment of severe                                                                                Intermittent presumptive
                                      acute malnutrition                                                                                  treatment of malaria
                                                                                                                                             in pregnancy in
                                                                                                                                        malaria-endemic regions


                                                                     Public provision of                    Vitamin A
Note: Red shading represents Benin and light blue shading           complementary foods                  supplementation
represents average Sub-Saharan Africa coverage




CHAPTER 3 Benin: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                      47
Economic Benefits of Investing in Nutrition
There is a strong body of evidence that shows high economic returns to investing in nutrition (Alderman et al.
2016; Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). Scaling up these proven nutrition-specific
interventions can ensure that mothers are healthy and well nourished, that they can provide optimal nutrition
to their children, that children realize their full physical and cognitive development potential, and that wom-
en’s productivity is not hampered by illness, especially anemia (Figure 3.6).

Figure 3.6: How Reaching the Global Nutrition Targets Generates Economic Benefits

                                                                                                                                                  Co nitive
                                                                                                                                                  Development

                                                        STUNTING

                                                                                        Childr n’s H lth &                                        Le rnin &
                                                                                                                                                  Educ tion l
                                                                                         Nutrition St tus                                         Att inment
                                                         WASTING
       Glob l Nutrition
       T r ts R ch d                                                                                                                              Adult
                                                                                                                                                  Productivit

                                                      EASTFEE
                                                    BRE     EDING


                                                                                                                                                  W    es


                                                          ANEMIA

                                                                                                                                                  Econom
                                                                                         Wom n’s H lth &                                          (GDP)
                                                                                         Nutrition St tus


In Benin, scaling up the package of nutrition-specific interventions would produce substantial economic ben-
efits over the productive lifetimes of the affected women and children (Figure 3.7). Additional health system
cost-savings would also be likely because many of these investments reduce the burden of childhood illnesses
such as diarrhea and pneumonia.


Figure 3.7: Investments in Benin to Meet the Global Nutrition Targets Have Enormous Economic Returns

                                                    Total Economic                                                         $1 Invested
                                                   Beneﬁts (Millions)a                                                       Yieldsb

                                       STUNTING              $2,821                                                           $14
                                                                                                                   $
                                                             $1,933                                                           $58
                                                                                                      1
                              BREASTFEEDING                                             $
                                                                                                                       $

                                          ANEMIA              $455                          $                                 $14

                                        WASTING               $272                                                            $23

a. Total economic benefits over 10 years for women and over the productive lives of children who benefit from these interventions, defined as the period between the age of 18
and a “retirement” age - the life expectancy or the age of 65, whichever is lower.

b. Benefit calculation assumes a 3 percent discount rate for both financing needs and benefits and a GDP growth rate of 3 percent.




48 	                                                                                                                                           in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                            Stunting Reduction 
Financing Needs, Impacts, and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling-Up Nutrition-Specific
Interventions
Using the methodology detailed in An Investment Framework for Nutrition (Shekar et al. 2017), this brief presents
estimates of the resources needed to scale up a package of high-impact nutrition-specific interventions in Benin
to meet the global nutrition targets for stunting, anemia, breastfeeding, and wasting, along with their estimated
nutrition, health, and economic impacts. An additional $30.9 million per year over 10 years is needed to scale
up the package of key interventions (Table 3.3). The health and nutrition impacts of this investment are shown
in Table 3.4.


Table 3.3: Estimated 10-Year Financing Needs and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling Up Nutrition-Specific Interventions, Benin

                                                                                        TOTAL 10-YEAR                                               COST PER CASE
                                                                                                                     COST PER DEATH
                INTERVENTION (NUTRITION TARGET)                                       FINANCING NEEDS                                                OF STUNTING
                                                                                                                     AVERTED (US $)
                                                                                           (US $M)                                                  AVERTED (US $)


                                                          For pregnant women and mothers of infants
 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation (stunting, anemia)                                       9.1                        68,675                         49,673
 Infant and young child nutrition counseling (complementary feeding
                                                                                                 21.0                         2,255                           501
 education and breastfeeding promotion combined)
 Complementary feeding education (stunting)                                                      11.0                         4,799                          284
 Breastfeeding promotion (stunting, breastfeeding)                                               9.9                          1,419                          3,282
 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women (stunting)                           41.8                        24,602                         25,721
 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-
                                                                                                 6.8                          3,330                          1,144
 endemic regions (stunting, anemia)


                                                                    For infants and young children
 Vitamin A supplementation (stunting)                                                             2.7                         1,317                           184
 Prophylactic zinc supplementation (stunting)                                                    66.2                        13,255                          1,254
 Public provision of complementary food (stunting)                                              104.7                         33,321                         1,930
 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition (wasting)                                                14.6                         3,338                           n.a


                                                       For non-pregnant women and general population
 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women (anemia)                             13.8                                                         n.a
                                                                                                                             41,926
 Staple food fortification (anemia)                                                               3.7                                                         n.a
 Pro-breastfeeding social policies (breastfeeding)                                                5.0                          n.a                            n.a
 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns (breastfeeding)                                      20.0                          n.a                            n.a

                                                                          TOTAL:               309.3                        10,465                          1,455

Note: Financing needs and impacts assume a linear scale-up of interventions from current coverage level to 90 percent over five years, then maintained at 90 percent for an
additional five years. Unit costs for each intervention were drawn from available unit costs from neighboring countries, global costs, or estimates available in the literature.
The estimated costs include an additional 12 percent (11 percent for pro-breastfeeding social policies and promotion campaigns) to account for monitoring, evaluation,
capacity and policy development that may be necessary to reach full scale-up of the interventions. The Lives Saved Tool (LiST; see LiST 2015) was used to estimate the
impact of interventions that target pregnant women and children. The impact of interventions that target the general population or non-pregnant women was estimated
using a Microsoft Excel model. It should be noted that the LiST model does not capture potential synergies between specific interventions (e.g. the fact that the impact of
behavior change communication interventions may be higher in populations that have access to affordable and diversified foods or in populations with higher levels of educa-
tional attainment). Therefore, it is possible that the impact estimates generated using LiST in fact underestimate the true impact of the interventions in some contexts.

n.a. = not applicable




CHAPTER 3 Benin: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                      49
                                                                        ANEMIA
                                                                       Total 10%:
        Among the set of proposed interventions, vitamin A supplementation is the most cost-effective for preventing
        stunting, averting nearly 15,000 cases of stunting and 22,000 child deaths over 10 years. Complementary feed-
        ing education prevents nearly 40,000 cases of stunting at a cost of $284 per case averted, and total cost of $11
        million over 10 years. Breastfeeding promotion through counseling mothers   WASTING
                                                                                         is projected to increase the number
                                                                                    Total:
        of infants exclusively breastfed by more than 430,000, prevent 77,000 deaths,       22%
                                                                                          and cost just $9.9 million over 10
        years. Among the package of nutrition-specific interventions, breastfeeding promotion is the most cost-effec-
        tive intervention for preventing child mortality, and costs $56 per child exclusively breastfed. For preventing
NIGER              STUNTING
        maternal anemia,   staple food fortification proves to be most cost-effective, at a cost of $44 for each case-year
        of anemia Total   71%:
                   prevented                                                        BREASTFEEDING
                              in women. Over 10 years, staple food fortification will   prevent nearly 940,000 cases of
        anemia in women at a cost of $3.7 million. Among pregnant women, antenatal        Total:  8%
                                                                                            micronutrient   supplementation
        will prevent nearly 570,000 case-years of anemia at a cost of $16 per case averted, or a total of $9.1 million over
        10 years.

                                                                       TOTAL
        Interventions to reduce stunting would require the most resources,       TEN-YEAR
                                                                              accounting        FINANCING
                                                                                           for about          NEEDS:
                                                                                                     82 percent          $771 million
                                                                                                                of the total
        amount required for scale-up. However, some of the stunting interventions would also affect the breastfeeding
        and anemia targets. Figure 3.8 represents the distribution of total cost across interventions to address the four
        targets.

        Figure 3.8: Ten-Year Financing Needs for Scaling Up a Package of Nutrition-Specific Interventionsin Benin, by Percent per
        Intervention

                                                                                   WASTING
                                                            ANEMIA                 Total: 5%
                                                           Total 11%:                                            BREASTFEEDING
                                                                                                                    Total: 11%




Benin                             STUNTING                                                                                     TOTAL TEN-YEAR
                                  Total 82%:                                                                                   FINANCING NEEDS:
                                                                                                                                $309 million




        Note: Some costs for anemia, breastfeeding, and stunting are shared across interventions. Costs for breastfeeding promotion ($9.99 million) have been included in both the-
        total cost for the breastfeeding target and the total cost for the stunting target; the costs of intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic
        regions ($6.8 million) and antenatal micronutrient supplementation ($9.1 million) have been included in both the total cost for the anemia target and the total cost for the
        stunting target.




        Two Alternative Investment Packages
        Relative to current expenditures on health, the investment required to scale up the set of effective nutrition-spe-
        cific interventions may present significant challenges for Benin. In an environment of constrained resources in
        which Benin may not be able to raise $309 million over the next 10 years, two alternative investment packages
        are laid out for consideration.




        50 	                                                                                                                                           in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                    Stunting Reduction 
Table 3.4: Benefits and Cost-Effectiveness by Investment Package, Benin

         GLOBAL                                                             PRIORITY                     CATALYZING                FULL PACKAGE:
                                           BENEFIT                                                                              All interventions needed
         TARGET                                                             PACKAGE                   PROGRESS PACKAGE               to meet targets
                                                                       $8.1 million/year in             $14.6 million/year in    $30.9 million/year in
                                                                         financing need                    financing need          financing need

                                Cases of stunting reduced by
        STUNTING                                                              66,000                           94,000                   179,000
                                      2025 (vs 2015)a


                                 Cases of anemia in women
         ANEMIA                                                               2 million                       2.4 million              3.7 million
                                    prevented by 2025


                                       Additional babies
    BREASTFEEDING                                                             433,000                         433,000                  433,000
                                    breastfed over 10 years

                                    Child deaths averted
                                                                              20,000                           23,000                   29,000
                                        over 10 years
      ALL TARGETS                   Cost per death averted                     4,072                            6,361                   10,465
                                       Cost per case of
                                                                                 601                            1,074                    1,455
                                       stunting averted

a. Total impacts of proposed intervention package combined with other health and poverty reduction efforts.




The Priority Package: The first—the “priority package”—includes interventions that are the most cost-effec-
tive; that is, have the lowest cost per health outcome (e.g., case of stunting averted), and that have well-es-
tablished global policy guidelines and delivery platforms. Based on those two criteria, the priority package
includes antenatal micronutrient supplementation, infant and young child nutrition counseling, intermittent
presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic regions, vitamin A supplementation, the
treatment of severe acute malnutrition, weekly iron and folic acid supplementation for girls 15–19 years of age
attending school, and fortification of wheat and maize flour with iron and folic acid. These interventions would
be scaled up to full program coverage in the first five years and maintained at full coverage levels for the last
five years. This priority package would require an estimated $81 million over 10 years, or $8.1 million annually
(see Table 3.4).

During the 10 years of scale up, this package would prevent more than 66,000 cases of stunting, prevent nearly
2 million case-years of anemia in women and would result in 433,000 children under six months of age being
exclusively breastfed. It would also avert over 20,000 deaths in children under five years of age.

The Catalyzing Progress Package: The second alternative—the “catalyzing progress package”—includes
scale-up of all interventions in the priority package, plus a phased approach to scaling up public provision
of complementary foods, balanced energy protein supplementation, prophylactic zinc supplementation, and
weekly iron and folic acid supplementation for women outside of schools. It is assumed that, for the latter set
of interventions, during the first five years emphasis will be placed on establishing global guidelines and on
operational research to develop effective delivery platforms, or to develop less expensive products or more
cost-effective technologies. Costs are approximated as the cost of scaling up this set of interventions from 0 to
10 percent coverage only in the first five years. In the subsequent five years, it is assumed that the coverage




CHAPTER 3 Benin: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                    51
expansion of those interventions will accelerate and reach 60 percent by 2025. This package would require $14.6
million per year, or a total of $146 million over 10 years (Table 3.4). It would prevent more than 94,000 cases of
stunting among children under age five and nearly 2.4 million case-years of anemia in women. It would also
increase the number of exclusively breastfed children under six months of age by 433,000 and avert nearly
23,000 deaths.

In comparing the relative cost-effectiveness of the three investment packages, the two alternative packages are
more cost-effective in preventing deaths and stunting. However, neither is as effective as the full package in
making progress toward achieving the stunting, wasting, and anemia targets. The priority and catalyzing prog-
ress packages would prevent 20 ,000 and 23,000 deaths respectively, compared with 29,000 deaths prevented
with the full package over 10 years. Under the full package scenario, 179,000 cases of childhood stunting would
be prevented, compared with 94,000 cases under the catalyzing progress scenario and 66,000 cases under the
priority package scenario. Furthermore, there would be nearly 1.7 million and 1.3 million more case-years of
anemia prevented in women under the priority package and catalyzing progress package, respectively.



A Call to Action
As the world stands on the cusp of the new Sustainable Development Goals, there is an unprecedented oppor-
tunity to save children’s lives, build future human capital and cognitive development, and drive faster eco-
nomic growth. Scaling up key nutrition interventions during the critical 1,000 day window of early childhood
would pay lifelong dividends, translating to healthier societies and more robust economies. If this window is
missed, it is missed for life.

The additional financing needed to reach the global nutrition targets will require coordinated efforts by all
stakeholders and a supportive policy environment. To achieve these targets, Benin will need to increase its
general government health expenditure by approximately 16 percent.5 Although this level of domestic financ-
ing is ambitious, Benin has demonstrated its commitment to improving the nutritional status of children and
mothers. In the long term, nutrition interventions have significant potential to reduce poverty and boost shared
prosperity.

Accelerating the reduction of stunting in Benin will be essential for maximizing the return on investments in
early childhood development, in education, and more broadly in policies aimed at fostering and enhancing
human capital accumulation and job creation. Investing in the early years is even more critical because the
Africa region is entering a demographic transition with an expected increase in the working-age population
from 54 percent in 2010 to 64 percent in 2090. The scale-up of the key nutrition-specific interventions to reduce
stunting is estimated to generate considerable returns in economic benefits over the productive lives of ben-
eficiaries, and is a necessary condition to build human capital through investments in the early years and to
harness the potential benefits of the demographic dividend.



Endnotes
Note: All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.

1
 Information about the Power of Nutrition initiative is available at https://ciff.org/grant-portfolio/
the-power-of-nutrition/.

2
 Current financing is sourced from Results for Development Institute and can be found at http://www.inves-
tinnutrition.org/.

3
 Note that because some funded interventions contribute to more than one target, the sum of funding across
the four targets is less than the total funding for each target added together.




52 	                                                                                                in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
4
 Two of the global nutrition targets—those for low birthweight and for child overweight—were not included
in the analyses because of insufficient data on the prevalence of low birthweight and a lack of consensus on
effective interventions to reach the target for child overweight.

5
 WHO National Health Accounts database indicates general government health expenditure in Benin was US
$197m in 2014. At that level, this will need to be increased by 16 percent to accommodate the $30.9 million per
year required for scale-up of the interventions.




References
AECD-Benin. No date. Actions pour l’environnement et le developpement durable : Strategic plan 2014–2018. Abom-
ey-Calvi, Benin: ACED. http://www.aced-benin.org/sites/default/files/strategic-plan-aced_summary.pdf

Aguayo, V. M., R. Nair, N. Badgaiyan, and V. Krishna. 2016. “Determinants of Stunting and Poor Linear Growth
in Children under 2 Years of Age in India: An In-Depth Analysis of Maharashtra’s Comprehensive Nutrition
Survey.” Maternal & Child Nutrition 12 (Suppl. 1): 121–40.

Alderman , H ., J. R. Behrman , and C. Puett . 2016 . “ Big Numbers about Small Children: Estimating the Eco-
nomic Benefits of Addressing Undernutrition .” World Bank Research Observer 31 ( 2 ).

BDHS (Benin Demographic Health Survey). 1996. Benin Demographic Health Survey, 1996. http://dhsprogram.
com/what-we-do/survey/survey-display-87.cfm

———. 2001. Benin Demographic Health Survey, 2001. http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/SR93/SR93.pdf

———. 2011–2012. Benin Demographic Health Survey: Final Report 2011-2012. Calverton, Maryland, USA: INSAE
and ICF International (published in 2013). http://dhsprogram.com/publications/publication-FR270-DHS-Fi-
nal-Reports.cfm

Benin MICS (Benin Multiple Cluster Survey). 2014. Enquête par grappes à indicateurs multiples 2014, Rapport final.
Cotonou, Bénin: Institut national de la statistique et de l’analyse économique (INSAE) published in 2015).

Black, R. E., L. H. Allen, Z. A. Bhutta, L. E. Caulfield, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, C. Mathers, J. Rivera, and the
Maternal and Child Undernutrition Study Group. 2008. “Maternal and Child Undernutrition: Global and
Regional Exposures and Health Consequences.” The Lancet 371 (9608): 243–60.

Black, R. E., C. G .Victora, S. P. Walker, Z. A. Bhutta, P. Christian, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, S. Grantham-Mcgregor,
J. Katz, R. Martorell, R. Uauy, and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. “Maternal and Child
Undernutrition and Overweight in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries.” The Lancet 382: 427–51.

Copenhagen Consensus Center. 2015. Smart Development Goals: The Post-2015 Consensus. http://www.copenha-
genconsensus.com/sites/default/files/outcomedocument_col.pdf

Daniels, M. C. and L. Adair. 2004. “Growth in Young Filipino Children Predicts Schooling Trajectories through
High School.” Journal of Nutrition 134: 1439–46.

Fink, G., E. Peet, G. Danaei, K. Andrews, D. C. McCoy, C. R. Sudfeld, M. C. Smith Fawzi, M. Ezzati, and W. W.
Fawzi. 2016. “Schooling and Wage Income Losses Due to Early-Childhood Growth Faltering in Developing
Countries: National, Regional, and Global Estimates.” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 104 (1): 104–12.

Hoddinott, J., H. Alderman, J. R. Behrman, L. Haddad, and S. Horton. 2013. “The Economic Rationale for
Investing in Stunting Reduction.” Maternal and Child Nutrition 9 (Suppl. 2): 69–82.



CHAPTER 3 Benin: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                             53
Hoddinott, J., J. A. Maluccio, J. R. Behman, R. Flores, and R. Martorell. 2008. “Effect of a Nutrition Intervention
during Early Childhood on Economic Productivity in Guatemalan Adults.” Lancet 371 (9610): 411–16.

Horton, S. and R. Steckel. 2013. “Malnutrition: Global Economic Losses Attributable to Malnutrition 1900–2000
and Projections to 2050.” In The Economics of Human Challenges, edited by B. Lomborg, 247–72. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.

IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2016. Global Nutrition Report 2016: From Promise to Impact –
Ending Malnutrition by 2030. Washington, DC: IFPRI.

LiST (Lives Saved Tool). 2015. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. http:/livessa-
vedtool.org/

Martorell, R., B. L. Horta, L. S. Adair, A. D. Stein, L. Richter, C. H. D. Fall, S. K. Bhargava, S. K. Dey Biswas,
L. Perez, F. C. Barros, C. G. Victora, and Consortium on Health Orientated Research in Transitional Societies
Group. 2010. “Weight Gain in the First Two Years of Life Is an Important Predictor of Schooling Outcomes in
Pooled Analyses from Five Birth Cohorts from Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” Journal of Nutrition 140:
348–54.

Ozaltin, E., K. Hill, and S. V. Subramanian. 2010. “Association of Maternal Stature with Offspring Mortality,
Underweight, and Stunting in Low- to Middle-Income Countries.” JAMA 303 (15): 1507–16.

SUN (Scaling Up Nutrition). 2016. Institutional Transformations in 2015-16. http://docs.scalingupnutrition.
org/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/Benin-SUN-Movement-Annual-Progress-Report-2016.pdf

Shekar, M., J. Kakietek, J. D. Eberwein, and D. Walters. 2017. An Investment Framework for Nutrition: Reaching
the Global Targets for Stunting, Anemia, Breastfeeding, and Wasting. Directions in Development. Washington, DC:
World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1010-7. https://tinyurl.com/InvestmentFrameworkNutrition

UN DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2015. World Population Prospects, the
2015 Revision. https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2016. Human Development Report 2016. New York, NY:
UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2016_human_development_report.pdf

UN SCN Secretariat (United Nations Standing Committee on Nutrition Secretariat). 2013. Draft UN Agencies
Country Level Actions in Nutrition: Mapping of agencies’ nutrition actions in 21 countries – FAO, UNICEF, WFP,
WHO and IFAD. http://unscn.org/files/Activities/SUN/NewYork2013/Final_report_Mapping_of_UN_nutri-
tion_actions_in_21_SUN_countries_Sept2013.pdf

WFP (World Food Programme). 2014. Republic of Benin: Global Analysis of Vulnerability and Food Security.
https://www.wfp.org/content/
republique-benin-analyse-globale-vulnerabilite-securite-alimentaire-janvier-2014

World Bank. 2014. Benin Economic Update: Fall 2014. Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management, The
World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/388521468228911802/pdf/916550WP0Benin-
00Box385342B00PUBLIC0.pdf

———. 2016. World Bank Data Bank (database). http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.
ZS?page=1

———. 2017. World Development Indicators (database), World Bank, Washington, DC (accessed May 1, 2017),
http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators




54 	                                                                                                  in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                   Stunting Reduction 
CHAPTER 4



               CÔTE D’IVOIRE: An Investment Framework for Nutrition
                                                                                                                                  Benefits of Investing in Nutrition
   Key Messages
   •	       Thirty percent of Ivorian children under five suffer from
            chronic malnutrition (stunting); this rate has remained virtually                                                               529,000
            unchanged over the last two decades. Children in the northern
            regions of the country and those in poorest households are the                                                         cases of stunting prevented
            most affected.                                                                                                                   in 2025
   •	       Scaling up a package of high-impact nutrition-specific
            interventions in Côte d’Ivoire to address global nutrition targets
            would require an additional $47.7 million per year over 10 years
            and would make an enormous health and nutrition impact (see                                                                    45,000
            panel on the right). These investments are over and above those                                                     child deaths prevented in 2025
            needed for improving water and sanitation and for addressing
            issues around women’s empowerment and food security.

   •	       This scale-up would require additional financing equivalent to an
            8.3 percent increase in current government health expenditures
            and could be financed from a combination of domestic budgets,                                                                6.5 MILLION
            official development assistance (ODA), and innovative financing                                                           case-years of anemia
            sources such as the Power of Nutrition.1                                                                              in women prevented in 2025
   •	       The economic benefits generated over the productive lives of
            beneficiaries would be massive: $8.1 billion for the prevention
            of stunting, $2.5 billion for breastfeeding, $1.5 billion for the
            prevention of anemia, and $287 million for the treatment of severe                                                             695,000
            wasting.
                                                                                                                                  babies exclusively breastfed
   •	       Returns on every dollar invested in reaching the global
            nutrition targets range from $9 for wasting to $24 for anemia,
            $27 for investing in reducing stunting, and $54 for exclusive
            breastfeeding.
                                                                                                                                          217,000
   •	       To finance the nutrition scale-up, two lower-cost scale-up
            scenarios are estimated to require between $13.5 million and
                                                                                                                               cases of severe wasting treated
            $21.3 million per year over the next 10 years. In an environment
            of constrained resources, starting with one of these two scenarios
            would be a strong first investment, but it would need to be
            followed by increased investments to contribute toward meeting                                                                  $9–$54
            the global nutrition targets.
                                                                                                                                return for every dollar invested



                                                                                                                                         $8.1 BILLION
                                                                                                                                  generated from investments
                                                                                                                                      to reduce stunting*
*The economic benefits are calculated over the productive lives of the children benefiting from the interventions that prevent stunting.



CHAPTER 4 Côte d’ivoire: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                   55
Investment Case for Nutrition
Ensuring optimum nutrition—particularly during the 1,000-day period from pregnancy to a child’s second
birthday—can alter an individual’s development trajectory and maximize her or his productive potential.
Chronic malnutrition has important lifelong consequences for health and cognitive development. Losses to
cognitive development in early childhood resulting from chronic malnutrition are irreversible. Being stunted
(low height-for-age) in early childhood is associated with a delayed start at school, reduced schooling attain-
ment and substantially decreased adult incomes at both the individual and country level (Daniels and Adair
2004; Fink et al. 2016; Hoddinott et al. 2008; Martorell et al. 2010). These consequences add up to overall gross
domestic product (GDP) losses of 4 to 11 percent in Africa and Asia (Horton and Steckel 2013). Importantly,
chronic undernutrition can be transmitted through an inter-generational cycle, where malnourished mothers
are more likely to have stunted children (Aguayo et al. 2016; Ozaltin et al. 2010).

Investments in nutrition are highly cost-effective and among the best value-for-money development actions
(Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). An Investment Framework for Nutrition, developed
by the World Bank in partnership with R4D, 1000 Days, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, estimated
high returns on every dollar invested in nutrition: from $4 in returns for treating acute malnutrition (wasting)
to $11 for preventing stunting, $12 for the treatment and prevention of anemia, and $35 for increasing the prev-
alence of exclusive breastfeeding (Shekar et al. 2017). Not only do investments in nutrition produce substantial
economic benefits, but they also lay the groundwork for the success of investments in other sectors.

Investments in the early years—including early life nutrition, early learning and stimulation, and the provision
of nurturing care and protection from stress—ensure that all children reach their human potential and contrib-
ute to the economic growth of their nation. The analysis presented below focuses on high-impact nutrition-spe-
cific interventions with strong evidence of efficacy in reducing malnutrition, and estimates the financing needs,
impacts, and economic benefits of scaling up these interventions in Côte d’Ivoire.



Country Context
Côte d’Ivoire has a population of 22.7 million and a population growth rate of 2.4 percent (UN DESA 2015). Côte
d’Ivoire has a young population, with approximately 16 percent of the country under age five (UN DESA 2015).
Over 3.7 million children—or 30 percent of those under five—are affected by the largely irreversible cognitive
and developmental impacts associated with stunting.

Côte d’Ivoire’s economic development has been built on agriculture, but it is also emerging as an oil-rich coun-
try. Agriculture accounts for 27 percent of GDP and over three-quarters of non-oil exports, and provides income
for two-thirds of all households. The labor market in Côte d‘Ivoire is undergoing a transformation: the country
has seen a 12 percent drop in agricultural employment between 2012 and 2015 and an increase in self and wage
employment (World Bank Group 2016).

After almost two decades of strong economic growth, Côte d’Ivoire experienced a series of economic and polit-
ical crises (2002–07, 2010–11) which culminated in a short war following the 2010 elections. The crises resulted
in widespread deterioration of living standards. Since then, Côte d’Ivoire has experienced some of the strongest
economic growth on the African continent (9 percent in 2015). Despite this growth, there has been only a mar-
ginal 0.3 percent decline in poverty for every 1 percent of economic growth since 2012. Nearly half of Ivorians
continue to live in poverty—a rate that far exceeds that of 1985—as a result of successive economic shocks and
political instability (World Bank Group 2016).

A large proportion of the population lives in a state of high vulnerability without any social protection. Accord-
ing to the 2016 UNDP Human Development Report, the incidence of poverty declined only marginally between
2008 and 2011, but the depth and incidence increased in a number of regions, including the North, Center North,




56 	                                                                                                in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
                                 and North East regions. Low human capital stock remains one of the key challenges to reducing poverty and
                                 achieving greater socioeconomic equity. The Human Development Index (HDI) showed Côte d’Ivoire ranked
                                 171st out of 187 countries, with a value of 0.474 (UNDP 2016).



                                 Nutritional Status in Côte d’Ivoire
                                 Persistently high rates of undernutrition remain a serious human capital challenge in Côte d’Ivoire. One in three
                                 children (29.8 percent) under five years of age are stunted (Côte d’Ivoire DHS 2011–2012). Over the past two
                                 decades, stunting prevalence has stagnated at around 30 percent and is of medium public health significance
                                 according to WHO standards. Côte d’Ivoire ranks 87th out of 130 countries assessed for highest stunting rates for
                                 children under five (IFPRI 2016). Prevalence of wasting (low weight-for-height) was 7.5 percent among children
                                 under 5 (Côte d’Ivoire DHS 2011–2012; WHO 2010) (Figure 4.1).

                                 National estimates mask geographic and socioeconomic disparities in stunting prevalence. There continue to be
                                 significant differences in stunting prevalence among children in poorer and wealthier households, and similarly
                                 among children in rural and urban households. Stunting prevalence has remained consistently lower among chil-
                                 dren living in households in the wealthiest quintile (15.6 percent) when compared with those in poorest quintile
                                 (38.1 percent) (Figure 4.2). However, it is critical to address the key underlying drivers of malnutrition, such as
                                 high fertility rates (total fertility rate for Côte d’Ivoire is 5.0), suboptimal infant and young child nutrition prac-
                                 tices, and hygiene and sanitation at all levels.


                                 Figure 4.1: Trends in Undernutrition in Côte d’Ivoire,                                          Figure 4.2: Disparities in Stunting by Wealth Quintile,
                                 1994–2012	                                                                                      1994–2012
                            35
                                                              30.7               31                       29.8
                            30                                35
                                                                                                                                 AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                                                                                                31
AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                                                                       30.7                                               29.8
                                                                                                                                  STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                                                                                                                                                              40
                            25                                30
                                                                                                                                                                AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE
                                 AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                                                                                                                                                                 STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                              40
    PREVALENCE (%)




                            20                                25                                                                                              30
                                     PREVALENCE (%)




                                                              20                                                                                                                              30
                            15                                                                                                                                20
                                                               10.9
                            10                                15                                          7.5                                                                                 20
                                                                        10.9     6.7
                                                                                                                                                               10
                            5                                 10                                6.7                       7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                               5                                                                                                0
                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                            1994         1998-99       2011-12
                                                             1994      1998-99          2011-12                                                                                                0
                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1994         1998-99        2011-12
                                                                      1994            1998-99         2011-12                                                Poorest quintile                           Richest quintile                 National
                                                                      Stunting                  Wasting
                                                                                  Stunting                      Wasting                                                                     Poorest quintile        Richest quintile                 National

                                  Source for Figures 4.1 and 4.2: Côte d’Ivoire DHS 2011–2012.



                                 This variation is pronounced at the regional level as well. While stunting prevalence is relatively low in Abi-
                                 djan (18 percent), five regions have stunting rates over 30 percent, with prevalence estimates rising to nearly
                                 40 percent in the North and North East regions, and the highest absolute number of stunted children is con-
                                 centrated in the north and southwest regions (Figure 4.3). Given the data on regional variations in stunting
                                 prevalence, it would be important to understand the key drivers of undernutrition in these highest prevalence
                                 regions and to design targeted interventions to address them.




                                CHAPTER 4 Côte d’ivoire: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                                                     57
  Figure 4.3: Number of Stunted Children and Stunting Prevalence by Region, Côte d’Ivoire 2011–12



                                                  DENGUELE          SAVANES                                                                           DENGUELE         SAVANES



                                                                                              ZANZAN                                                                                           ZANZAN
                                                        WOROBA              VALLEE DU                                                                        WOROBA            VALLEE DU
                                                                            BANDAMA                                                                                            BANDAMA



   MONTAGNES                                             SASSANDRA-                 LACS                                             MONTAGNES                    SASSANDRA-        LACS
                                                         MARAHOUE                                      YAMOUSSOUKRO                                               MARAHOUE                              YAMOUSSOUKRO


                                                                     GÔH-                                     COMOE                                                      GÔH-                                  COMOE
                                                                    DJIBOUA         LAGUNES                                                                             DJIBOUA     LAGUNES

                                                       BAS SASSANDRA                                                                                        BAS SASSANDRA
                                                      Burundi
                                  60                                                 ABIDJAN                                                                                         ABIDJAN
                                                                                                           Madagascar                RWANDA
 STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                                                                                                                                                                          142,220
                                  50                                   Niger         Mozambique                                                                           100,000
                           Stunting Prevalence                       ≥ 40%: Very high      20–29%: Medium
                                                                                                                                              Total Children
                                                                                                                                                           Chad           75,000
                           By Region (%)                             30–39%: High                 <20%: Low             Ethiopia              Stunted By Region           50,000
                                                                                                                                                                                           Region Boundaries
                                  40                         DRC                                                                                                                     Tanzania
                                                                                Malawi
                                                                              Region Boundaries
                                                                                                       Sierra Leone                                                       17,500
                                                                                                                                                                          14,897
                                                                                                Uganda
                                  30
                                                       Guinea
  Data source: Côte d’Ivoire DHS 2011–12. IBRD 42941 | MAY 2017 These maps were produced by the Cartography Unit of the World Bank Group. The boundaries, colors,
IBRD 42941 | MAY 2017                                                               Zimbabwe                               Senegal
         20 and any other information shown on these maps do not imply, on the part of the World Bank Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
  denominations
  endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
                                   10
  The prevalence
        0         of stunting in Côte d’Ivoire is lower than the average for the Africa region (35.2 percent)
          Bank 2017). Nevertheless,
  (World500                  1000                 1500 higher than would
                                    it is considerably                                     2500 on Côte d’Ivoire’s
                                                                        2000 be expected based                 3000
  per capita income level, which belies the fact that economic development needs to be coupled with other
                                              GDP PER CAPITA
  investments to attain improvements in childhood                (see Figure $
                                                             (INTERNATIONAL
                                                      nutrition                PPP)
                                                                             4.4).


  Figure 4.4: Prevalence of Stunting and GDP per capita: Côte d’Ivoire and Selected Low-Middle-Income Countries
                             50
                              45
                                                                                                         Zambia
 STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                             40                                                                                           Sudan                Nigera
                               35                                                                 Cameroon
                                                                               Lesotho
                             30                                                                                   CÔTE D’IVOIRE                                                              Swaziland
                              25                                                    Kenya
                                                                                                                 Mauritania
                             20                                                                                                                      Congo
                                                                                                                       Ghana
                                15
                                                                                 Sao Tome and Principe
                               10
                                    5
                                   0
                                           500               1500               2500                 3500              4500            5500             6500              7500               8500                9500

                                                                                                        GDP PER CAPITA (INTERNATIONAL $ PPP)
  Source: UNICEF, WHO, and World Bank 2015; World Bank 2017.



  Wasting, also known as acute malnutrition, is typically classified as either severe or moderate. Wasting can result
  from food insecurity in resource-poor settings with insufficient dietary quality, quantity and diversity, subop-
  timal breastfeeding, and recurrent episodes of illness such as diarrhea. Wasting prevalence across Sub-Saharan
                                    NIGER
  Africa is second
             50    highest in the world, after South Asia, with 13 million children (7.8 percent) suffering from acute
  malnutrition. Wasting in
                         DRCCôte d’Ivoire is just slightly below the regional prevalence at 7.5 percent.
                                      Mozambique
                                                                                                                                                          Chad
                                                                                                                          Ethiopia
                            ING PREVALENCE (%)




                                                 40                                                                                    Rwanda
                                                                                        Malawi
                                                                                                                      Sierra Leone                                                             Tanzania
                                                                                                                                                         Benin
 58 	                                            30                                                                                    Uganda                                         in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                                                   Stunting Reduction 
                                                                                                  Guinea
                                                                                                                                   Zimbabwe
Micronutrient deficiencies (a form of malnutrition that relates to a deficiency in essential vitamins and minerals
needed for body functions and is sometimes referred to as hidden hunger) are highly pervasive in Côte d’Ivoire.
Anemia, a condition caused by inadequate dietary intake of iron, helminth infections, and malaria, among other
factors, has cross-generational impacts. More than one in two women of reproductive age in Côte d’Ivoire are
anemic (Côte d’Ivoire DHS 2011–2012), which affects not only women’s own health, but also contributes to the
intergenerational cycle of undernutrition. Three-quarters of children aged 6 to 59 months are anemic, with three
regions experiencing an anemia prevalence of over 80 percent (Côte d’Ivoire DHS 2011–2012). Ensuring that
women of reproductive age are well nourished sets the stage for their children to achieve optimal nutrition and
development. Recognizing that other factors beyond poverty and food insecurity put children at risk of chronic
malnutrition, there is a need for effective multisectoral strategies to address undernutrition across the country.

The high prevalence of stunting in Côte d’Ivoire is associated with insufficient access to health services, poor
water and sanitation, and suboptimal care and feeding practices. Demand- and supply-side barriers influence
food consumption and diversity of diet. A survey conducted in 2015 found that households in rural areas spent
56 percent of their income on food, compared with 39 percent in urban areas (National Institute of Statistics
2015), thereby persistently limiting access to the range of nutrients required for growth, health, and devel-
opment during the early years and beyond. Food insecurity affects 12.8 percent of the population (Ministry
of Planning and Development 2015) and an estimated 20–40 percent of the population are not meeting the
minimum recommended caloric intake (IMF 2009). In post-harvest and lean seasons, 72 percent of households
reported food-related coping strategies including reductions in number of daily meals and consumption of
non-diversified diets (Ministry of Agriculture 2016).



Political Commitment to Reduce Malnutrition
Political commitment to nutrition is very high in Côte d’Ivoire, with the Prime Minister and the Finance
Minister both highly committed to the agenda. In 2013, Côte d’Ivoire joined the SUN movement, solidifying
this commitment to nutrition. In 2016, a council of ministers adopted the national Multisectoral Nutrition Plan
(2016–2020). This national plan identifies chronic malnutrition as a key priority for improving human and
economic development in Côte d’Ivoire. The plan lays the groundwork for cross-sectoral collaboration across
seven strategic areas and prioritizes the scale-up of nutrition activities in support of the Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals (Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene 2016). Côte d’Ivoire has developed a common policy
framework for nutrition, incorporating a common budget and results framework for both the National Nutri-
tion Policy and the Multisectoral Nutrition Plan. The Prime Minister launched the plan in September 2016 and
is mobilizing financing for its implementation.

The commitment to nutrition is also reflected in the 2016–2020 National Development Plan, which lays out tar-
gets for reducing chronic malnutrition to 20 percent and wasting to 5 percent by 2020 (Ministry of Health and
Public Hygiene 2016). This commitment builds upon the 2012–2015 National Development Plan, which pro-
moted action on food security (Côte d’Ivoire, Republic of 2012). A multisectoral Nutrition Council was estab-
lished in 2014 and is chaired by the Prime Minister. The Council engages almost a dozen ministries, reflecting
the multisectoral nature of food and nutrition policies and programs.



Current Financing for Nutrition
In 2015 in Côte d’Ivoire, the government and overseas donors spent a total of $4.41 million on interventions
that will contribute to reaching the global targets for nutrition. Of that amount, $1.60 million came from the
government and $2.82 million came from ODA. This contribution from ODA included $799,000 for stunting,
$97,000 for anemia, $190,000 for breastfeeding, and $1.89 million for wasting.2 These estimates reflect the
current spending on nutrition, and the following sections detail additional financing needed in order for Côte
d’Ivoire to contribute to reaching the global targets on nutrition.3




CHAPTER 4 Côte d’ivoire: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                  59
Global Targets for Nutrition
Substantial improvements to the nutritional status of women and children can be realized if there is adequate
investment in a set of evidence-based nutrition-specific interventions that ensure optimum nutrition during
the critical 1,000 day window between the start of a woman’s pregnancy and the child’s second birthday (Black
et al. 2008, 2013). For women, these include interventions to prevent anemia before and during pregnancy as
well as those aimed at improving protein energy intake and adequate antenatal care. Interventions targeted at
children and their mothers aim to improve breastfeeding and complementary feeding practices, enhance the
micronutrient status of children, and treat acute malnutrition in children.

In 2012—to rally the international community around improving nutrition—the 176 members of the World
Health Assembly endorsed the first-ever global nutrition targets, focusing on six areas: stunting, anemia, low
birthweight, childhood overweight, breastfeeding, and wasting. These targets aim to boost investments in
cost-effective interventions, spearhead better implementation practices, and catalyze progress toward reducing
malnutrition. The targets for stunting and wasting are enshrined within the United Nations’ Sustainable Devel-
opment Goal 2 (SDG 2), which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year 2030. The 2016 Global
Nutrition Report ranked each country’s progress in contributing toward achieving the global targets (Table 4.1)
(IFPRI 2016).4


Table 4.1: Four Global Targets for Nutrition and Côte d’Ivoire’s Contribution toward Meeting Them

                                                                                                      CÔTE D’IVOIRE              PREVALENCE               PROGRESS
                                                                                                         RANK

                                              Reduce the number of stunted children
   1
                    STUNTING*                                                                               87/132                    29.8%
                                                       under five by 40%
        Stuntin


                                                 Reduce the number of women of
   2
                    ANEMIA                                                                                  173/185                    53.7%
                                              reproductive age with anemia by 50%
        An mi



                                           Increase the rate of exclusive breastfeeding 
   5
                    BREASTFEEDING                                                                           126/141                    12.1%
                                             in the first six months up to at least 50%
        Exclusiv
   br     stf din

                                             Reduce and maintain childhood wasting
   6
                    WASTING*                                                                                92/130                     7.5%
                                                      alnutrition) to less than 5%
                                              (acute m
        W stin



                             LEGEND:          Off course, no progress             Off course, some progress               On course, good progress

Sources: Nutrition targets from WHO 2014; Rank and progress from IFPRI 2016; Prevalence data from Cote d’Ivoire DHS 2011-12.
*Stunting and wasting are included within the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 2 (SDG 2), which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year 2030.




Coverage of key nutrition-specific interventions in Côte d’Ivoire is largely inadequate, and is well below the
levels necessary to advance progress in reducing malnutrition among Ivorian children. Table 4.2 and Figure 4.5
summarize the current coverage of and delivery platforms for nutrition-specific interventions in Côte d’Ivoire.




60 	                                                                                                                                         in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                          Stunting Reduction 
Table 4.2: Delivery Platforms of Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Côte d’Ivoire
 INTERVENTION                                                                                                                     PLATFORM

 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation - (iron and folic acid only)                                                    Health facility and community

 Complementary feeding education                                                                            Health facility, community, and communication campaigns

 Breastfeeding promotion                                                                                      Health facility, community, and community campaigns

 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women                                                 Health facility, community, and social safety net programs

 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic regions                                   Health facility and community

 Vitamin A supplementation                                                                                      Health facility, community, and food fortification

 Public provision of complementary foods                                                                    Health facility, community, and social safety net programs

 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition                                                                                  Health facility and community

 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women of reproductive age                                School, community, health facility, and marketplace

 Staple food fortification                                                                                                        Marketplace

 Pro-breastfeeding social policies                                                                                            Government policies

 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns                                                                                          Media


Figure 4.5: Coverage of Key Nutrition-Specific Interventions: Côte d’Ivoire and Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                             Antenatal micronutrient
                                                                                 supplementation -
                                                                             (iron and folic acid only)
                                                    Pro-breastfeeding                                            Complementary
                                                      social policies                                           feeding education
                                                                            100



                                                                                  80



                                                                                       60

                                Staple food                                                                                                Breastfeeding
                                fortiﬁcation                                                40
                                                                                                                                            promotion

                                                                                                 20




           Iron and folic acid                                                                                                                      Balanced energy
    supplementation for non-pregnant                                                                                                            protein supplementation
       women of reproductive age                                                                                                                  for pregnant women




                              Treatment of severe                                                                                   Intermittent presumptive
                               acute malnutrition                                                                                     treatment of malaria
                                                                                                                                         in pregnancy in
                                                                                                                                    malaria-endemic regions


                                                                Public provision of                      Vitamin A
                                                               complementary foods                    supplementation

Note: Red shading represents Côte d’Ivoire and light blue shading represents average Sub-Saharan Africa coverage




CHAPTER 4 Côte d’ivoire: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                           61
Economic Benefits of Investing in Nutrition
There is a strong body of evidence that shows high economic returns to investing in nutrition (Alderman et al.
2016; Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). Scaling up these proven nutrition-specific
interventions can ensure that mothers are healthy and well nourished, that they can provide optimal nutrition
to their children, that children realize their full physical and cognitive development potential, and that wom-
en’s productivity is not hampered by illness, especially anemia (Figure 4.6).

Figure 4.6: How Reaching the Global Nutrition Targets Generates Economic Benefits

                                                                                                                                                  Co nitive
                                                                                                                                                  Development

                                                        STUNTING

                                                                                       Childr n’s H lth &                                         Le rnin &
                                                                                                                                                  Educ tion l
                                                                                        Nutrition St tus                                          Att inment
                                                        WASTING
       Glob l Nutrition
       T r ts R ch d                                                                                                                              Adult
                                                                                                                                                  Productivit

                                                      EASTFEE
                                                    BRE     EDING


                                                                                                                                                  W    es


                                                         ANEMIA

                                                                                                                                                  Econom
                                                                                        Wom n’s H lth &                                           (GDP)
                                                                                        Nutrition St tus

In Côte d’Ivoire, scaling-up the package nutrition-specific interventions would produce substantial economic
benefits over the productive lifetime of the affected women and children (Figure 4.7). Additional health system
cost-savings would also be likely because many of these investments reduce the burden of childhood illnesses
such as diarrhea and pneumonia.


Figure 4.7: Investments in Côte d’Ivoire to Meet the Global Nutrition Targets Have Enormous Economic Returns
                                                     Total Economic                                                           $1 Invested
                                                    Beneﬁts (Millions)a                                                         Yieldsb

                                       STUNTING               $8,112                                                              $27
                                                                                                                      $
                                                             $2,529                                                               $54
                                                                                                         1
                              BREASTFEEDING                                               $
                                                                                                                          $

                                           ANEMIA             $1,547                          $                                   $24

                                         WASTING             $286.6                                                                $9

a. Total economic benefits over 10 years for women and over the productive lives of children who benefit from these interventions, defined as the period between the age of 18
and a “retirement” age - the life expectancy or the age of 65, whichever is lower.
b. Benefit calculation assumes a 3 percent discount rate for both financing needs and benefits and a GDP growth rate of 3 percent.




62 	                                                                                                                                             in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                              Stunting Reduction 
Financing Needs, Impacts, and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling-Up Nutrition-Specific
Interventions
Using the methodology detailed in An Investment Framework for Nutrition (Shekar et al. 2017), this brief presents
estimates of the resources needed to scale up a package of 12 high-impact nutrition-specific interventions in
Côte d’Ivoire to meet the global nutrition targets for stunting, anemia, breastfeeding, and wasting, along with
their estimated nutrition, health, and economic impacts. An additional $47.7 million per year over 10 years is
needed to scale up the package of key interventions (Table 4.3). The health and nutrition impacts of this invest-
ment are shown in Table 4.4.


Table 4.3: Estimated 10-Year Financing Needs and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling Up Nutrition-Specific Interventions, Côte d’Ivoire

                                                                                        TOTAL 10-YEAR                                               COST PER CASE
                              INTERVENTION                                                                           COST PER DEATH
                                                                                      FINANCING NEEDS                                                OF STUNTING
                           (NUTRITION TARGET)                                                                        AVERTED (US $)
                                                                                           (US $M)                                                  AVERTED (US $)

                                                          For pregnant women and mothers of infants
 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation (stunting, anemia)                                      24.7                         8,395                          4,173
 Infant and young child nutrition counseling (complementary feeding
                                                                                                 22.7                         2,017                           125
 education and breastfeeding promotion combined) (stunting, breastfeeding)
 Complementary feeding education (stunting)                                                       11.3                        2,269                           63
 Breastfeeding promotion (stunting, breastfeeding)                                               11.5                         1,820                          3,302
 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women (stunting)                           56.7                        20,551                         10,647
 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy (stunting,
                                                                                                 14.6                         2,294                          1,087
 anemia)

                                                                    For infants and young children
 Vitamin A supplementation (stunting)                                                             5.3                         1,630                           513
 Prophylactic zinc supplementation (stunting)                                                    76.4                         6,766                          489
 Public provision of complementary food (stunting)                                               181.0                       66,705                          1,763
 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition (wasting)                                                39.2                        10,184                           n.a


                                                       For non-pregnant women and general population
 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women (anemia)                             22.7                                                         n.a
                                                                                                                             27,855
 Staple food fortification (anemia)                                                               8.2                                                         n.a
 Pro-breastfeeding social policies (breastfeeding)                                                5.0                          n.a                            n.a
 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns (breastfeeding)                                      20.0                          n.a                            n.a

                                                                          TOTAL:               476.6                        10,462                           801


Note: Financing needs and impacts assume a linear scale-up of interventions from current coverage level to 90 percent over five years, then maintained at 90 percent for an
additional five years. Unit costs for each intervention were drawn from available unit costs from neighboring countries, global costs, or estimates available in the literature.
The estimated financing needs include an additional 12 percent (11 percent for pro-breastfeeding social policies and promotion campaigns) to account for monitoring, evalua-
tion, capacity, and policy development that may be necessary to reach full scale-up of the interventions. The Lives Saved Tool (LiST; see LiST 2015) was used to estimate the
impact of interventions that target pregnant women and children. The impacts of interventions that target the general population or non-pregnant women were estimated
using a Microsoft Excel model. It should be noted that the LiST model does not capture potential synergies between specific interventions (e.g. the fact that the impact of
behavior change communication interventions may be higher in populations that have access to affordable and diversified foods or in populations with higher levels of educa-
tional attainment). Therefore, it is possible that the impact estimates generated using LiST in fact underestimate the true impact of the interventions in some contexts.

n.a. = not applicable.




CHAPTER 4 Côte d’ivoire: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                              63
                                                       ANEMIA                 Total: 5%
                                                      Total 11%:                                            BREASTFEEDING
                                                                                                               Total: 11%



        Among the set of proposed interventions, educating mothers about complementary feeding is the most effec-
        tive for preventing stunting, averting more than half a million cases of stunting and 40,000 child deaths over
        10 years. Breastfeeding promotion through counseling mothers is projected        to increase
                                                                                      TOTAL           the number of infants
                                                                                                TEN-YEAR
Benin                   STUNTING
        exclusively breastfed                                                         million over 10NEEDS:
                                by 69,000, prevent over 6,000 deaths, and cost $11.5 FINANCING          years. For preventing
        maternal anemia,Total  82%:
                            staple food fortification proves to be the most cost-effective, at a cost of $5.50 for each case-
        year of anemia prevented in women. Over 10 years, staple food fortification   $309      million
                                                                                          will prevent  nearly 1.5 million
        case-years of anemia in non-pregnant women at a cost of $8.2 million. Among pregnant women, antenatal
        micronutrient supplementation will prevent 1.5 million case-years of anemia, at a cost of $16.5 per case averted,
        or a total of $24.7 million over 10 years.

        Interventions to reduce stunting will require the most resources, accounting for 80 percent of the total amount
        required for scale-up. However, some of the stunting interventions will also have impacts for the breastfeeding
        and anemia targets. Figure 4.8 breaks down the distribution of total financing needs across the four targets.

        Figure 4.8: Ten-Year Financing Needs for Scaling Up a Package of Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Côte d’Ivoire, by Percent
        per Intervention
                                                          WASTING
                                          ANEMIA           Total: 8%
                                         Total 11%:                             BREASTFEEDING
                                                                                     Total: 8%



 Cote

                             STUNTING                                                                                     TOTAL TEN-YEAR
                             Total 80%:                                                                                   FINANCING NEEDS:
                                                                                                                           $477 million



        Note: Some costs for anemia, breastfeeding, and stunting are shared across interventions. Costs for breastfeeding promotion ($11.5 million) have been included in both the
        total cost for the breastfeeding target and the total cost for the stunting target; the costs of intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic
        regions ($14.6 million) and antenatal micronutrient supplementation ($24.7 million) have been included in both the total cost for the anemia target and the total cost for the
        stunting target



        The analysis above includes only interventions related to the four global targets. Two additional high impact
        interventions aimed at improving micronutrient status, namely zinc and oral rehydration solute (ORS) for the
        treatment of diarrhea and deworming, will be scaled up as part of the Cote d’Ivoire’s National Multisectoral
        Nutrition Plan. The World Bank had previously conducted analysis of the cost and impact of two of these inter-
        ventions in the context of the Plan. Over a five year period, the scale-up of therapeutic zinc coverage would
        cost an additional $39.4 million and save 7,700 additional lives, while the scale-up of deworming would cost
        $1.7 million and result in an additional 6.9 million children being dewormed.



        Two Alternative Investment Packages
        Relative to current expenditures on health, the investment required to scale up the set of effective nutrition-spe-
        cific interventions may present significant challenges for Côte d’Ivoire. In an environment of constrained
        resources in which Côte d’Ivoire may not be able to raise $477 million over the next 10 years, two alternative
        investment packages are laid out for consideration.



        64 	                                                                                                                                          in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                   Stunting Reduction 
Table 4.4: Benefits and Cost-Effectiveness by Investment Package, Côte d’Ivoire

         GLOBAL                                                             PRIORITY                     CATALYZING               FULL PACKAGE:
                                           BENEFIT                                                                             All interventions needed
         TARGET                                                             PACKAGE                   PROGRESS PACKAGE              to meet targets
                                                                      $13.5 million/year in               $21.3 million/year    $47.7 million/year in
                                                                        financing need                     financing need         financing need

                                Cases of stunting reduced by
        STUNTING                                                              253,000                         330,000                 529,000
                                      2025 (vs 2015)a


                                 Cases of anemia in women
         ANEMIA                                                               2 million                       2.6 million             6.5 million
                                    prevented by 2025


                                       Additional babies
    BREASTFEEDING                                                             695,000                         695,000                 695,000
                                    breastfed over 10 years

                                    Child deaths averted
                                                                              34,000                           39,000                  45,000
                                        over 10 years
      ALL TARGETS                   Cost per death averted                      4,019                           5,458                  10,463
                                       Cost per case of
                                                                                 266                             489                     801
                                       stunting averted

a. Total impacts of proposed intervention package combined with other health and poverty reduction efforts.



The Priority Package: The first—the “priority package”—includes interventions that are the most cost-effec-
tive; that is, have the lowest cost per health outcome (e.g., case of stunting averted), and that have well-es-
tablished global policy guidelines and delivery platforms. Based on those two criteria, the priority package
includes antenatal micronutrient supplementation, infant and young child nutrition counseling, intermittent
presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic regions, vitamin A supplementation, the
treatment of severe acute malnutrition, weekly iron and folic acid supplementation for girls 15–19 years of age
attending school, and fortification of wheat and maize flour with iron and folic acid. These interventions would
be scaled up to full program coverage in the first five years and maintained at full coverage levels for the last
five years. This priority package would require an estimated $135 million over 10 years, or $13.5 million annu-
ally (see Table 4.4).

During the 10 years of scale up, this package would prevent more than 253,000 cases of stunting and avert
34,000 deaths in children under five years of age. It would also prevent nearly 2 million case-years of anemia in
women and would result in 695,000 additional children under six months of age being exclusively breastfed.

The Catalyzing Progress Package: The second alternative—the “catalyzing progress package”—includes
scale-up of all interventions in the priority package, plus a phased approach to scaling up public provision
of complementary foods, balanced energy protein supplementation, prophylactic zinc supplementation, and
weekly iron and folic acid supplementation for women outside of schools. It is assumed that, for the latter set
of interventions, during the first five years, emphasis will be placed on establishing global guidelines and on
operational research to develop effective delivery platforms, or to develop less expensive products or more
cost-effective technologies. Costs are approximated as the cost of scaling up this set of interventions from 0 to
10 percent coverage only in the first five years. In the subsequent five years, it is assumed that the coverage
expansion of those interventions will accelerate and reach 60 percent by 2025. This package would require $21.3
million per year, or a total of $213 million over 10 years (Table 4.4). It would prevent 39,000 deaths and more



CHAPTER 4 Côte d’ivoire: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                           65
than 330,000 cases of stunting among children under age five, increase the number of exclusively breastfed chil-
dren under six months of age by 695,000, and prevent more than 2.6 million case-years of anemia in women.

In comparing the relative cost-effectiveness of the three intervention packages, the two alternative packages
are more cost-effective in preventing deaths and stunting. However, neither is as effective as the full package in
making progress toward achieving the stunting, wasting, and anemia targets. The priority and catalyzing prog-
ress packages would prevent 34,000 and 39,000 deaths respectively, compared with 45,000 deaths prevented
with the full package over 10 years. Under the full package scenario, 529,000 cases of childhood stunting would
be prevented, compared with 330,000 cases under the catalyzing progress scenario and 253,000 cases under the
priority package scenario. Furthermore, there would be nearly 4.5 million and 3.9 million more case-years of
anemia prevented in women under the priority package and catalyzing progress package, respectively.



A Call to Action
As the world stands on the cusp of the new Sustainable Development Goals, there is an unprecedented oppor-
tunity to save children’s lives, build future human capital and cognitive development, and drive faster eco-
nomic growth. Scaling up key nutrition interventions during the critical 1,000 day window of early childhood
will pay lifelong dividends, translating to healthier societies and more robust economies. If this window is
missed, it is missed for life.

The additional financing required to reach the global nutrition targets will require coordinated efforts by all
stakeholders and a supportive policy environment. To achieve these targets, Côte d’Ivoire will need to increase
the funding allocated to nutrition by $47.7 million annually, roughly equivalent to an 8.3 percent increase in
current general government expenditure on health.5 These investments are over and above those needed for
improving water and sanitation and issues around women’s empowerment, and food security. Although this
level of domestic financing is ambitious, Côte d’Ivoire is already moving in this direction. In the long term, nutrition
interventions have significant potential to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity.

Accelerating the reduction of stunting in Côte d’Ivoire will be essential for maximizing the return on invest-
ments in early childhood development, in education, and more broadly in policies aimed at fostering and
enhancing human capital accumulation and job creation. Investing in the early years is even more critical
because the Africa region is entering a demographic transition with an expected increase in the working-age
population from 54 percent in 2010 to 64 percent by 2090. The scale-up of the key nutrition-specific interven-
tions to reduce stunting is estimated to generate considerable returns in economic benefits over the productive
lives of beneficiaries, and is a necessary condition to build human capital through investments in the early
years and to harness the potential benefits of the demographic dividend.



Endnotes
Note: All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.

1
 Information about the Power of Nutrition initiative is available at https://ciff.org/grant-portfolio/
the-power-of-nutrition/.

2
 Note that because some funded interventions contribute to more than one target, total funding across the four
targets is less than the total funding for each target added together.

3
 Current financing by source is from Results for Development Institute and can be found at http://www.
investinnutrition.org/.




66 	                                                                                                    in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                     Stunting Reduction 
4
 Two of the global nutrition targets—those for low birthweight and for child overweight—were not included
in the analyses because of insufficient data on the prevalence of low birthweight and a lack of consensus on
effective interventions to reach the target for child overweight.

5
 WHO National Health accounts database indicates general government health expenditure in Cote d’Ivoire
was US $575m in 2014. At that level, this will need to be increased by 8.3% to accommodate the US $47.7m per
year required for scale-up of the 12 nutrition-specific interventions.




References
Aguayo, V. M., R. Nair, N. Badgaiyan, and V. Krishna. 2016. “Determinants of Stunting and Poor Linear Growth
in Children under 2 Years of Age in India: An In-Depth Analysis of Maharashtra’s Comprehensive Nutrition
Survey.” Maternal & Child Nutrition 12 (Suppl. 1): 121–40.

Alderman , H ., J. R. Behrman , and C. Puett . 2016 . “ Big Numbers about Small Children: Estimating the Eco-
nomic Benefits of Addressing Undernutrition .” World Bank Research Observer 31 ( 2 ).

Black, R. E., L. H. Allen, Z. A. Bhutta, L. E. Caulfield, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, C. Mathers, J. Rivera, and the
Maternal and Child Undernutrition Study Group. 2008. “Maternal and Child Undernutrition: Global and
Regional Exposures and Health Consequences.” The Lancet 371 (9608): 243–60.

Black, R. E., C. G .Victora, S. P. Walker, Z. A. Bhutta, P. Christian, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, S. Grantham-Mcgregor,
J. Katz, R. Martorell, R. Uauy, and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. “Maternal and Child
Undernutrition and Overweight in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries.” The Lancet 382: 427–51.

Copenhagen Consensus Center. 2015. Smart Development Goals: The Post-2015 Consensus. http://www.copenha-
genconsensus.com/sites/default/files/outcomedocument_col.pdf

Côte d’Ivoire, Republic of. 2012. National Development Plan 2012–2015.

Côte d’Ivoire DHS (Côte d’Ivoire Demographic and Health Survey). 2011–2012. Côte d’Ivoire Demographic and
Health Survey: Final Report 2011–2012. Calverton, Maryland, USA: INS/Côte d’Ivoire and ICF International (in
French; published in 2013). http://dhsprogram.com/publications/publication-FR272-DHS-Final-Reports.cfm

Daniels, M. C. and L. Adair. 2004. “Growth in Young Filipino Children Predicts Schooling Trajectories through
High School.” Journal of Nutrition 134: 1439–46.

Fink, G., E. Peet, G. Danaei, K. Andrews, D. C. McCoy, C. R. Sudfeld, M. C. Smith Fawzi, M. Ezzati, and W. W.
Fawzi. 2016. “Schooling and Wage Income Losses Due to Early-Childhood Growth Faltering in Developing
Countries: National, Regional, and Global Estimates.” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 104 (1): 104–12.

Hoddinott, J., H. Alderman, J. R. Behrman, L. Haddad, and S. Horton. 2013. “The Economic Rationale for
Investing in Stunting Reduction.” Maternal and Child Nutrition 9 (Suppl. 2): 69–82.

Hoddinott, J., J. A. Maluccio, J. R. Behman, R. Flores, and R. Martorell. 2008. “Effect of a Nutrition Intervention
during Early Childhood on Economic Productivity in Guatemalan Adults.” Lancet 371 (9610): 411–16.

Horton, S. and R. Steckel. 2013. “Malnutrition: Global Economic Losses Attributable to Malnutrition 1900–2000
and Projections to 2050.” In The Economics of Human Challenges, edited by B. Lomborg, 247–72. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.




CHAPTER 4 Côte d’ivoire: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                     67
IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2016. Global Nutrition Report 2016: From Promise to Impact –
Ending Malnutrition by 2030. Washington, DC: IFPRI.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2009. “Côte d’Ivoire: Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper.” IMF Country
Report No. 09/156. Washington, DC: IMF. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2009/cr09156.pdf

LiST (Lives Saved Tool). 2015. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. http:/livessa-
vedtool.org/

Martorell, R., B. L. Horta, L. S. Adair, A. D. Stein, L. Richter, C. H. D. Fall, S. K. Bhargava, S. K. Dey Biswas,
L. Perez, F. C. Barros, C. G. Victora, and Consortium on Health Orientated Research in Transitional Societies
Group. 2010. “Weight Gain in the First Two Years of Life Is an Important Predictor of Schooling Outcomes in
Pooled Analyses from Five Birth Cohorts from Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” Journal of Nutrition 140:
348–54.

Ministry of Agriculture, Côte d’Ivoire. 2016. Suivi de la saison agricole et de la vulnérabilité alimentaire. Côte
d’Ivoire.

Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene, Côte d’Ivoire. 2016. National Multisectoral Nutrition Plan 2016–2020 (in
French). http://www.nutrition.gouv.ci/fichier/doc/PNMN_2016_2020_15_08_16.pdf

Ministry of Planning and Development, Côte d’Ivoire. 2015. National Household Living Conditions in Côte d’Ivoire.
Côte d’Ivoire.

National Institute of Statistics. 2015. Enquête sur le niveau de vie des ménages en Côte d’Ivoire.

Ozaltin, E., K. Hill, and S. V. Subramanian. 2010. “Association of Maternal Stature with Offspring Mortality,
Underweight, and Stunting in Low- to Middle-Income Countries.” JAMA 303 (15): 1507–16.

Shekar, M., J. Kakietek, J. D. Eberwein, and D. Walters. 2017. An Investment Framework for Nutrition: Reaching
the Global Targets for Stunting, Anemia, Breastfeeding, and Wasting. Directions in Development. Washington, DC:
World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1010-7. https://tinyurl.com/InvestmentFrameworkNutrition

UN DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2015. World Population Prospects, the
2015 Revision. https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2016. Human Development Report 2016. New York, NY:
UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2016_human_development_report.pdf

UNICEF, WHO, and World Bank (United Nations Children’s Fund, World Health Organization and World
Bank). 2015. Joint Malnutrition Estimates. Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition, http://www.
who.int/growthdb/estimates2014/en/

WHO (World Health Organization). 2010. Nutrition Landscape Information System – Country Profile Indica-
tors: Interpretation Guide.
http://www.who.int/nutrition/nlis_interpretationguide_isbn9789241599955/en/

World Bank, World Development Indicators. 2015. Africa region average for 2015

World Bank. 2017. World Development Indicators (database), World Bank, Washington, DC (accessed May 1,
2017), http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators

World Bank Group. 2016. Côte d’Ivoire Economic Update. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/809921468000024657/pdf/102021-v1-FRENCH-WP-PUBLIC-Box394824B.pdf




68 	                                                                                                      in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                       Stunting Reduction 
CHAPTER 5


                    ETHIOPIA: An Investment Framework for Nutrition
                                                                                                                             Benefits of Investing in Nutrition
    Key Messages
     •	      Thirty-eight percent of children in Ethiopia are stunted.
             Those most affected live in northern regions and in the
             poorest households. Over the past 15 years, those in the
                                                                                                                                     1.6 MILLION
             highest wealth quintiles experienced the fastest rates of                                                        cases of stunting prevented
             declines in stunting.                                                                                                      in 2025
     •	      Scaling up a package of high-impact nutrition-specific
             interventions in Ethiopia to address global nutrition
             targets would require an additional $220 million per year
             for 10 years and would provide enormous benefits (see                                                                     130,000
             panel on right). These investments are over and above                                                          child deaths prevented in 2025
             those needed for improving water and sanitation, and for
             addressing issues around women’s empowerment and
             food security.

     •	      This investment would require additional financing
             equivalent to a 15 percent increase in current government
                                                                                                                                     14.4 MILLION
             health expenditures and could be financed from a                                                                     case-years of anemia
             combination of domestic budgets, official development                                                            in women prevented in 2025
             assistance (ODA), and innovative financing sources such
             as the Power of Nutrition.1

     •	      The economic benefits generated over the productive
             lives of beneficiaries would be enormous: $28 billion                                                                    1.7 MILLION
             for stunting, $4 billion for anemia, $12 billion for
                                                                                                                              additional babies exclusively
             breastfeeding, and $3 billion for the treatment of severe
             wasting.                                                                                                                   breastfed
     •	      Returns on every dollar invested in this set of
             interventions range from $10 for wasting to $18 for
             anemia, $21 for stunting, and $66 for investing in exclusive
             breastfeeding.                                                                                                         2.7 MILLION
     •	      To finance the nutrition scale-up, two lower-cost
                                                                                                                           cases of severe wasting treated
             scale-up scenarios are estimated to require between
             $100 and $140 million per year over the next 10 years.
             In an environment of constrained resources, starting
             with one of these two scenarios would be a strong first                                                                   $10-$66
             investment, but it would need to be followed by increased
             investments to contribute to meeting the global nutrition
                                                                                                                            return for every dollar invested
             targets and the Government of Ethiopia’s pledge to end
             child undernutrition by 2030 as laid out in the Segota
             Declaration.
                                                                                                                                     $28 BILLION
                                                                                                                              generated from investments
                                                                                                                                  to reduce stunting*
*The economic benefits are calculated over the productive lives of the children benefiting from the interventions that prevent stunting.



CHAPTER 5 Ethiopia: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                        69
Investment Case for Nutrition
Ensuring optimum nutrition—particularly during the 1,000-day period from pregnancy to a child’s second
birthday—can alter an individual’s development trajectory and maximize her or his productive potential.
Chronic malnutrition has important lifelong consequences for health and cognitive development. Losses to
cognitive development in early childhood resulting from chronic malnutrition are irreversible. Being stunted
(low height-for-age) in early childhood is associated with a delayed start at school, reduced schooling attain-
ment and substantially decreased adult incomes at both the individual and country level (Daniels and Adair
2004; Fink et al. 2016; Hoddinott et al. 2008; Martorell et al. 2010). These consequences add up to overall GDP
losses of 4 to 11 percent in Africa and Asia (Horton and Steckel 2013). Importantly, chronic undernutrition
can be transmitted through an inter-generational cycle, where malnourished mothers are more likely to have
stunted children (Aguayo et al. 2016; Ozaltin et al. 2010).

Investments in nutrition are highly cost-effective and among the best value-for-money development actions
(Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). An Investment Framework for Nutrition developed
by the World Bank in partnership with R4D, 1000 Days, and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation estimated
high returns on every dollar invested in nutrition: from $4 in returns for treating acute malnutrition (wasting)
to $11 for preventing stunting, $12 for the treatment and prevention of anemia, and $35 for increasing the prev-
alence of exclusive breastfeeding (Shekar et al. 2017). Not only do investments in nutrition produce substantial
economic benefits, but they also lay the groundwork for the success of investments in other sectors.

Investments in the early years including early life nutrition, early learning and stimulation, and nurturing care
and protection from stress ensure that all children reach their human potential and contribute to the economic
growth of their nation. The analysis presented below focuses on high-impact nutrition-specific interventions
with strong evidence of efficacy in reducing malnutrition, and estimates the costs, impact, and economic bene-
fits of scaling up these interventions in Ethiopia.



Country Context
Ethiopia is the second-most populous country in Sub-Saharan Africa, with a population of almost 100 million
and a population growth rate of 2.5 percent. Ethiopia has a young population, with approximately 15 percent of
the country under age five (UN DESA 2015).

More than 80 percent of the population resides in rural areas, and agriculture accounts for 77 percent of employ-
ment in Ethiopia. Ethiopia’s economy is among the fastest growing in the world, despite slowed growth in
2015–2016 due to the recent drought. The Government of Ethiopia is implementing its National Second Growth
and Transformation Plan (GTP II) for the period 2015/16 – 2019/20, outlining the path for Ethiopia to become a
lower-middle-income country by 2025, with a focus on sustained economic growth, job creation, promotion of
women and youth empowerment, and human development (World Bank 2016).

Ethiopia has achieved substantial progress in economic, social, and human development over the past decade.
Extreme poverty incidence has fallen dramatically within less than two decades (US$1.90 PPP poverty line),
from 60.5 percent in 1996 to 33 percent in 2011, driven by improvements in economic growth and provision of
safety nets and basic services (World Bank 2016). Additionally total fertility rate has fallen dramatically from 7.0
in the mid-1990’s to the current 4.3, which is below the average for Sub-Saharan Africa (4.9). With agriculture
underlying most livelihoods, the population is highly vulnerable to weather shocks and food insecurity, and
malnutrition remains high (MOFED 2011).




70 	                                                                                                  in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                   Stunting Reduction 
       Nutritional Status in Ethiopia
       Persistently high rates of undernutrition remain a serious human development challenge in Ethiopia. More
       than one-in-three children (38.4 percent) under five years of age are stunted and 10 percent are wasted (low
       weight-for-height) (EDHS 2016). Since 2000, stunting prevalence has declined but remains of high public health
       significance according to WHO standards. Furthermore, Ethiopia is among the 10 countries globally with the
       largest numbers of children under five who suffer from acute malnutrition (wasting) (Sanchez-Montero et al.
       2010). Prevalence of wasting has slowly declined, with a slight increase documented between 2014 and 2016,
       likely due to the recent drought (Figure 5.1).


      Figure 5.1: Trends in Undernutrition in Ethiopia, 2000–2016                        Figure 5.2: Disparities in Stunting by Wealth Quintile, 2000–2016
                               70
                             70                                                                                            70
                                    57.4
 AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                                                                                            AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE
                               6057.4                                                                                   70
                       (%)




                                                                                                                  (%)
               UNDER FIVE




                                                                                                          UNDER FIVE
                             60                  50.7                                                                      60
 STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                                                                                            STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)
                                               50.7                                                                     60
            PREVALENCE




                                                                                                       PREVALENCE
                               50                         44.2
                                                        44.2         40.4                                                  50
                             50                                    40.4           38.4                                  50
                               40                                               38.4                                       40
                             40                                                                                         40
      CHILDREN




                                                                                                 CHILDREN
                               30                26.6                                                                      30
                                               26.6                               23                                    30
   STUNTING




                                                                                              STUNTING
                             30                                                 23
                                                          16.6                                                             20
                               20                       16.6                                                            20
                             20                                                                                            10
AMONG




                                                                                           AMONG
                                10                                                                                      10
                             10                  12.3                                                                       0
                                                          10.1        8.7          9.9                                   0
                                0              12.3     10.1                     9.9
                             0                                     8.7                                                            2000   2005         2011        2014        2016
                                   2000          2005     2011       2014         2016                                          2000   2005         2011        2014        2016
                                 2000          2005     2011       2014         2016

                                             Stuntin      W stin              An mi                                       Poor st Quintil     Rich st quintil              N tion l
                                           Stuntin       W stin             An mi                                       Poor st Quintil     Rich st quintil              N tion l
       Source for Figures 5.1 and 5.2: EDHS 2016.




       National estimates mask geographic and socioeconomic disparities in stunting prevalence. There continue to
       be significant differences in stunting prevalence among children in poorer and wealthier households. Stunt-
       ing declined at a faster rate among children living in households in the top wealth quintile when compared to
       those in the bottom quintile (Figure 5.2). Nevertheless, even in the richest households, stunting still remains
       high (27 percent), underscoring the fact that rising income alone are insufficient to eliminate malnutrition.

       The highest stunting prevalence rates are concentrated in the northern regions of the country, however much
       of the country carries a high burden in terms of absolute number of children stunted (Figure 5.3). Four regions
       have stunting prevalence of over 40 percent, and as many as half of children under five years of age were
       stunted in the Amhara region. Given the regional variations in stunting prevalence, it would be important to
       understand the key drivers of undernutrition in these highest prevalence regions, and to design targeted inter-
       ventions to address them.




      CHAPTER 5 Ethiopia: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                 71
        Figure 5.3: Number of Stunted Children and Stunting Prevalence by Region,
                                                                     TIGRAY                                                                                              TIGRAY

r
the
                                                                                    AFAR                                                                                            AFAR
ries.
                                  BENSHANGUL                         AMHARA                                                           BENSHANGUL                      AMHARA

                                                                                                        DIRE DAWA                                                                                     DIRE DAWA

                                       ADDIS                                                                   HARARI                     ADDIS                                                              HARARI
                                       ABABA                                                                                              ABABA

                                                                             OROMIYA                                                                                          OROMIYA
                                  GAMBELA                                                          SOMALI                             GAMBELA                                                  SOMALI
                                                              SNNP                                                                                           SNNP




                                                                                                                                                                                  1,951,121
                                                                                                                                                                                  350,000
                                             Stunting Prevalence            ≥ 40%: Very high            20–29%: Medium
                                                                                                                                                     Total Children               115,000           Region Boundaries
                                             By Region (%)                  30–39%: High                <20%: Low                                    Stunted By Region            75,000
                                                                                                                                                                                  25,000
                                                                                    Region Boundaries                                                                             11,612

        Data source: EDHS 2016. IBRD 42913 and IBRD 42912 | MAY 2017 These maps were produced by the Cartography Unit of the World Bank Group. The boundaries, colors,
        denominations and any other information shown on these maps do not imply, on the part of the World Bank Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
        endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


        The prevalence of stunting in Ethiopia is higher than the average for the region (35.2 percent) (World Bank 2017).
        It is significantly higher than in African countries with similar income levels, such as Zimbabwe and Uganda,
        indicating that it is possible to achieve better nutrition outcomes at this income level (Figure 5.4).


        Figure 5.4: Prevalence of Stunting and GDP per capita: Ethiopia and Selected Low-Income Countries
                                  70


                                                       Burundi
                                  60


                                  50
        STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                                                                        Niger                  Mozambique                           ETHOPIA
                                                                                                                                                                           Chad
                                  40                         DRC                                                    Sierra Leone
                                                                                         Malawi
                                                                                                                                                Uganda
                                                                                                                                                                     Benin
                                  30                                                                           Guinea-Bissau
                                                                                                                                                  Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                       Togo
                                                                                                                                   The Gambia                                             Senegal
                                  20


                                  10


                                   0
                                       500             700            900             1100              1300             1500         1700          1900            2100          2300          2500

                                                                                                    GDP PER CAPITA (INTERNATIONAL $ PPP)
        EDHS 2016 and World Bank 2017.


        Wasting, also known as acute malnutrition, is typically classified as either severe or moderate. Wasting can
        result from food insecurity in resource-poor settings with insufficient dietary quality, quantity and diversity,
        suboptimal breastfeeding, and recurrent episodes of illness such as diarrhea. Wasting prevalence across Sub-Sa-
        haran Africa is second highest in the world, after South Asia, with 13 million children (7.8 percent) suffering
        from acute malnutrition. Ethiopia’s wasting prevalence is higher than the regional average at nearly 10 percent
        in 2016, and one of the highest in the world. Thus, treatment of acute malnutrition, as well as efforts to better
        understand and address the drivers of wasting, are evermore critical to reversing this trend.



        72 	                                                                                                                                                                            in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                                                     Stunting Reduction 
Micronutrient deficiencies, a form of malnutrition that relates to a deficiency in essential vitamins and minerals
needed for body functions, also known as hidden hunger, are highly pervasive in Ethiopia. Anemia, a condition
caused by inadequate dietary intake of iron and parasitic infections, among other causes, has cross-generational
impacts on health and the economy. Approximately one in four women of reproductive age in Ethiopia are ane-
mic (EDHS 2016), which affects not only women’s own health, but also contributes to the intergenerational cycle
of undernutrition and lower productivity. More than half of children aged 6 to 59 months are anemic, with five
regions having anemia prevalence of over 60 percent (EDHS 2016). Ensuring that women of reproductive age are
well nourished sets the stage for their children to achieve optimal nutrition and development.

Ethiopia has made significant investments in health services over the past two decades, and has seen impres-
sive progress in improving several health outcomes, including child mortality that has declined from 77 to
20 deaths per 1,000 live births between 2000 and 2016 (EDHS 2016). Despite these improvements, significant
challenges remain. The high prevalence of stunting in Ethiopia is associated with insufficient access to health
services, poor water and sanitation, and suboptimal care and feeding practices. Demand- and supply-side
barriers influence food consumption and diversity of diet. A recent analysis found that the cost of a nutrition-
ally balanced diet in Ethiopia exceeds households’ incomes, limiting access to the range of nutrients required
for growth, health and development during the early years and beyond (De Pee et al. 2010). Recognizing that
factors other than poverty and food insecurity put children at risk of chronic malnutrition, there is a need for
effective multi-sectoral strategies to address undernutrition across the country.

A recent report found that 28 percent of all child mortality and 16 percent of primary school repetitions in Ethio-
pia are associated with undernutrition (African Union Commission et al. 2014). Total annual costs associated with
undernutrition are estimated at 16.5 percent of the Ethiopian gross domestic product (GDP) (55.5 billion Ethiopian
birr) and are driven largely by lost working hours due to mortality associated with undernutrition and lower
productivity of adults engaged in manual labor, such as agricultural work (Government of Ethiopia 2013).



Political Commitment to Reduce Malnutrition
In 2015, the Government of Ethiopia, a member of the SUN movement since 2011, adopted the Seqota Declara-
tion to end child undernutrition by 2030 (Denys 2015). This declaration identifies nutrition targets and imple-
mentation guidelines, and mobilizes ministries across sectors to address the underlying causes of malnutrition,
with a focus on improved agriculture, food quality and micronutrient fortification. The commitment to nutri-
tion is also reflected in the inclusion of an indicator to measure stunting in the five-year National Growth and
Transformation Plan (GTP II 2016-2020) (Government of Ethiopia 2015).

The Government of Ethiopia enacted the National Nutrition Plan (NNP I 2008-2015) to reorient the nutrition
focus in the country from humanitarian emergencies to a more systematic and strategic preventive/promotive
approach. Building on the success of this initiative, in 2016 the government launched the NNP II (2016-2020)
with a focus on multi-sectoral actions to improve nutrition outcomes, particularly within the first 1,000 days,
including through agriculture, water, education, social protection, and health sector as well as a nutrition coor-
dination structure that extends from sub-woreda level to regional levels.



Current Financing for Nutrition
In 2015 in Ethiopia, the government and foreign donors spent a total of $71.8 million on interventions that con-
tribute to reaching the global targets for nutrition. Of that amount, $2.55 million came from the government and
$69.2 million came from ODA. This contribution from ODA included $23 million for stunting, $4.76 million for
anemia, $7.26 million for breastfeeding, and $38.2 million for wasting.2 These estimates reflect the current spend-
ing on nutrition; the following sections detail additional financing needed in order for Ethiopia to contribute to
reaching the global targets on nutrition.3




CHAPTER 5 Ethiopia: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                         73
Global Targets for Nutrition
Substantial improvements to the nutritional status of women and children can be realized if there is adequate
investment in a set of evidence-based nutrition-specific interventions that ensure optimum nutrition during
the critical 1,000 day window between the start of a woman’s pregnancy and the child’s second birthday (Black
et al. 2008, 2013). For women, these include interventions to prevent anemia before and during pregnancy, as
well as those aimed at improving protein energy intake during pregnancy. Interventions targeted at children
and their mothers aim to improve breastfeeding and complementary feeding practices, micronutrient status of
children, and to treat acute malnutrition in children.

In 2012—to rally the international community around improving nutrition—the 176 members of the World
Health Assembly endorsed the first-ever global nutrition targets, focusing on six areas: stunting, anemia, low
birthweight, childhood overweight, breastfeeding, and wasting. These targets aim to boost investments in
cost-effective interventions, spearhead better implementation practices, and catalyze progress toward reducing
malnutrition. The targets for stunting and wasting are enshrined within the United Nations’ Sustainable Devel-
opment Goal 2 (SDG 2), which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year 2030. The 2016 Global
Nutrition Report ranked each country’s progress in contributing toward achieving the global targets (Table 5.1)
(IFPRI 2016)4.

Table 5.1: Four Global Targets for Nutrition and Ethiopia’s Contribution Toward Meeting Them

                                                                                                   ETHIOPIA’S RANK              PREVALENCE              PROGRESS

                                              Reduce the number of stunted children
   1
                    STUNTING*                                                                              117/132                    38%
                                                       under five by 40%
        Stuntin


                                                 Reduce the number of women of
   2
                    ANEMIA                                                                                 37/185                     23%
                                              reproductive age with anemia by 50%
        An mi


                                           Increase the rate of exclusive breastfeeding 
   5
                    BREASTFEEDING                                                                          38/141                     58%
                                             in the first six months up to at least 50%
        Exclusiv
   br     stf din

                                             Reduce and maintain childhood wasting
   6
                    WASTING*                                                                               98/130                     10%
                                                      alnutrition) to less than 5%
                                              (acute m
        W stin



                             LEGEND:          Off course, no progress             Off course, some progress              On course, good progress

*Stunting and wasting are included within the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 2 (SDG 2), which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year
2030. Sources: Nutrition targets from WHO 2014; Rank and progress from IFPRI 2016; Prevalence data from EDHS 2016.




Coverage of key nutrition-specific interventions in Ethiopia is largely inadequate. Although coverage rates are
higher for some childhood interventions, they remain well below the levels necessary to advance progress in
reducing malnutrition among Ethiopian children. Table 5.2 and Figure 5.5 summarize the current coverage of
and delivery platforms available for nutrition-specific interventions in Ethiopia.




74 	                                                                                                                                       in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                        Stunting Reduction 
Table 5.2: Delivery Platforms For Nutrition-Specific Interventions In Ethiopia

 INTERVENTION                                                                                                                DELIVERY PLATFORM

 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation (iron and folic acid only)                                                       Health facility and community

 Complementary feeding education                                                                            Health facility, community, and communication campaigns

 Breastfeeding promotion                                                                                    Health facility, community, and communication campaigns

 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women                                                  Health facility, community, and social safety net programs

 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy                                                      Health facility, community, and food fortification

 Vitamin A supplementation                                                                                       Health facility, community, and food fortification

 Public provision of complementary foods                                                                     Health facility, community, and social safety net programs

 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition                                                                                   Health facility and community

 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women of reproductive age                                 School, community, health facility, and marketplace

 Staple food fortification                                                                                                         Marketplace

 Pro-breastfeeding social policies                                                                                             Government policies

 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns                                                                                           Media


Figure 5.5: Coverage of Key Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Ethiopia and Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                               Antenatal micronutrient
                                                                                   supplementation -
                                                                               (iron and folic acid only)
                                                     Pro-breastfeeding                                               Complementary
                                                       social policies                                              feeding education
                                                                              100



                                                                                    80



                                                                                         60

                                Staple food                                                                                                    Breastfeeding
                                fortiﬁcation                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                promotion

                                                                                                   20




          Iron and folic acid                                                                                                                           Balanced energy
   supplementation for non-pregnant                                                                                                                 protein supplementation
      women of reproductive age                                                                                                                       for pregnant women




                               Treatment of severe                                                                                      Intermittent presumptive
                                acute malnutrition                                                                                        treatment of malaria
                                                                                                                                              in pregnancy



                                                                 Public provision of                       Vitamin A
                                                                complementary foods                     supplementation

Note: Red shading represents Ethiopia and light blue shading represents average Sub-Saharan Africa coverage




CHAPTER 5 Ethiopia: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                75
Economic Benefits of Investing in Nutrition
There is a strong body of evidence that shows high economic returns to investing in nutrition (Alderman et al.
2016; Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). Scaling up these proven nutrition-specific
interventions can ensure that mothers are healthy and well-nourished and that they can provide optimal nutrition
to their children, that children realize their full physical and cognitive development potential, and that women’s
productivity is not hampered by illness, especially anemia (Figure 5.6).

Figure 5.6: How Reaching The Global Nutrition Targets Generates Economic Benefits

                                                                                                                                                Co nitive
                                                                                                                                                Development

                                                      STUNTING

                                                                                      Childr n’s H lth &                                        Le rnin &
                                                                                                                                                Educ tion l
                                                                                       Nutrition St tus                                         Att inment
                                                       WASTING
       Glob l Nutrition
       T r ts R ch d                                                                                                                            Adult
                                                                                                                                                Productivit

                                                    EASTFEE
                                                  BRE     EDING


                                                                                                                                                W    es


                                                        ANEMIA

                                                                                                                                                Econom
                                                                                       Wom n’s H lth &                                          (GDP)
                                                                                       Nutrition St tus


In Ethiopia, scaling-up the package nutrition-specific interventions will produce substantial economic ben-
efits over the productive lifetime of the affecte d women and children (Figure 5.7). Additional health system
cost-savings are also likely because many of these investments reduce the burden of childhood illnesses such as
diarrhea and pneumonia.


Figure 5.7: Investments in Ethiopia to Meet the Global Nutrition Targets Have Enormous Economic Returns
                                                      Total Economic                                                          $1 Invested
                                                     Beneﬁts (Billions)a                                                        Yieldsb

                                       STUNTING                $27.9                                                              $21
                                                                                                                      $
                                                               $10.7                                                             $66
                                                                                                         1
                              BREASTFEEDING                                                $
                                                                                                                          $

                                           ANEMIA               $3.5                           $                                  $18

                                         WASTING                 $2.9                                                             $10

a. Total economic benefits over 10 years for women and over the productive lives of children who benefit from these interventions , defined as the period between the age of
18 and a “retirement” age - the life expectancy or the age of 65, whichever is lower.
b. Benefit calculation assumes a 3 percent discount rate for both costs and benefits, and GDP growth rate of 3 percent.




76 	                                                                                                                                             in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                              Stunting Reduction 
Financing Needs, Impact, and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling Up Nutrition-Specific
Interventions
Using the methodology detailed in An Investment Framework for Nutrition this brief presents estimates of the
resources needed to scale up a package of 12 high-impact nutrition-specific interventions in Ethiopia to meet
the global nutrition targets for stunting, anemia, breastfeeding and wasting, and the estimated nutrition, health and
economic impact. An additional $220 million per year over 10 years is needed to scale up the package of key inter-
ventions (Table 5.3). The health and nutrition impact of this investment is shown in Table 5.4.

Among the set of proposed interventions, educating mothers about complementary feeding is the most effective
for stunting, averting more than half million cases of stunting and 12,000 child deaths over 10 years. Breastfeeding
promotion through counseling of mothers is projected to increase the number of infants exclusively breastfed by
1.65 million, prevent nearly 30,000 deaths, and cost $93 million over 10 years. Among these interventions, this is
the most cost-effective intervention for preventing child mortality, and costs $56 per child exclusively breastfed.
For preventing maternal anemia, staple food fortification proves to be most cost-effective, at a cost of $3.70 for
each case of anemia prevented in women. Over 10 years, staple food fortification will prevent 4.19 million cases of
anemia in women at a cost of $15.4 million.

Interventions to reduce stunting will require the most resources, accounting for about 76 percent of the total
amount required for scale-up. However, some of the stunting interventions will also have impacts for achieving
the targets for breastfeeding and anemia. Figure 5.8 represents the distribution of total cost across interventions
to address the four targets.


Figure 5.8: Ten Year Financing Needs For Scaling Up a Package of Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Ethiopia

                                                                 ANEMIA
                                                                Total 13%:



                                                                                                                 WASTING
                                                                                                                 Total: 17%


              STUNTING
              Total 76%:                                                                                        BREASTFEEDING
                                                                                                                   Total: 13%

                                                                                                                    TOTAL TEN-YEAR
                                                                                                              FINANCING NEEDS: $2.2 billion

Note: Some costs for anemia, breastfeeding, and stunting are shared across interventions. Costs for breastfeeding promotion (US $93 million) has been included in both the
total cost for the breastfeeding target and the total cost for the stunting target; cost of intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy (US $62.2 million) and
antenatal micronutrient supplementation (US $110.7 million) have been included in both the total cost for the anemia target and the total cost for the stunting target.




CHAPTER 5 Ethiopia: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                  77
Table 5.3: Estimated 10-Year Financing Needs and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling Up Nutrition-Specific Interventions, Ethiopia

                                                                                         TOTAL 10-YEAR                                                COST PER CASE
                                                                                                                      COST PER DEATH
                INTERVENTION (NUTRITION TARGET)                                        FINANCING NEEDS                                                 OF STUNTING
                                                                                                                      AVERTED (US $)
                                                                                            (US $M)                                                   AVERTED (US $)

                                                           For pregnant women and mothers of infants
 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation (stunting, anemia)                                      110.7                        10,491                          8,170
 Infant and young child nutrition counseling (complementary feeding
                                                                                                 235.1                         5,865                           411
 education and breastfeeding promotion combined) (stunting, breastfeeding)
 Complementary feeding education                                                                  142.1                        11,517                          254
 Breastfeeding promotion                                                                         93.0                          3,352                          7,671
 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women (stunting)                           210.0                        28,256                         45,537
 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy (anemia)                              62.2                         4,230                          1,965

                                                                    For infants and young children
 Vitamin A supplementation (stunting)                                                            48.5                          7,188                           384
 Prophylactic zinc supplementation (stunting)                                                    541.4                        33,852                          1,062
 Public provision of complementary food (stunting)                                               453.6                        57,743                          1,317
 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition (wasting)                                                366.7                         11,744                          n/a

                                                        For non-pregnant women and general population
 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women (anemia)                             90.5                                                          n/a
                                                                                                                              15,252
 Staple food fortification (anemia)                                                               15.4                                                         n/a
 Pro-breastfeeding social policies (breastfeeding)                                                6.2                           n/a                            n/a
 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns (breastfeeding)                                       33.3                          n/a                            n/a

                                                                          TOTAL:                2,173.7                      15,078                          1,037

Note: Financing needs and impacts assume a linear scale-up of interventions from current coverage level to 90 percent over five years, then maintained at 90 percent for an
additional five years. Unit costs for each intervention were drawn from available unit costs from neighboring countries, global costs, or estimates available in the literature.
The estimated financing needs include an additional 12 percent (11 percent for pro-breastfeeding social policies and promotion campaigns) to account for monitoring,
evaluation, capacity and policy development that may be necessary to reach full scale-up of the interventions. The Lives Saved Tool (LiST) was used to estimate the impact
of interventions that target pregnant women and children. The impact of interventions that target the general population or non-pregnant women were estimated using a
Microsoft Excel model. It should be noted that the LiST model does not capture potential synergies between specific interventions (e.g. the fact that the impact of behavior
change communication interventions may be higher in populations that have access to affordable and diversified foods or in populations with higher levels of educational
attainment). Therefore, it is possible that the impact estimates generated using LiST in fact underestimate the true impact of the interventions in some contexts.

n.a. = not applicable.




Two Alternative Investment Packages
In an environment of constrained resources in which Ethiopia may not be able to raise $220 over the next 10
years, two alternative investment packages are laid out for consideration.

The Priority Package: The first—the “priority package”—includes interventions that are the most cost- effec-
tive, that is, have the lowest cost per health outcome (e.g., case of stunting averted), and that have well-es-
tablished global policy guidelines and delivery platforms. Based on those two criteria, the priority package
includes:antenatal micronutrient supplementation, infant and young child nutrition counseling, intermittent
presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic regions;vitamin A supplementation;
treatment of severe acute malnutrition intermittent weekly iron and folic acid supplementation for girls 15–19
years of age attending school; and) fortification of wheat and maize flour with iron and folic acid. These



78 	                                                                                                                                             in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                              Stunting Reduction 
Table 5.4: Benefits and Cost-Effectiveness By Investment Package, Ethiopia

         GLOBAL                                                             PRIORITY                     CATALYZING                 FULL PACKAGE:
                                           BENEFIT                                                                               All interventions needed
         TARGET                                                             PACKAGE                   PROGRESS PACKAGE                to meet targets
                                                                       $99 million/year in                   $138 million/year    $220 million/year in
                                                                         financing need                       financing need        financing need

                                Cases of stunting reduced by
        STUNTING                                                             0.7 million                         1.0 million            1.6 million
                                      2025 (vs 2015)a


                                 Cases of anemia in women
         ANEMIA                                                              2.7 million                        10.0 million           14.4 million
                                    prevented by 2025


                                       Additional babies
    BREASTFEEDING                                                            1.7 million                         1.7 million            1.7 million
                                    breastfed over 10 years

                                    Child deaths averted
                                                                              97,000                             107,000                130,000
                                        over 10 years
      ALL TARGETS                   Cost per death averted                     10,247                              12,897                16.692
                                       Cost per case of
                                                                                630                                 840                   1,038
                                       stunting averted

a. Total impact of proposed intervention package combined with other health and poverty reduction efforts.




interventions would be scaled up to full program coverage in the first five years and maintained at full cover-
age levels for the last five years. This priority package would require an estimated $994 million over 10 years,
or $99.4 million annually (see Table 5.4).

During the 10 years of scale-up, this package would prevent 700,000 cases of stunting and avert 97,000 deaths
in children under five years of age. It would also prevent 2.7 million case-years of anemia in women and would
result in 1.7 million additional children under 6 months of age being exclusively breastfed.

The Catalyzing Progress Package: The second alternative—“catalyzing progress”—includes scale-up of all
interventions in the priority package, plus a phased approach to scaling up public provision of complementary
foods, balanced energy protein supplementation, prophylactic zinc supplementation, and weekly iron-fo-
lic acid supplementation for women outside of schools. It is assumed that, for the latter set of interventions,
during the first five years, emphasis will be placed on establishing global guidelines and on operational
research to develop effective delivery platforms, or to develop less expensive products or more cost-effective
technologies. Costs are approximated as the cost of scaling up this set of interventions from 0 to 10 percent
coverage only in the first five years. In the subsequent five years, it is assumed that the coverage expansion of
those interventions will accelerate and reach 60 percent by 2025. This package would require $138 million per
year, a total of $1.38 billion over 10 years (Table 5.4). It would prevent 107,000 deaths and 1 million cases of
stunting among children under five, increase the number of exclusively breastfed children under six months of
age by 1.7 million, and prevent 10 million case-years of anemia in women.

In comparing the relative cost-effectiveness of the three investment packages, the two alternative packages
are more cost-effective in preventing deaths and stunting. However, neither is as effective as the full package
in making progress toward achieving the stunting, wasting, and anemia targets. The priority and catalyzing



CHAPTER 5 Ethiopia: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                               79
progress packages will prevent 97,000 and 107,000 thousand deaths respectively, compared with 130,000 deaths
prevented with the full package over 10 years. Under the full package scenario, 1.6 million cases of childhood
stunting will be prevented, compared with 1 million cases under the catalyzing progress scenario and 700,000
cases under the priority package scenario. Furthermore, there would be nearly 11.7 million and 4.4 million
more cases of anemia in women under the priority package and catalyzing progress package, respectively.



A Call to Action
As the world stands at the cusp of the new Sustainable Development Goals, there is an unprecedented oppor-
tunity to save children’s lives, build future human capital and cognitive development, and drive faster eco-
nomic growth. Scaling-up key nutrition interventions during the critical 1,000 day window of early childhood
will pay lifelong dividends, translating to healthier societies and more robust economies. If this window is
missed, it is missed for life.

The additional financing required to reach the global nutrition targets will require coordinated efforts by
all stakeholders and a supportive policy environment. To achieve these targets would require an increase in
the funding allocated to nutrition by $220 million annually, roughly an equivalent to a 15 percent increase in
current general government expenditure on health.5 These investments are over and above those needed for
improving water and sanitation, and issues around women’s empowerment, and food security. Although this
level of domestic financing is ambitious, Ethiopia is already moving in this direction. In the long term, nutrition
interventions have significant potential to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity.

Accelerating the reduction of stunting in Ethiopia will be essential for maximizing the return on investments
in early childhood development, in education, and more broadly in policies aimed at fostering and enhancing
human capital accumulation and job creation. Investing in the early years is even more critical because the
Africa region is entering a demographic transition with an expected increase in the working age population
from 54 percent in 2010 to 64 percent in 2090. The scale-up of the key nutrition-specific interventions to reduce
stunting is estimated to generate considerable returns in economic benefits over the productive lives of ben-
eficiaries, and is a necessary condition to build human capital through investments in the early years and to
harness the potential benefits of the demographic dividend.



Endnotes
1
 Information about the Power of Nutrition initiative is available at https://ciff.org/grant-portfolio/
the-power-of-nutrition/.

2
 Note that because some funded interventions contribute to more than one target, total funding across the four
targets is less than the total funding for each target added together.

3
 Current financing by source is from Results for Development Institute and can be found at http:/www.inves-
tinnutrition.org/.

4
 Two of the global nutrition targets—those for low birthweight and for child overweight—were not included
in the analyses because of insufficient data on the prevalence of low birthweight and a lack of consensus on
effective interventions to reach the target for child overweight.

5
 WHO National Health accounts database indicates general government health expenditure in Ethiopia was
US$1,517 million in 2014. At that level, this will need to be increased by 15 percent to accommodate the US$220
million per year required for scale-up of the 12 nutrition-specific interventions.




80 	                                                                                                in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
References
African Union Commission, NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency, UN Economic Commission for
Africa, and UN World Food Programme. 2014. The Cost of Hunger in Africa: Social and Economic Impact of Child
Undernutrition in Egypt, Ethiopia, Swaziland, and Uganda. Addis Ababa: UNECA.

Aguayo, V. M., R. Nair, N. Badgaiyan, and V. Krishna. 2016. “Determinants of Stunting and Poor Linear Growth
in Children under 2 Years of Age in India: An In-Depth Analysis of Maharashtra’s Comprehensive Nutrition
Survey.” Maternal & Child Nutrition 12 (Suppl. 1): 121–40.

Alderman , H ., J. R. Behrman , and C. Puett . 2016 . “ Big Numbers about Small Children: Estimating the Eco-
nomic Benefits of Addressing Undernutrition .” World Bank Research Observer 31 ( 2 ).

Black, R. E., L. H. Allen, Z. A. Bhutta, L. E. Caulfield, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, C. Mathers, J. Rivera, and the
Maternal and Child Undernutrition Study Group. 2008. “Maternal and Child Undernutrition: Global and
Regional Exposures and Health Consequences.” The Lancet 371 (9608): 243–60.

Black, R. E., C. G .Victora, S. P. Walker, Z. A. Bhutta, P. Christian, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, S. Grantham-Mcgregor,
J. Katz, R. Martorell, R. Uauy, and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. “Maternal and Child
Undernutrition and Overweight in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries.” The Lancet 382: 427–51.

Copenhagen Consensus Center. 2015. Smart Development Goals: The Post-2015 Consensus. http://www.copenha-
genconsensus.com/sites/default/files/outcomedocument_col.pdf

Daniels, M. C. and L. Adair. 2004. “Growth in Young Filipino Children Predicts Schooling Trajectories through
High School.” Journal of Nutrition 134: 1439–46.

Denys, C. 2015. “Financing for Development: Mobilizing Leadership and Investment in Nutrition.” Site and Life
29 (2): 90–94. http://www.sightandlife.org/fileadmin/data/Magazine/2015/29_2_2015/20_financing_for_
development_mobilizing_leadership_and_investment_in_nutrition.pdf

De Pee, S., T. van den Briel, J. van Hees, and M. Bloem. 2010. “Introducing New and Improved Food Products
for Better Nutrition.” In Revolution: From Food Aid to Food Assistance. Rome: World Food Programme.

EDHS (Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey). 2016. Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey: Key Indicators
Report. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, and Rockville, Maryland, USA: Central Statistical Agency and the DHS Pro-
gram, ICF. https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/PR81/PR81.pdf

Fink, G., E. Peet, G. Danaei, K. Andrews, D. C. McCoy, C. R. Sudfeld, M. C. Smith Fawzi, M. Ezzati, and W. W.
Fawzi. 2016. “Schooling and Wage Income Losses Due to Early-Childhood Growth Faltering in Developing
Countries: National, Regional, and Global Estimates.” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 104 (1): 104–12.

Government of Ethiopia. 2013. The Cost of Hunger in Ethiopia: Implications for the Growth and Transformation of
Ethiopia. Summary Report. Addis Ababa: Government of Ethiopia. https://www.unicef.org/ethiopia/FINAL_
Ethiopia_-_COHA_Summary_Report_June_20_24pg_72dpi.pdf

Government of Ethiopia. 2015. The Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II) 2015/16-2019/20. Addis
Ababa: National Planning Commission. https://www.africaintelligence.com/c/dc/LOI/1415/GTP-II.pdf

Hoddinott, J., H. Alderman, J. R. Behrman, L. Haddad, and S. Horton. 2013. “The Economic Rationale for
Investing in Stunting Reduction.” Maternal and Child Nutrition 9 (Suppl. 2): 69–82.

Hoddinott, J., J. A. Maluccio, J. R. Behman, R. Flores, and R. Martorell. 2008. “Effect of a Nutrition Intervention
during Early Childhood on Economic Productivity in Guatemalan Adults.” Lancet 371 (9610): 411–16.




CHAPTER 5 Ethiopia: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                          81
Horton, S. and R. Steckel. 2013. “Malnutrition: Global Economic Losses Attributable to Malnutrition 1900–2000
and Projections to 2050.” In The Economics of Human Challenges, edited by B. Lomborg, 247–72. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.

IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2016 . Global Nutrition Report 2016: From Promise to Impact –
Ending Malnutrition by 2030. Washington, DC: IFPRI.

Martorell, R., B. L. Horta, L. S. Adair, A. D. Stein, L. Richter, C. H. D. Fall, S. K. Bhargava, S. K. Dey Biswas,
L. Perez, F. C. Barros, C. G. Victora, and Consortium on Health Orientated Research in Transitional Societies
Group. 2010. “Weight Gain in the First Two Years of Life Is an Important Predictor of Schooling Outcomes in
Pooled Analyses from Five Birth Cohorts from Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” Journal of Nutrition 140:
348–54.

MOFED (Ministry of Finance and Economic Development). 2011. Growth and Transformation Plan for Ethiopia
(GTP): 2010/11–2014/15. Draft. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. http://
www.ethiopians.com/Ethiopia_GTP_2015.pdf

Ozaltin, E., K. Hill, and S. V. Subramanian. 2010. “Association of Maternal Stature with Offspring Mortality,
Underweight, and Stunting in Low- to Middle-Income Countries.” JAMA 303 (15): 1507–16.

Sanchez-Montero, M., N. Salse Ubach, and M. Sullivan 2010. Undernutrition: What Works? A Review of Policy and
Practice. Madrid: ACF International Network and Tripode.

Shekar, M., J. Kakietek, J. D. Eberwein, and D. Walters. 2017. An Investment Framework for
Nutrition: Reaching the Global Targets for Stunting, Anemia, Breastfeeding, and Wasting. Directions in
Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1010-7. https://tinyurl.com/
InvestmentFrameworkNutrition

UN DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2015. World Population
Prospects, the 2015 Revision. https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/

World Bank. 2016. 5th Ethiopia Economic Update: Why so Idle? Wages and Employment in a Crowded Labor Mar-
ket. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/463121480932724605/
pdf/110730-WP-P155867-PUBLIC-WBEEUdraftforlaunchdecemberfull.pdf

———. 2017. World Development Indicators (database), World Bank , Washington, DC (accessed May 1, 2017),
http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.

WHO (World Health Organziation). 2014. Comprehensive Implementation Plan on Maternal, Infant and Young Child
Nutrition. Geneva: WHO. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/113048/1/WHO_NMH_NHD_14.1_eng.
pdf?ua=1




82 	                                                                                                  in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                   Stunting Reduction 
CHAPTER 6




               NIGER: An Investment Framework for Nutrition
                                                                                                                                 Benefits of Investing in Nutrition
   Key Messages
   •	      More than 40 percent of children in Niger are chronically
           malnourished (stunted), with the highest prevalences in Diffa,                                                                  436,000
           Zinder, and Maradi regions. In addition, nearly half (46 percent) of
           women of reproductive age in Niger are anemic.                                                                         cases of stunting prevented
                                                                                                                                            in 2025
   •	      To address persistent malnutrition, the Nigerien government
           launched an initiative called the 3N Program, Nigeriens Nourish
           Nigeriens, to promote sustainable national food security and
           agricultural development.                                                                                                         86,000
   •	      Scaling up a package of high-impact nutrition-specific                                                                     child deaths prevented
           interventions in Niger to contribute to reaching the global                                                                        in 2025
           nutrition targets would require an additional $77.1 million per
           year over 10 years and would provide enormous benefits (see
           panel on right). These investments are over and above those
           needed for improving water and sanitation and for addressing                                                                  7.5 MILLION
           issues around women’s empowerment and food security.
                                                                                                                                      case-years of anemia
   •	      This investment would require additional financing equivalent to                                                       in women prevented in 2025
           40 percent of the general government expenditure on health and
           could be financed from a combination of domestic budgets, official
           development assistance (ODA), and innovative financing sources
           such as the Power of Nutrition.1                                                                                              1.2 MILLION
   •	      The economic benefits generated over the productive lives of                                                           babies exclusively breastfed
           beneficiaries would be enormous: $4.1 billion for stunting, $512
           million for anemia, $3 billion for breastfeeding, and $1.5 billion for
           the treatment of severe wasting.

   •	      Returns on every dollar invested in reaching the global nutrition
                                                                                                                                        1.4 MILLION
           targets range from $7 in returns for anemia to $10 for stunting, $11                                                cases of severe wasting treated
           for wasting, and $48 for investing in exclusive breastfeeding.

   •	      To finance the nutrition scale-up, two lower-cost scale-up
           scenarios are estimated to require between $29.7 and $46.6 million
           per year over the next 10 years. In an environment of constrained                                                                $7–$48
           resources in Niger, starting with one of these two scenarios would                                                   return for every dollar invested
           be a strong first investment, but it would need to be followed by
           increased investments, along with investments in strengthening
           the national platforms for service delivery, to contribute to
           meeting the global nutrition targets.                                                                                         $4.1 BILLION
                                                                                                                                  generated from investments
                                                                                                                                      to reduce stunting*


*The economic benefits are calculated over the productive lives of the children benefiting from the interventions that prevent stunting.




CHAPTER 6 Niger: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                          83
Investment Case for Nutrition
Ensuring optimum nutrition—particularly during the 1,000-day period from pregnancy to a child’s second
birthday—can alter an individual’s development trajectory and maximize her or his productive potential.
Chronic malnutrition has important lifelong consequences for health and cognitive development. Losses to
cognitive development in early childhood resulting from chronic malnutrition are irreversible. Being stunted
(low height-for-age) in early childhood is associated with a delayed start at school, reduced schooling attain-
ment, and substantially decreased adult incomes at both the individual and country level (Daniels and Adair
2004; Fink et al. 2016; Hoddinott et al. 2008; Martorell et al. 2010). These consequences add up to overall GDP
losses of 4 to 11 percent in Africa and Asia (Horton and Steckel 2013). Importantly, chronic undernutrition
can be transmitted through an inter-generational cycle, where malnourished mothers are more likely to have
stunted children (Aguayo et al. 2016; Ozaltin et al. 2010).

Investments in nutrition are highly cost-effective and among the best value-for-money development actions
(Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). An Investment Framework for Nutrition developed
by the World Bank in partnership with R4D, 1000 Days, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation estimated
high returns on every dollar invested in nutrition: from $4 in returns for treating acute malnutrition (wasting)
to $11 for preventing stunting, $12 for the treatment and prevention of anemia, and $35 for increasing the prev-
alence of exclusive breastfeeding (Shekar et al. 2017). Not only do investments in nutrition produce substantial
economic benefits, but they also lay the groundwork for the success of investments in other sectors.

Investments in the early years—including early life nutrition, early learning and stimulation, and nurturing
care and protection from stress—ensure that all children reach their human potential and contribute to the
economic growth of their nation. The analysis presented below focuses on high-impact nutrition-specific inter-
ventions with strong evidence of efficacy in reducing stunting, and it estimates the costs, impact, and economic
benefits of scaling up these interventions in Niger.



Country Context
The Republic of Niger is a landlocked country in Sub-Saharan Africa with a population of nearly 20 million
people. Niger has one of the lowest GDP rates per capita on the continent, coupled with one of the highest pop-
ulation growth rates globally (4 percent) (UN DESA 2015). The absolute number of individuals living in poverty
in Niger continues to increase because of the country’s high population growth rate, which is highest among the
poorest households (World Bank 2014). Niger’s population is young—approximately 20 percent of the country
are under age five (UN DESA 2015). Low human capital remains one of the key challenges in reducing poverty
and achieving greater socioeconomic equity.

Over 80 percent of the population reside in rural areas (World Bank 2016). Only 4 percent of the country is
arable, yet the agriculture sector represents the country’s primary source of economic activity, contributing an
average of 25 percent of the national GDP (Geesing and Djibo 2001; World Bank 2013). Between 2005 and 2011,
income disparities between rural and urban households grew as poverty rates fell more rapidly in urban centers
than in rural areas, as measured by household consumption and living conditions (World Bank 2014). During
this same time period, the poverty headcount for the poorest populations decreased by four percentage points,
reflecting the fact that farming households are highly sensitive to fluctuations in agricultural outputs (World
Bank 2014).

The Human Development Index (HDI) showed Niger ranked 187 out of 188 countries in 2016, with a value of
0.353 (UNDP 2016), exacerbating vulnerability and compounding a poor household’s ability to meet basic needs.
Child malnutrition, an underlying cause of up to 45 percent of deaths of children under age five (Black et al.
2013), has emerged as one of the key markers of poverty and vulnerability as well as one of the key challenges to
ensuring optimal accumulation of human capital in the country.




84 	                                                                                               in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                Stunting Reduction 
                            Nutritional Status in Niger
                            Persistently high rates of undernutrition remain a serious human development challenge in Niger. More than
                            40 percent of children under age five are stunted and 18 percent are wasted (low weight-for-height) (NDHS
                            2012). Between 1992 and 2006, stunting prevalence increased, but this was followed by a decline from 54.8
                            percent in 2006 to 43.9 percent in 2012 (NDHS 2006). Despite this recent downward trend, Niger still ranks
                            122nd out of 132 countries assessed for highest stunting prevalence in children under age five (IFPRI 2016). At
                            the same time, wasting prevalence increased sharply, from 12.4 percent in 2006 to 18 percent in 2012 (Figure 6.1)
                            (NDHS 2006, 2012) suggesting that acute forms of malnutrition are on the rise.

                            Although levels of chronic malnutrition show some socioeconomic variation, stunting prevalence is perva-
                            sive across all wealth quintiles (Figure 6.2). In the wealthiest households, stunting is a significant concern
                            (34.5 percent), compared with 46.7 percent in the poorest quintile, underscoring the fact that much of Niger
                            faces extreme poverty and that wealth status may be relative and insufficient to eliminate malnutrition by
                            itself. Among children from rural households, 46 percent are stunted compared with 30 percent of their urban
                            counterparts.


                              Figure 6.1: Trends in Undernutrition in Niger, 1992–2012                           Figure 6.2: Disparities in Stunting by Wealth Quintile, 1992–2012

                                  60                    60                             54.8 54.8                                                  80                       80


                                                                                                                                             AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE
                                                                                                                 AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE

                                                                                                                                              STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)
                            AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                                                                                                                  STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)


                                                                         46.5 46.5
AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                                                        50
                                                         45.2   45.2
                                  50                                                                 43.9 43.9                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                  60
                                 PREVALENCE (%)




                                                        40
     PREVALENCE (%)




                                  40
                                                                                                                                                    40                     40
                                  30                    30               25.5 25.5
                                                         18.5   18.5                                       18
                                                                                                     18                                                                    20
                                  20                    20                                    12.4                                                20
                                                                                       12.4

                                    10                  10
                                                                                                                                                        0                   0
                                                                                                                                                                          1992   1992       1998   1998       2006 2006   2012   2012
                                        0                0
                                                         1992   1992 1998     1998     2006 2006 2012     2012
                                                                                                                                                                               Poor
                                                                                                                                                                         Poor st quintil              Rich
                                                                                                                                                                                     st quintil Rich st     st quintil
                                                                                                                                                                                                        quintil            N tionNl tion l
                                                                             Stuntin
                                                                       Stuntin          W stinW stin


                             Source for Figures 6.1 and 6.2: NDHS, 1992, 1998, 2006 and 2012.




                            The highest stunting prevalence is concentrated in the Diffa, Maradi, and Zinder regions, where stunting preva-
                            lence there is estimated to be over 50 percent (Figure 6.3). This is in stark contrast to the capital, Niamey, which
                            has the lowest prevalence of stunting, at 20 percent (NDHS 2012). Given the regional variation in stunting
                            prevalence and burden, targeted interventions are needed to address the key drivers of undernutrition in these
                            highest prevalence and burden regions. Furthermore, Maradi and Zinder regions carry the greatest absolute
                            burden of children who are stunted. While Diffa region’s prevalence is among the highest, the absolute burden
                            is lower, particularly as compared to the Tahoua region. Given the data on regional variations in stunting prev-
                            alence in Niger, it would be important to understand the key drivers of undernutrition in these highest preva-
                            lence and burden regions and to design targeted interventions to address them.




                            CHAPTER 6 Niger: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                                                 85
                                                                    Burundi
                                   60
                                                                                                                        Madagascar               RWANDA

 STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)
                                   50                                              Niger           Mozambique
                                                         Ethiopia                  Chad
                                   40                                   DRC                                                                                                                               Tanzania
                              Malawi        Sierra Leone
Figure 6.3: Number of Stunted Children and Stunting Prevalence by Region,Uganda Niger 2012
      30
                                     Guinea
                                                                Zimbabwe                   Senegal
      20

                                    10

                                       0                                                           AGADEZ                                                                                     AGADEZ
                                        500                                             1000                                1500                               2000                              2500                           3000

                                                                                                                        GDP PER CAPITA (INTERNATIONAL $ PPP)
                                                                     TAHOUA                                     DIFFA                                            TAHOUA                                  DIFFA

                                                                                              ZINDER                                                                                    ZINDER
                                                     TILLABERI                                                                                     TILLABERI
                                                                               MARADI                                                                                       MARADI
       NIAMEY                                                                                                                           NIAMEY
                                                                       DOSSO                                                                                       DOSSO

                             50
                                                                                                                                                                                   453,927
                                                                                                                                                                                   400,000
                             45
                             Stunting Prevalence                               ≥ 40%: Very high            20–29%: Medium
                                                                                                                                                     Total Children
                             By Region (%)                                     30–39%: High                <20%: Low    Zambia                       Stunted By Region
                                                                                                                                                                                   250,000
                                                                                                                                                                                   80,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Region Boundaries
 STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                            40                                                         Region Boundaries
                                                                                                                                        Sudan                  Nigera              50,000
                                                                                                                                                                                   46,437
                              35                                                                             Cameroon
Data source: NDHS 2012. IBRD 42942 | MAY Lesotho
                                            2017 These maps were produced by the Cartography Unit of the World Bank Group. The boundaries, colors, denominations
       30 | MAY 2017
IBRD 42942                                                                                                                   COTE D’LVOIRE Swaziland
and any other information shown on these maps do not imply, on the part of the World Bank Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any endorsement or
       25 of such boundaries.
acceptance                                  Kenya
                                                                                                                             Mauritania
                             20                                                                                                                                          Congo
Niger’s stunting prevalence is significantly higher        than the average for the region, which is 35.2 percent (World
                                                         Ghana
     15
Bank 2017), and the country Sao   Tomeof
                               is one  andthe  poorest in the region (Figure 6.4). Approximately one in five people
                                           Principe
     10
in Niger  face extreme food insecurity (Save the Children 2009). During the 2009–10 food crisis, more than 30
      5 of the population required food assistance (World Bank 2013). It is estimated that, in 2011, the poorest
percent
30 percent
      0     of the population shared one-seventh of total national consumption, while the highest income group
        more than1500
shared 500                   2500
                    51 percent             3500
                                of total national        4500
                                                     consumption     5500
                                                                    (World     6500
                                                                            Bank          7500
                                                                                 2014). Although     8500
                                                                                                 Niger          9500
                                                                                                         has made  some
gains in child survival and maternal health,        significant challenges remain
                                              GDP PER CAPITA (INTERNATIONAL $ PPP) in improving nutrition  outcomes  as
well as in curbing the high fertility rates, which can seriously impede any progress made in nutrition.


Figure 6.4: Prevalence of Stunting and GDP per Capita: Niger and Selected Low-Income Countries


                                                                                                    NIGER
                                                         50

                                                                                DRC                        Mozambique
                                                                                                                                                                            Chad
                                                                                                                                        Ethiopia
                           STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                                                        40                                                                                            Rwanda
                                                                                                    Malawi
                                                                                                                                 Sierra Leone                                                                        Tanzania
                                                                                                                                                                           Benin
                                                         30                                                                                           Uganda
                                                                                                              Guinea
                                                                                                                                                 Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                                                                                             Senegal
                                                         20



                                                         10
                                                              500                                 1000                           1500                           2000                              2500                          3000

                                                                                                                        GDP PER CAPITA (INTERNATIONAL $ PPP)

Source: NDHS 2012; World Bank 2017.



Wasting, also known as acute malnutrition, is typically classified as either severe or moderate. Wasting can
result from food insecurity in resource-poor settings with insufficient dietary quality, quantity and diver-
      50
sity, suboptimal breastfeeding, and recurrent episodes of illness such as diarrhea. Wasting prevalence across
                                                                        DRC                        Mozambique
                                                                                                                                                                           Chad
PREVALENCE (%)




                                                                                   Niger                                           Ethiopia
                           40
                                                                                                            Malawi                                 Rwanda
86 	                                                                                                                                                                                                Tanzania 
                                                                                                                                                                                         Stunting Reduction  in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                            Sierra Leone

                           30
                                                                                                                                                  Uganda                     BENIN
                                                                                                       Guinea
Sub-Saharan Africa is second highest in the world, after South Asia, with 13 million children (7.8 percent)
suffering from acute malnutrition. Niger ranks fifth in the top five countries with the highest wasting preva-
lence, with the prevalence at 18 percent in 2012. Particularly with sharp rise in wasting prevalence since 2012,
treatment of acute malnutrition, as well as efforts to better understand and address the drivers of wasting, are
evermore critical to reversing this trend.

Micronutrient deficiencies, a form of malnutrition that relates to a deficiency in essential vitamins and minerals
needed for body functions, are highly pervasive in Niger. Anemia, a condition caused by inadequate dietary
intake of iron and by parasitic infections, among other causes, has cross-generational impacts. Nearly half (46
percent) of women of reproductive age in Niger are anemic (NDHS 2012), which affects not only women’s own
health but also contributes to the intergenerational cycle of undernutrition. Nearly three-quarters of children
(73 percent) 6 to 59 months of age are anemic, with anemia prevalence highest in the Diffa region (88 percent)
(NDHS 2012). Ensuring that women of reproductive age are well nourished through diverse diets rich in
micronutrients and are provided with necessary micronutrient supplements sets the stage for their children to
achieve optimal nutrition, growth, and development and for the country to build human capital.

Demand- and supply-side barriers influence feeding behaviors, including breastfeeding practices, food con-
sumption, and dietary diversity. Market dependence varies by livelihood and wealth quintile. Sheep and cattle
farmers largely rely on markets, while wealthier cultivators tend to grow enough to support themselves as
well as to purchase additional food to improve dietary diversity (Save the Children 2009). The cost of food can
account for 60 to 75 percent of expenditures for the poorest families, and because the percentage of budget
allocated for food purchases sharply increases during times of crisis, food consumption can drastically decrease
at these times. A crop or grazing failure, climatic event, or an increase in market rate for staple crops translates
into a reduction in purchasing power and an impaired ability to meet basic food needs for the most vulnerable
families (Save the Children 2009). These underlying causes of malnutrition from food shortages, coupled with
difficult access to health centers, inadequate hygiene, lack of proper sanitation, and behavioral factors, further
highlight the need for effective multisectoral strategies to address undernutrition across the country.




Political Commitment to Reduce Malnutrition
The policy environment around nutrition is gaining momentum in Niger. Nutrition, along with reducing fertility
and maximizing the demographic dividend—two agendas that share complementarity with nutrition—is one
of priorities of the Prime Minister’s ambitious General Development Plan, demonstrating a high-level recog-
nition that nutrition outcomes influence economic development (SUN 2014). This commitment was further
solidified when Niger joined the fight to end malnutrition as a member of the SUN movement in 2011. Starting
in 2012, Niger began implementing a multisector, overarching nutrition strategy known as Nigeriens Nourish-
ing Nigeriens (3N). 3N aims to strengthen the agriculture sector’s production capabilities to improve nutrition
outcomes and resilience to cyclical food crises (SUN, no date). The Health Ministry implements the majority of
the nutrition interventions, the Minister of Public Health chairs the 3N committee, and the underlying guide-
lines of the strategy were derived by the Niger Renaissance Program (SUN 2014). Within the 3N initiative, nearly
three-quarters of the budget allocation is for nutrition-specific interventions to improve nutrition practices,
reduce acute malnutrition, and improve micronutrient intake; about one-quarter is allocated for governance to
implement nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive interventions; and the remaining smaller portion is allo-
cated for nutrition-sensitive interventions such as food security (SUN, no date). Although the 3N program lays
the foundation necessary to address malnutrition, enable national food production, and increase income, greater
investments are needed from domestic resources, ODA, and other innovative financing mechanisms for Niger to
substantially reduce malnutrition.




CHAPTER 6 Niger: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                            87
Current Financing for Nutrition
In 2015 in Niger, the government and overseas donors spent a total of $28.9 million on interventions that will
contribute to reaching the global targets for nutrition. Of that amount, $10.7 million came from the government
and $18.3 million came from ODA. The contribution from ODA included $5.7 million for stunting, $1.2 million
for anemia, $1.6 million for breastfeeding, and $10.7 million for treating wasting.2 The single largest nutrition
investment in Niger is for the treatment of wasting. These estimates reflect the current spending on nutrition;
the following sections detail additional financing needed in order for Niger to contribute to reaching the global
targets on nutrition.3



Global Targets for Nutrition
Substantial improvements to the nutritional status of women and children can be realized if adequate invest-
ment is made in a set of evidence-based nutrition-specific interventions that ensure optimum nutrition during
the critical 1,000-day window between the start of a woman’s pregnancy and the child’s second birthday (Black
et al. 2008, 2013). For women, these include interventions to prevent anemia before and during pregnancy
as well as those aimed at improving protein energy intake during pregnancy. Interventions targeted toward
children and their mothers aim to improve breastfeeding and complementary feeding practices, enhance the
micronutrient status of children, and treat acute malnutrition in children.

In 2012—to rally the international community around improving nutrition—the 176 members of the World
Health Assembly endorsed the first-ever global nutrition targets, focusing on six areas: stunting, anemia, low
birthweight, childhood overweight, breastfeeding, and wasting. These targets aim to boost investments in
cost-effective interventions, spearhead better implementation practices, and catalyze progress toward reducing
malnutrition. The targets for stunting and wasting are enshrined within the United Nations’ Sustainable Devel-
opment Goal 2 (SDG 2), which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year 2030. The 2016 Global
Nutrition Report ranked each country’s progress in contributing to the achievement of the global targets (Table
6.1) (IFPRI 2016).4

Table 6.1: Four Global Targets for Nutrition and Niger’s Contribution Toward Meeting Them

                                                                                                      NIGER’S RANK               PREVALENCE               PROGRESS

                                              Reduce the number of stunted children
   1
                    STUNTING*                                                                               122/132                   43.9%
                                                       under five by 40%
        Stuntin


                                                 Reduce the number of women of
   2
                    ANEMIA                                                                                  169/185                   46.7%
                                              reproductive age with anemia by 50%
        An mi


                                           Increase the rate of exclusive breastfeeding 
   5
                    BREASTFEEDING                                                                           103/141                    23.3%
                                             in the first six months up to at least 50%
        Exclusiv
   br     stf din

                                             Reduce and maintain childhood wasting
   6
                    WASTING*                                                                               126/130                     18.0%
                                                      alnutrition) to less than 5%
                                              (acute m
        W stin



                             LEGEND:          Off course, no progress             Off course, some progress               On course, good progress

*Stunting and wasting are included within the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 2 (SDG 2), which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year 2030.
Source: Global Nutrition Report 2016. Nutrition targets are from WHO 2014; rank and progress from IFPRI 2016; prevalence data from NDHS 2012.




88 	                                                                                                                                         in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                          Stunting Reduction 
Coverage of key nutrition-specific interventions in Niger is largely inadequate and remains well below the lev-
els necessary to advance in reducing malnutrition among Nigerien children. Table 6.2 and Figure 6.5 summa-
rize the current coverage and delivery platforms of nutrition-specific interventions in Niger.


Table 6.2: Delivery Platforms for Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Niger

 INTERVENTION                                                                                                                 DELIVERY PLATFORM
 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation (iron and folic acid only)                                                         Health facility and community
 Complementary feeding education                                                                              Health facility, community, and communication campaigns
 Breastfeeding promotion                                                                                      Health facility, community, and communication campaigns

 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women                                                   Health facility, community, and social safety net programs
 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic regions                                      Health facility and community
 Vitamin A supplementation                                                                                         Health facility, community, and food fortification
 Public provision of complementary foods                                                                      Health facility, community, and social safety net programs

 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition                                                                                     Health facility and community
 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women of reproductive age                                  School, community, health facility, and marketplace
 Staple food fortification                                                                                                           Marketplace
 Pro-breastfeeding social policies                                                                                               Government policies
 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns                                                                                             Media


Figure 6.5: Coverage of Key Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Niger and Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                              Antenatal micronutrient
                                                                                  supplementation -
                                                                              (iron and folic acid only)
                                                       Pro-breastfeeding                                          Complementary
                                                         social policies                                         feeding education
                                                                             100



                                                                                   80



                                                                                        60

                                     Staple food                                                                                           Breastfeeding
                                     fortiﬁcation                                            40
                                                                                                                                            promotion

                                                                                                  20




               Iron and folic acid                                                                                                                  Balanced energy
        supplementation for non-pregnant                                                                                                        protein supplementation
           women of reproductive age                                                                                                              for pregnant women




                                 Treatment of severe                                                                                 Intermittent presumptive
                                  acute malnutrition                                                                                   treatment of malaria
                                                                                                                                          in pregnancy in
                                                                                                                                     malaria-endemic regions


                                                                 Public provision of                      Vitamin A
                                                                complementary foods                    supplementation

Note: Red shading represents Niger and light blue shading represents average Sub-Saharan Africa regional coverage




CHAPTER 6 Niger: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                    89
Economic Benefits of Investing in Nutrition
There is a strong body of evidence that shows high economic returns to investing in nutrition (Alderman et al.
2016; Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). Scaling up these proven nutrition-specific
interventions can ensure that mothers are healthy and well nourished and that they can provide optimal nutri-
tion to their children, that children realize their full physical and cognitive development potential, and that
women’s productivity is not hampered by illness, especially anemia (Figure 6.6).

Figure 6.6: How Reaching the Global Nutrition Targets Generates Economic Benefits

                                                                                                                                                   Co nitive
                                                                                                                                                   Development

                                                        STUNTING

                                                                                        Childr n’s H lth &                                         Le rnin &
                                                                                                                                                   Educ tion l
                                                                                         Nutrition St tus                                          Att inment
                                                         WASTING
       Glob l Nutrition
       T r ts R ch d                                                                                                                               Adult
                                                                                                                                                   Productivit

                                                      EASTFEE
                                                    BRE     EDING


                                                                                                                                                   W    es


                                                          ANEMIA

                                                                                                                                                   Econom
                                                                                         Wom n’s H lth &                                           (GDP)
                                                                                         Nutrition St tus


In Niger, scaling-up the package of nutrition-specific interventions would produce substantial economic ben-
efits over the productive lifetime of the affected women and children (Figure 6.7). Additional health system
cost-savings would also be likely because many of these investments reduce the burden of childhood illnesses
such as diarrhea and pneumonia.

Figure 6.7: Investments in Niger to Meet the Global Nutrition Targets Have Enormous Economic Returns
                                                      Total Economic                                                              $1 Invested
                                                     Beneﬁts (Billions)a                                                            Yieldsb

                                        STUNTING              $4,136                                                                  $10
                                                                                                                          $
                                                              $3,001                                                                   $48
                                                                                                          1
                              BREASTFEEDING                                                $
                                                                                                                              $

                                           ANEMIA               $512                           $                                        $7

                                         WASTING              $1,492                                                                   $11

a. Total economic benefits over 10 years for women and over the productive lives of children who benefit from these interventions, , defined as the period between the age of
18 and a “retirement” age - the life expectancy or the age of 65, whichever is lower.
b. Benefit calculation assumes a 3 percent discount rate for both costs and benefits, and GDP growth rate of 3 percent.




90 	                                                                                                                                                 in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                  Stunting Reduction 
                                                                                            TOTAL TEN-YEAR FINANCING NEEDS: $2.2 billion



       Financing Needs, Impacts, and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling Up Nutrition-Specific
       Interventions                WASTING
                                ANEMIA
       Using the methodology detailed            Total: 1%
                                         in An Investment Framework for Nutrition (Shekar et al. 2017), this brief presents
                               Total  12%:                         12 high-impact nutrition-specific interventions in
       estimates of the resources needed to scale up a package ofBREASTFEEDING
       Niger to meet the global nutrition targets for stunting, anemia,       13% and wasting, along with their
                                                                        breastfeeding,
                                                                       Total:
       estimated nutrition, health, and economic impacts. An additional $77.1 million per year over 10 years is needed
       to scale up the package of key interventions (Table 6.3). The health and nutrition impact of this investment is
       shown in Table 6.4.

       The scale up of complementary feeding education would be the most cost-effective intervention for the pre-
                                                                            TOTAL    TEN-YEAR
anda            of stunting, averting more than 71,000 cases and costing $17.6
       ventionSTUNTING                                                          million over 10 years. Prophylactic zinc
       supplementation
               Total 82%: would  be the most effective intervention for     FINANCING
                                                                        stunting, and wouldNEEDS:
                                                                                             prevent 194,000 cases over
                                                                             $273 million through counseling
       10 years—but this intervention also has the highest total cost. Breastfeeding  promotion
       mothers would be projected to increase the number of infants exclusively breastfed by 1.18 million, prevent
       14,000 deaths, and cost $38 million over 10 years. Among the set of nutrition-specific interventions, vitamin A
       supplementation would be the most cost-effective intervention for preventing child mortality, but would avert
       only 5,000 deaths over 10 years. Given that acute malnutrition is of serious public health significance in Niger,
       treatment of wasting would have the highest impact for child mortality, resulting in more than 30,000 deaths
       averted. For preventing maternal anemia, staple food fortification would be the most cost-effective, at a cost of
       $4.50 for each case-year of anemia prevented in women. Over 10 years, staple food fortification would prevent
       nearly 1.7 million case-years of anemia in women at a cost of $7.4 million.

       Figure 6.8: Ten-Year Financing Needs for Scaling Up a Package of Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Niger by Percent per
       Intervention
                                                        ANEMIA
                                                       Total 10%:



                                                                                                       WASTING
                                                                                                       Total: 22%


ER     STUNTING
       Total 71%:                                                                                      BREASTFEEDING
                                                                                                          Total: 8%



                                                                                      TOTAL TEN-YEAR FINANCING NEEDS: $771 million

       Note: Some costs for anemia, breastfeeding, and stunting are shared across interventions. Costs for breastfeeding promotion ($38 million) has been included in both the total
       cost for the breastfeeding target and the total cost for the stunting target; cost of intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic regions
       ($15.3 million) has been included in both the total cost for the anemia target and the total cost for the stunting target.




       Interventions to reduce stunting would require the most resources,4 accounting for about 71 percent of the total
       amount required for scale-up. However,    some of the stunting interventions would also affect breastfeeding and
                                              WASTING
       anemia targets. Figure 6.8 represents the distribution of total cost across interventions to address the four targets.
                                           ANEMIA                  Total: 5%
                                          Total 11%:                                            BREASTFEEDING
                                                                                                   Total: 11%



       CHAPTER 6 Niger: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                    91


                                                                                                              TOTAL TEN-YEAR
Table 6.3: Estimated 10-Year Financing Needs and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling Up Nutrition-Specific Interventions, Niger

                                                                                        TOTAL 10-YEAR                                               COST PER CASE
                                                                                                                    COST PER DEATH
                INTERVENTION (NUTRITION TARGET)                                       FINANCING NEEDS                                                OF STUNTING
                                                                                                                    AVERTED (US $)
                                                                                           (US $M)                                                  AVERTED (US $)


                                                          For pregnant women and mothers of infants
 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation (stunting, anemia)                                     26.4                         5,980                          5,143
 Infant and young child nutrition counseling (complementary feeding
                                                                                                55.6                         3,272                           712
 education and breastfeeding promotion combined)
 Complementary feeding education (stunting)                                                      17.6                        5,909                           245
 Breastfeeding promotion (stunting, breastfeeding)                                              38.0                          2,711                         5,999
 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women (stunting)                          112.7                       24,090                         19,322
 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-
                                                                                                 15.3                         4,117                          744
 endemic regions (stunting, anemia)


                                                                   For infants and young children
 Vitamin A supplementation (stunting)                                                            5.9                         1,194                           110
 Prophylactic zinc supplementation (stunting)                                                   181.7                        11,255                          937
 Public provision of complementary food (stunting)                                              148.0                       40,458                          1,880
 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition (wasting)                                               167.6                        5,479                           n.a


                                                       For non-pregnant women and general population
 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women (anemia)                             25.1                                                        n.a
                                                                                                                             29,719
 Staple food fortification (anemia)                                                              7.4                                                         n.a
 Pro-breastfeeding social policies (breastfeeding)                                               5.0                          n.a                            n.a
 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns (breastfeeding)                                     20.2                          n.a                            n.a

                                                                         TOTAL:                 771.1                       8,940                          1,524

Note: Financing needs and impacts assume a linear scale-up of interventions from current coverage level to 90 percent over five years, then maintained at 90 percent for
an additional five years. Unit financing needs for each intervention were drawn from available unit costs from neighboring countries, global costs, or estimates available in
the literature. The estimated costs include an additional 12 percent (11 percent for pro-breastfeeding social policies and promotion campaigns) to account for monitoring,
evaluation, capacity, and policy development that may be necessary to reach full scale-up of the interventions. The Lives Saved Tool (LiST) was used to estimate the impact
of interventions that target pregnant women and children. The impact of interventions that target the general population or non-pregnant women were estimated using a
Microsoft Excel model. n.a. = not applicable. It should be noted that the LiST model does not capture potential synergies between specific interventions (e.g. the fact that the
impact of behavior change communication interventions may be higher in populations that have access to affordable and diversified foods or in populations with higher levels
of educational attainment). Therefore, it is possible that the impact estimates generated using LiST in fact underestimate the true impact of the interventions in some contexts.

n.a. = not applicable.




Two Alternative Investment Packages
Relative to current expenditures on health, the investment required to scale-up the set of effective nutrition-spe-
cific interventions may present significant challenges for Niger. In an environment of constrained resources in
which Niger may not be able to raise $771.1 million over the next 10 years, two alternative investment packages
are laid out for consideration.

The Priority Package: The first—the “priority package”—includes interventions that are the most cost-ef-
fective; that is, that have the lowest cost per health outcome (e.g., case of stunting averted), and that have




92 	                                                                                                                                           in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                            Stunting Reduction 
Table 6.4: Benefits and Cost-Effectiveness by Investment Package, Niger

         GLOBAL                                                             PRIORITY                     CATALYZING              FULL PACKAGE:
                                           BENEFIT                                                                            All interventions needed
         TARGET                                                             PACKAGE                   PROGRESS PACKAGE             to meet targets
                                                                       $29.7 million/year                $46.6 million/year      $77.1 million/year
                                                                        in financing need                 in financing need      in financing need

                                Cases of stunting reduced by
        STUNTING                                                              140,000                         188,000                425,000
                                      2025 (vs 2015)a


                                 Cases of anemia in women
         ANEMIA                                                              2.2 million                      3 million              7.5 million
                                    prevented by 2025


                                       Additional babies
    BREASTFEEDING                                                            1.2 million                     1.2 million             1.2 million
                                    breastfed over 10 years

                                    Child deaths averted
                                                                              62,000                          68,000                 86,000
                                        over 10 years
      ALL TARGETS                   Cost per death averted                      4,787                          6,811                   8,940
                                       Cost per case of
                                                                                 738                           1,054                   1,524
                                       stunting averted

a. Total impact of proposed intervention package combined with other health and poverty reduction efforts.




well-established global policy guidelines and delivery platforms. Based on those two criteria, the priority
package includes antenatal micronutrient supplementation, infant and young child nutrition counseling,
intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic regions, vitamin A supplemen-
tation, treatment of severe acute malnutrition, weekly iron and folic acid supplementation for girls 15–19 years
of age attending school, and fortification of wheat and maize flour with iron and folic acid. These interventions
would be scaled up to full program coverage in the first five years and maintained at full coverage levels for
the last five years. This priority package would require an estimated $297 million over 10 years, or $29.7 million
annually (see Table 6.4).

During the 10 years of scale-up, this package would prevent more than 140,000 cases of stunting and avert
62,000 deaths in children under five years of age. It would also prevent more than 2.2 million case-years of ane-
mia in women and result in 1.2 million children under six months of age being exclusively breastfed.

The Catalyzing Progress Package: The second alternative—the “catalyzing progress package”—includes
scale-up of all interventions in the priority package, plus a phased approach to scaling up public provision
of complementary foods, balanced energy protein supplementation, prophylactic zinc supplementation, and
weekly iron and folic acid supplementation for women outside of schools. It is assumed that, for the latter set
of interventions, during the first five years emphasis will be placed on establishing global guidelines and on
operational research to develop effective delivery platforms, or to develop less expensive products or more
cost-effective technologies. Financing needs are approximated as the cost of scaling up this set of interventions
from 0 to 10 percent coverage only in the first five years. In the subsequent five years it is assumed that the
coverage expansion of those interventions will accelerate and reach 60 percent by 2025. This package would
require $46.6 million per year, for a total of $466 million over 10 years (Table 6.4). It would prevent 68,000




CHAPTER 6 Niger: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                               93
deaths and more than 188,000 cases of stunting among children under age five, increase the number of exclu-
sively breastfed children under six months of age by 1.2 million, and prevent more than 3 million case-years of
anemia in women.

In comparing the relative cost-effectiveness of the three investment packages, the two alternative packages are
more cost-effective in preventing deaths and stunting. However, neither is as effective as the full package in
making progress toward achieving the stunting, wasting, and anemia targets. The priority and catalyzing prog-
ress packages would prevent 62,000 and 68,000 deaths respectively, compared with 86,000 deaths prevented
with the full package over 10 years. Under the full package scenario, 425,000 cases of childhood stunting would
be prevented, compared with 188,000 cases under the catalyzing progress scenario and 140,000 cases under the
priority package scenario. Furthermore, there would be nearly 5.3 million and 4.5 million more case-years of
anemia in women under the priority package and catalyzing progress package, respectively.



A Call to Action
As the world stands on the cusp of the new Sustainable Development Goals, there is an unprecedented oppor-
tunity to save children’s lives, build future human capital and cognitive development, and drive faster eco-
nomic growth. Scaling up key nutrition interventions during the critical 1,000 day window of early childhood
would pay lifelong dividends, translating to healthier societies and more robust economies. If this window is
missed, it is missed for life.

The additional financing needed to reach the global nutrition targets will require coordinated efforts by all
stakeholders and a supportive policy environment. To achieve these targets, Niger will need to increase its
general government health expenditure by approximately 40 percent.5 These investments are over and above
those needed for improving water and sanitation and for addressing issues around women’s empowerment
and food security. Although this level of domestic financing is ambitious, investing in nutrition interventions
have significant potential to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity.

Accelerating the reduction of stunting along with family-planning programs to help realize potential of the
demographic dividend in Niger will be essential for maximizing the return on investments in early childhood
development, in education, and more broadly in policies aimed at fostering and enhancing human capital accu-
mulation and job creation. Investing in the early years is even more critical because the Africa region is entering
a demographic transition with an expected increase in the working-age population from 54 percent in 2010 to
64 percent in 2090. The scale-up of the key nutrition-specific interventions to reduce stunting is estimated to
generate considerable returns in economic benefits over the productive lives of beneficiaries, and is a necessary
condition to build human capital through investments in the early years and to harness the potential benefits of
the demographic dividend.



Endnotes
Note: All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.

1
 Information about the Power of Nutrition initiative is available at https://ciff.org/grant-portfolio/
the-power-of-nutrition/.

2
 Note that because some funded interventions contribute to more than one target, the sum of funding across
the four targets is less than the total funding for each target added together.

3
 Current financing by source is from Results for Development Institute and can be found at http://www.inves-
tinnutrition.org/.




94 	                                                                                                in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
4 Two of the global nutrition targets—those for low birthweight and for child overweight—were not included
in the analyses because of insufficient data on the prevalence of low birthweight and a lack of consensus on
effective interventions to reach the target for child overweight.

5
 WHO National Health accounts database indicates that general government health expenditure in Niger was
$191 million in 2014. At that level, government spending on health will need to be increased by 40 percent to
accommodate the $77.1 million per year required to scale up the 12 nutrition-specific interventions.



References
Aguayo, V. M., R. Nair, N. Badgaiyan, and V. Krishna. 2016. “Determinants of Stunting and Poor Linear Growth
in Children under 2 Years of Age in India: An In-Depth Analysis of Maharashtra’s Comprehensive Nutrition
Survey.” Maternal & Child Nutrition 12 (Suppl. 1): 121–40.

Alderman , H ., J. R. Behrman , and C. Puett . 2016 . “ Big Numbers about Small Children: Estimating the Eco-
nomic Benefits of Addressing Undernutrition .” World Bank Research Observer 31 ( 2 ).

Black, R. E., L. H. Allen, Z. A. Bhutta, L. E. Caulfield, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, C. Mathers, J. Rivera, and the
Maternal and Child Undernutrition Study Group. 2008. “Maternal and Child Undernutrition: Global and
Regional Exposures and Health Consequences.” The Lancet 371 (9608): 243–60.

Black, R. E., C. G .Victora, S. P. Walker, Z. A. Bhutta, P. Christian, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, S. Grantham-Mcgregor,
J. Katz, R. Martorell, R. Uauy, and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. “Maternal and Child
Undernutrition and Overweight in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries.” The Lancet 382: 427–51.

Copenhagen Consensus Center. 2015. Smart Development Goals: The Post-2015 Consensus. http://www.copenha-
genconsensus.com/sites/default/files/outcomedocument_col.pdf

Daniels, M. C. and L. Adair. 2004. “Growth in Young Filipino Children Predicts Schooling Trajectories through
High School.” Journal of Nutrition 134: 1439–46.

Fink, G., E. Peet, G. Danaei, K. Andrews, D. C. McCoy, C. R. Sudfeld, M. C. Smith Fawzi, M. Ezzati, and W. W.
Fawzi. 2016. “Schooling and Wage Income Losses Due to Early-Childhood Growth Faltering in Developing
Countries: National, Regional, and Global Estimates.” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 104 (1): 104–12.

Geesing D. and H. Djibo H. 2001. Niger: Country Pasture/Forage Resources Profile. http://www.fao.org/ag/
agp/agpc/doc/counprof/niger/niger.htm

Hoddinott, J., H. Alderman, J. R. Behrman, L. Haddad, and S. Horton. 2013. “The Economic Rationale for
Investing in Stunting Reduction.” Maternal and Child Nutrition 9 (Suppl. 2): 69–82.

Hoddinott, J., J. A. Maluccio, J. R. Behman, R. Flores, and R. Martorell. 2008. “Effect of a Nutrition Intervention
during Early Childhood on Economic Productivity in Guatemalan Adults.” Lancet 371 (9610): 411–16.

Horton, S. and R. Steckel. 2013. “Malnutrition: Global Economic Losses Attributable to Malnutrition 1900–2000
and Projections to 2050.” In The Economics of Human Challenges, edited by B. Lomborg, 247–72. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.

IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2016 . Global Nutrition Report 2016: From Promise to Impact –
Ending Malnutrition by 2030. Washington, DC: IFPRI.




CHAPTER 6 Niger: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                           95
Martorell, R., B. L. Horta, L. S. Adair, A. D. Stein, L. Richter, C. H. D. Fall, S. K. Bhargava, S. K. Dey Biswas,
L. Perez, F. C. Barros, C. G. Victora, and Consortium on Health Orientated Research in Transitional Societies
Group. 2010. “Weight Gain in the First Two Years of Life Is an Important Predictor of Schooling Outcomes in
Pooled Analyses from Five Birth Cohorts from Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” Journal of Nutrition 140:
348–54.

NDHS (Niger Demographic and Health Survey). 2006. Niger Demographic Health Survey 2006. Calverton,
Maryland, USA: INS/Niger and Macro International (published in 2007). http://dhsprogram.com/publica-
tions/publication-FR193-DHS-Final-Reports.cfm

Ozaltin, E., K. Hill, and S. V. Subramanian. 2010. “Association of Maternal Stature with Offspring Mortality,
Underweight, and Stunting in Low- to Middle-Income Countries.” JAMA 303 (15): 1507–16.

Save the Children. 2009. Understanding Household Economy in Rural Niger. London: Save the Children. https://
www.savethechildren.org.uk/sites/default/files/docs/Understanding_HE_in_Rural_Niger_low_res_comp_1.
pdf

Shekar, M., J. Kakietek, J. D. Eberwein, and D. Walters. 2017. An Investment Framework for Nutrition: Reaching
the Global Targets for Stunting, Anemia, Breastfeeding, and Wasting. Directions in Development. Washington, DC:
World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1010-7. https://tinyurl.com/InvestmentFrameworkNutrition

SUN (Scaling Up Nutrition). 2014. “Niger.” In SUN Movement Compendium. http://docs.scalingupnutrition.
org/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/SUN_Compendium_ENG_20141026_06Niger.pdf

———. No date. Niger: Call for Commitments for Nutrition.” Costed Plan Summary. http://docs.scalingupnu-
trition.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Niger-Costed-Plan-Summary.pdf

UN DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2015. World Population Prospects, the
2015 Revision. https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2016. Human Development Report 2016. New York, NY:
UNDP.

World Bank. 2013. “Republic of Niger: Joint IDA-IMF Staff Advisory Note on the Economic and Social
Development Plan 2012-2015.” Report No. 76241-NE, April 5. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/106641468324034369/pdf/762410PRSP0P120OFFICIAL0USE0ONLY090.pdf

———. 2014. Republic of Niger: Trends in Poverty, Inequality and Growth 2005-2011. Report No. 89837-NE. Pov-
erty Reduction and Economic Management 4, Africa Region. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/226071468189571689/pdf/89837-WP-P146536-PUBLIC-Box393186B.pdf

———. 2016. World Bank Data Bank (database). World Bank, Washington, DC (accessed May 1, 2017), . http://
data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS?page=1

———. 2017. World Development Indicators (database). World Bank, Washington, DC (accessed May 1, 2017),
http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators

WHO (World Health Organziation). 2014. Comprehensive Implementation Plan on Maternal, Infant and Young Child
Nutrition. Geneva: WHO. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/113048/1/WHO_NMH_NHD_14.1_eng.
pdf?ua=1




96 	                                                                                                  in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                   Stunting Reduction 
CHAPTER 7



                RWANDA: An Investment Framework for Nutrition
                                                                                                                                 Benefits of Investing in Nutrition
   Key Messages
   •	      Thirty-eight percent of children in Rwanda are chronically
           malnourished (stunted); this represents a steady but slow
           decline since 2005, when half of all children were stunted. Acute
                                                                                                                                           183,000
           malnutrition (wasting) has declined rapidly between 2000 and                                                           cases of stunting prevented
           2015 (from 8.3 to 2.2 percent), and Rwanda is among the few                                                                      in 2025
           countries in the world that have passed the 2030 Sustainable
           Development Goal (SDG) target for wasting.

   •	      Although stunting is concentrated in Rwanda’s western districts
           and among the poor, one-fifth of children in the richest quintile
                                                                                                                                            6,200
           are stunted (as compared with nearly half in the poorest quintile),
           suggesting that factors other than income affect malnutrition.                                                       child deaths prevented in 2025
           Despite major successes in exclusive breastfeeding rates (almost
           90 percent nationwide), suboptimal complementary feeding
           practices, poor hygiene and sanitation, and high fertility rates all
           contribute to persistently high rates of stunting.
                                                                                                                                         1.5 MILLION
   •	      Scaling up a package of high-impact nutrition-specific                                                                     case-years of anemia
           interventions in Rwanda to contribute toward achieving the global
           nutrition targets would require an additional $27.3 million per                                                        in women prevented in 2025
           year over 10 years and would yield enormous benefits (see panel
           on the right). These investments are over and above those needed
           for improving water and sanitation and for addressing issues
           around women’s empowerment and food security.
                                                                                                                                           28,000
   •	      This scale-up would require additional financing equivalent to a                                                       babies exclusively breastfed
           12 percent increase in current government expenditure on health
           and could be financed from a combination of domestic sources,
           official development assistance (ODA), and innovative financing
           sources such as the Power of Nutrition.1

   •	      To finance the nutrition scale-up, two lower-cost scenarios are                                                                45,000
           estimated to require between $5.7 and $12.2 million per year over                                                   cases of severe wasting treated
           the next 10 years. In an environment of constrained resources,
           starting with one of these two scenarios would be a strong
           first investment, but it would need to be followed by increased
           investments toward full scale-up to achieve the global nutrition
           targets.
                                                                                                                                            $4–$24
                                                                                                                                return for every dollar invested
   •	      Making these investments in reducing malnutrition would
           produce around $3.4 billion in economic benefits over the
           productive lives of women and children and help the Government
           of Rwanda meet its ambitious Vision 2020 strategy.
                                                                                                                                        $3.4 BILLION
                                                                                                                                  generated from investments
                                                                                                                                      to reduce stunting*
*The economic benefits are calculated over the productive lives of the children benefiting from the interventions that prevent stunting.




CHAPTER 7 Rwanda: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                         97
Investment Case for Nutrition
Ensuring optimum nutrition—particularly during the 1,000-day period from pregnancy to a child’s second
birthday—can alter an individual’s development trajectory and maximize her or his productive potential.
Chronic malnutrition has important lifelong consequences for health and cognitive development. Losses to
cognitive development in early childhood resulting from chronic malnutrition are irreversible. Being stunted
(low height-for-age) in early childhood is associated with a delayed start at school, reduced schooling attain-
ment, and substantially decreased adult incomes at both the individual and country level (Daniels and Adair
2004; Fink et al. 2016; Hoddinott et al. 2008; Martorell et al. 2010). These consequences add up to overall gross
domestic product (GDP) losses of 4 to 11 percent in Africa and Asia (Horton and Steckel 2013). Importantly,
chronic undernutrition can be transmitted through an inter-generational cycle, where malnourished mothers
are more likely to have stunted children (Aguayo et al. 2016; Ozaltin et al. 2010).

Investments in nutrition are highly cost-effective and among the best value-for-money development actions
(Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). An Investment Framework for Nutrition devel-
oped by the World Bank in partnership with R4D, 1000 Days, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation esti-
mated high returns on every dollar invested in nutrition: from $4 in returns for treating acute malnutrition
(wasting) to $11 for preventing stunting, $12 for the treatment and prevention of anemia, and $35 for increasing
the prevalence of exclusive breastfeeding (Shekar et al. 2017). Not only do investments in nutrition produce
substantial economic benefits, but they also lay the groundwork for the success of investments in other sectors.
The Government of Rwanda, with support from ODA and implementation partners, has an expanding portfo-
lio of investments in nutrition that is expected to total more than $100 million between 2014 and 2021.2

Investments in the early years—including early life nutrition, early learning and stimulation, and the provision
of nurturing care and protection from stress—ensure that all children reach their human potential and con-
tribute to the economic growth of their nation. The analysis presented below focuses on high-impact nutri-
tion-specific interventions with strong evidence of efficacy in reducing malnutrition, and estimates the financ-
ing needs, impacts, and economic benefits of scaling up these interventions in Rwanda.



Country Context
Rwanda is a small landlocked country in East Africa. The Rwandan population is estimated to be 11.6 million
with a growth rate of 2.4 percent, a total fertility rate (TFR) of 4.2, and one of the highest densities on the conti-
nent (470.6 people per square kilometer). Although the country’s TFR has declined from a high of 5.8 in 2000 and
is currently below the average for Sub-Saharan Africa (4.9), it still remains a significant impediment to achieving
progress on malnutrition reduction. Rwanda has a young population: 43 percent are under age 15 and about 4
percent under age five (UN DESA 2015).

More than 84 percent of the population resides in rural areas, and agriculture accounts for 70 percent of employ-
ment in Rwanda (RDHS 2015). Rwanda’s economy has maintained a steady growth rate over the past five years
and is projected to increase from 6.8 percent in 2016 to 7.1 percent in 2017, exceeding average global growth rate
projections (World Bank 2016).

The Government of Rwanda is prioritizing achieving the ambitious goals laid out in Vision 2020, a guiding
national strategy that aims to transform the country into a knowledge-based, service-oriented middle-income
country by 2020 (Republic of Rwanda 2012). Rwanda has made substantial progress in economic, social, and
human development. The poverty rate ($1.90 2011 PPP) has declined from 60.4 percent in 2010 to 54.3 percent in
2014, driven by a growing working-age labor force and a rapid inter-sectoral shift from work in the agriculture
sector to work in other sectors of the economy (World Bank 2016). With agriculture still underlying most liveli-
hoods, the population is highly vulnerable to weather shocks (V20, 2017).




98 	                                                                                                  in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                   Stunting Reduction 
           Nutritional Status in Rwanda
           Persistently high rates of undernutrition remain a serious human development challenge in Rwanda. Thirty-eight
           percent—or 640,000—children under age five are stunted and 2 percent are wasted (low weight-for-height), which
           suggests that wasting, or acute malnutrition, is less of a problem in Rwanda than chronic malnutrition (RDHS 2015).
           Overall, stunting prevalence has declined since 2000 but remains of high public health significance according to
           WHO standards. The prevalence of wasting has declined significantly since 2000, and by 2005 Rwanda had reduced
           wasting to less than 5 percent, overshooting the 2030 global target (Figure 7.1).

           National estimates mask socioeconomic and geographic disparities in stunting prevalence. Significant differences
           in stunting remain among children in poorer and wealthier households. In the past 15 years, stunting declined
           more quickly among children living in households in the top wealth quintile (with a 3.2 percent average annual
           rate of reduction) when compared with those in the bottom quintile (a 1 percent average annual rate of reduction)
           (Figure 7.2). Nevertheless, stunting prevalence remains high (21 percent) in the highest wealth quintile, underscor-
           ing the fact that rising incomes alone are insufficient to eliminate child malnutrition and build sustainable futures.


            Figure 7.1: Trends in Undernutrition in Rwanda, 2000–2015 Figure 7.2: Disparities in Stunting by Wealth Quintile, 2000–2015
                 60         60
                                               51.1 51.1                                                      70        70
AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                              48.3 48.3
AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE




                                                                                            AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE
                                                                                            AMONG CHILDREN UNDER FIVE
                                                                                             STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)
                                                                                             STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)
                 50         50                                   44.2 44.2                                    60        60
                                                                               37.9 37.9
     PREVALENCE (%)




                                                                                                                        50
     PREVALENCE (%)




                 40         40                                                                                50

                                                   25.6 25.6                                                  40        40
                 30         30
                                                                               19.2 19.2                      30        30
                                                                 17.3 17.3
                 20         20
                                                                                                              20        20
                              8.3     8.3
                 10         10                     4.7   4.7           2.8                                     10       10
                                                                 2.8           2.2   2.2
                    0        0                                                                                   0      0
                             2000 2000         2005 2005         2010 2010        2014-15
                                                                             2014-15                                     2000 2000          2005 2005       2010 2010        2014-15
                                                                                                                                                                        2014-15

                                         Stuntin
                                    Stuntin                  W stin
                                                         W stin              An mi
                                                                         An mi                                           Poor
                                                                                                                    Poor st    st quintil
                                                                                                                            quintil                Rich
                                                                                                                                              Rich st    st quintil
                                                                                                                                                      quintil                  N ltion l
                                                                                                                                                                          N tion


           Source for Figures 7.1 and 7.2: RDHS 2015.



           The highest rates of stunting are concentrated in the western districts of the country, but stunting levels remain
           high across almost all districts (Figure 7.3). Out of 30 districts in the country, 25 had a stunting prevalence of
           high (more than 30 percent) or very high (more than 40 percent) public health significance. Furthermore, seven
           districts carry the highest burden in terms of absolute number of stunted children.




          CHAPTER 7 Rwanda: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                99
Figure 7.3: Number of Stunted Children and Stunting Prevalence by District, Rwanda 2014–15

                                                     MUSANZE                                                                                           MUSANZE
                                                                                    NYAGATARE                                                                                        NYAGATARE
                                        NYABIHU                 BURERA                                                                  NYABIHU                   BURERA

                                                                        GICUMBI            GATSIBO                                                                        GICUMBI          GATSIBO
                                     RUBAVU                    GAKENKE                                                                RUBAVU                     GAKENKE
                                                                     RULINDO                                       GASABO                                              RULINDO                                    GASABO
                                                                                                KAYONZA                                                                                         KAYONZA
                                NGORORERO                                                                                         NGORORERO
                                              RUTSIRO                                                              RWAMAGANA                    RUTSIRO                                                           RWAMAGANA
                                MUHANGA                                                                                           MUHANGA
                                                                  KAMONYI                                          KICUKIRO                                           KAMONYI                                     KICUKIRO
                                                  KARONGI                                                          NYARUGENGE                      KARONGI                                                        NYARUGENGE
                                                               RUHANGO                      NGOMA                                                                RUHANGO                    NGOMA
                                                                             BUGESERA                 KIREHE                                                                    BUGESERA             KIREHE
                                        NYAMASHEKE      NYANZA                                                                          NYAMASHEKE      NYANZA
                                              NYAMAGABE                                                                                       NYAMAGABE
                                                               HUYE                                                                                              HUYE
                                            RUSIZI                                                                                            RUSIZI
                                                                              GISAGARA                                                                                          GISAGARA
                                                      NYARUGURU                                                                                         NYARUGURU

                                                                                                                                                                                 29,208
                                                                                                                                                                                 23,250
                                       Stunting Prevalence              ≥ 40%: Very high              20–29%: Medium
                                                                                                                                                Total Children                   21,500          District Boundaries
                                       By District(%)                   30–39%: High                  <20%: Low                                 Stunted By District              18,500
                                                                                                                                                                                 12,500
                                                                                District Boundaries                                                                              8,215


Data source: RDHS  2015.|IBRD
             IBRD 42943        42943 | MAY 2017 These maps were produced by the Cartography Unit of the World Bank Group. The boundaries, colors, denominations
                          MAY 2017
and any other information shown on these maps do not imply, on the part of the World Bank Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.



The prevalence of stunting in Rwanda is higher than the average for the region (35.2 percent) (Figure 7.4),
and higher than that of other Sub-Saharan African countries with similar or lower per capita GDP, such as
Guinea, Malawi, Uganda, and Zimbabwe (World Bank 2017). Although the nutritional status of children
under five can improve with greater economic growth, more active interventions are necessary to capitalize
on such gains.


Figure 7.4: Prevalence of Stunting and GDP per Capita: Rwanda and Selected Low-Income Countries
                                            Burundi
                          60
                                                                                                       Madagascar                  RWANDA
STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                          50                                   Niger         Mozambique
                                                                                                                       Ethiopia                               Chad
                          40                      DRC                                                                                                                                                Tanzania
                                                                         Malawi                   Sierra Leone
                                                                                                                                           Uganda
                          30
                                                                                   Guinea
                                                                                                                                Zimbabwe                                         Senegal
                          20

                          10

                           0
                            500                                       1000                                     1500                              2000                                     2500                                 3000

                                                                                                        GDP PER CAPITA (INTERNATIONAL $ PPP)
Source: RDHS 2015; World Bank 2017.



Wasting, also known as acute malnutrition, is typically classified as either severe or moderate. Wasting can
       from food insecurity in resource-poor settings with insufficient dietary quality, quantity and diversity,
result50
suboptimal
      45     breastfeeding, and recurrent episodes of illness such as diarrhea. Wasting prevalence across Sub-Sa-
                                               Zambia
haran40Africa is second highest in the world, after South   Asia, with 13  million children (7.8 percent) suffering
STUNTING PREVALENCE (%)




                                                          Sudan           Nigera
from acute  malnutrition. However,    this varies at the country level. Since  2005, Rwanda has shown a consis-
      35                                 Cameroon
                              Lesotho prevalence and has exceeded its goal to reduce wasting to under 5 percent.
tently downward trend in wasting
      30
In 2014-15, the wasting prevalence in Rwanda was     COTE  D’LVOIRE
                                                       2.2 percent.                                    Swaziland
                          25                                                 Kenya
                                                                                                                  Mauritania
                          20                                                                                                                              Congo
                                                                                                                       Ghana
                          15
                                                                         Sao Tome and Principe
                          10
                           5
100 	                                                                                                                                                                                      in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                                                        Stunting Reduction 
                          0
                               500               1500                   2500                   3500                    4500            5500                  6500                    7500                   8500               9500
Micronutrient deficiencies (a form of malnutrition that relates to a deficiency in essential vitamins and minerals
needed for body functions and sometimes referred to as hidden hunger) are pervasive in Rwanda. Anemia—a
condition caused by inadequate dietary intake of iron, helminth infections, and malaria, among other causes—
has cross-generational impacts. Ensuring that women of reproductive age are well nourished sets the stage for
their children to achieve optimal nutrition and development. Approximately one in five women of reproduc-
tive age in Rwanda is anemic, which not only affects women’s own health, but also contributes to the inter-gen-
erational cycle of undernutrition (RDHS 2015). Although more than one in three children (37 percent) 6 to 59
months of age are anemic, there has been a 30 percent reduction since 2005 (RDHS 2015).

Rwanda has made significant investments in health services and has seen impressive progress in improv-
ing several health outcomes in recent years. However, a multitude of factors have restricted similar levels of
improvement in childhood malnutrition. High fertility rates, along with suboptimal complementary feeding
practices, poor hygiene and sanitation practices, insufficient access to health services, and inadequate maternal
and child care practices remain obstacles to further reducing chronic child malnutrition. Although Rwanda has
one of the highest rates of exclusive breastfeeding for children under six months old (87 percent), the transition
to complementary foods after this period presents a significant challenge, with only 18 percent of children 6 to
24 months old having an adequate quantity and diversity of complementary foods.

Demand- and supply-side barriers influence food consumption and diversity of diet. A recent analysis found
that the cost of the most nutritious diet in Burera District is 25 percent greater than the total income of very
poor households, thereby persistently limiting access to the range of nutrients required for growth, health, and
development during the early years and beyond (Save the Children 2011a). The high cost of food is a significant
barrier: an analysis conducted by Save the Children in the same district estimated that 50 percent of very poor
households rely on markets to purchase half of their food, largely as a result of limited land to grow a sufficient
amount and variety of food. This reliance on purchasing food makes families vulnerable to seasonality and
price fluctuations (Save the Children 2011b). Recognizing that other factors beyond poverty and food insecurity
put children at risk of chronic malnutrition, effective multisectoral strategies are needed to address undernutri-
tion across the country.

A recent report found that 21.9 percent of all child mortality and 12.7 percent of grade repetitions in Rwanda
were associated with undernutrition. Total annual financing needs associated with undernutrition in 2012 were
estimated at 11.5 percent of the Rwandan GDP (503.6 billion Rwandan francs, equivalent to US$826.2 million
in 2012) and are driven largely by lost working hours that result from mortality associated with undernutrition
and the lower productivity of adults engaged in manual labor, such as agricultural work (WFP 2013).



Political Commitment to Reduce Malnutrition
The Government of Rwanda, a SUN movement member since 2011, has demonstrated high-level political
commitment, multisectoral coordination, and resource allocation to address chronic malnutrition. The govern-
ment highlighted food security, nutrition, and early childhood development as foundational issues to address
within its Economic and Poverty Reduction Strategy for 2013–2018, which guides midterm actions to achieve
the ambitious Vision 2020 goals. Under this strategy, community-based nutrition programs across the coun-
try will identify and address poor maternal, infant, and child feeding practices (Republic of Rwanda 2013).
Building on this momentum, the Ministry of Health developed the National Food and Nutrition Strategic Plan
for 2013–2018 to provide multisectoral and sector-specific strategies to address chronic malnutrition and food
security (Ministry of Health 2014). To operationalize this plan, in 2016 the Government of Rwanda approved
the Joint Action Plan to Eliminate Malnutrition (JAPEM) and created the National Food and Nutrition Coordi-
nation Secretariat (NFNCS) to oversee its implementation (Ministry of Local Government 2016). The commit-
ment to reducing malnutrition is also reflected in the inclusion of an indicator to measure chronic malnutrition
and wasting in the Rwanda Vision 2020 strategy (Republic of Rwanda 2012). This reflects official recognition
that malnutrition is a barrier to achieving the human resource development necessary to match the country’s
evolving market labor needs.




CHAPTER 7 Rwanda: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                        101
Current Financing for Nutrition
In 2015 in Rwanda, overseas donors spent a total of $10.1 million on interventions that will contribute to reach-
ing the global targets for nutrition. No data on domestic resources were available at the time of publishing.3
This contribution from donors included $6.61 million to reduce stunting, $0.914 million to prevent anemia,
$1.85 million to promote breastfeeding, and $1.93 million to treat wasting.4



Global Targets for Nutrition
Substantial improvements to the nutritional status of women and children can be realized if adequate invest-
ment is made in a set of evidence-based nutrition-specific interventions that ensure optimum nutrition during
the critical 1,000 day window between the start of a woman’s pregnancy and the child’s second birthday (Black
et al. 2008, 2013). For women, these include interventions to prevent anemia before and during pregnancy
as well as those aimed at improving protein energy intake during pregnancy. Interventions targeted toward
children and their mothers aim to improve breastfeeding and complementary feeding practices, enhance the
micronutrient status of children, and treat acute malnutrition in children.

In 2012—to rally the international community around improving nutrition—the 176 members of the World Health
Assembly endorsed the first-ever global nutrition targets, focusing on six areas: stunting, anemia, low birthweight,
childhood overweight, breastfeeding, and wasting. These targets aim to boost investments in cost-effective inter-
ventions, spearhead better implementation practices, and catalyze progress toward reducing malnutrition. The
targets for stunting and wasting are enshrined within the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 2 (SDG
2), which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year 2030. The 2016 Global Nutrition Report ranked
each country’s progress in contributing toward achieving the global targets (Table 7.1) (IFPRI 2016 ).5

Table 7.1: Four World Health Assembly Targets for Nutrition and Rwanda’s Contribution toward Meeting Them

                                                                                                    RWANDA’S RANK                PREVALENCE              PROGRESS

                                              Reduce the number of stunted children
   1
                    STUNTING*                                                                               110/132                     37.9
                                                       under five by 40%
        Stuntin


                                                 Reduce the number of women of
   2
                    ANEMIA                                                                                  16/185                      19.2
                                              reproductive age with anemia by 50%
        An mi


                                           Increase the rate of exclusive breastfeeding 
   5
                    BREASTFEEDING                                                                            1/141                     87.0
                                             in the first six months up to at least 50%
        Exclusiv
   br     stf din

                                             Reduce and maintain childhood wasting
   6
                    WASTING*                                                                                26/130                      2.2
                                                      alnutrition) to less than 5%
                                              (acute m
        W stin



                             LEGEND:          Off course, no progress             Off course, some progress               On course, good progress
*Stunting and wasting are included within the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 2 (SDG 2), which commits to ending malnutrition in all its forms by the year 2030
Sources: Nutrition targets from WHO 2014; Rank and progress from IFPRI 2016; Prevalence data from RDHS 2015



Coverage of key nutrition interventions in Rwanda is largely inadequate. Coverage of interventions that ensure
optimal maternal nutrition and micronutrient status, which reduce the burden of low birthweight in children, is
very low. Although coverage rates are higher for some childhood interventions, they remain well below the lev-
els necessary to reduce malnutrition among Rwandan children. Table 7.2 and Figure 7.5 summarize the current
coverage and delivery platforms of key nutrition interventions in Rwanda.



102 	                                                                                                                                       in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                         Stunting Reduction 
Table 7.2: Delivery Platforms of Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Rwanda
 INTERVENTION                                                                                                               DELIVERY PLATFORM
 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation (iron and folic acid only)                                                      Health facility and community
 Complementary feeding education                                                                           Health facility, community, and communication campaigns
 Breastfeeding promotion                                                                                   Health facility, community, and communication campaigns
 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women                                                 Health facility, community, and social safety net programs
 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic areas                            Health facility, community, and food fortification
 Vitamin A supplementation                                                                                      Health facility, community, and food fortification
 Public provision of complementary foods                                                                        Health facility, community, and food fortification
 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition                                                                                  Health facility and community
 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women of reproductive age                                School, community, health facility, and marketplace
 Staple food fortification                                                                                                        Marketplace
 Pro-breastfeeding social policies                                                                                            Government policies
 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns                                                                                          Media



Figure 7.5: Coverage of Key Nutrition-Specific Interventions: Rwanda and the Sub-Saharan Africa Region

                                                                              Antenatal micronutrient
                                                                                  supplementation -
                                                                              (iron and folic acid only)
                                                       Pro-breastfeeding                                            Complementary
                                                         social policies                                           feeding education
                                                                             100



                                                                                   80



                                                                                        60

                                     Staple food                                                                                             Breastfeeding
                                     fortiﬁcation                                            40
                                                                                                                                              promotion

                                                                                                  20




             Iron and folic acid                                                                                                                      Balanced energy
      supplementation for non-pregnant                                                                                                            protein supplementation
         women of reproductive age                                                                                                                  for pregnant women




                                 Treatment of severe                                                                                   Intermittent presumptive
                                  acute malnutrition                                                                                     treatment of malaria
                                                                                                                                            in pregnancy in
                                                                                                                                       malaria-endemic regions


                                                                 Public provision of                      Vitamin A
                                                                complementary foods                    supplementation


Note: Red shading represents Rwanda and light blue shading represents average Sub-Saharan Africa coverage




CHAPTER 7 Rwanda: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                 103
Economic Benefits of Investing in Nutrition
There is a strong body of evidence that shows high economic returns to investing in nutrition (Alderman et al.
2016; Copenhagen Consensus Center 2015; Hoddinott et al. 2013). Scaling up these proven nutrition-specific
interventions can ensure that mothers are healthy and well nourished and that they can provide optimal nutri-
tion to their children, that children realize their full physical and cognitive development potential, and that
women’s productivity is not hampered by illness, especially anemia (Figure 7.6).


Figure 7.6: How Reaching the Global Nutrition Targets Generates Economic Benefits

                                                                                                                                                   Co nitive
                                                                                                                                                   Development

                                                        STUNTING

                                                                                       Childr n’s H lth &                                          Le rnin &
                                                                                                                                                   Educ tion l
                                                                                        Nutrition St tus                                           Att inment
                                                        WASTING
      Glob l Nutrition
      T r ts R ch d                                                                                                                                Adult
                                                                                                                                                   Productivit

                                                     EASTFEE
                                                   BRE     EDING


                                                                                                                                                  W     es


                                                         ANEMIA

                                                                                                                                                   Econom
                                                                                         Wom n’s H lth &                                           (GDP)
                                                                                         Nutrition St tus


In Rwanda, scaling up the package of nutrition-specific interventions would produce substantial economic ben-
efits over the productive lifetimes of the affected women and children (Figure 7.7). Additional health system
cost-savings would also be likely because many of these investments reduce the burden of childhood illnesses
such as diarrhea and pneumonia.


Figure 7.7: Investments in Rwanda to Meet the Global Nutrition Targets Have Enormous Economic
                                                    Total Economic                                                           $1 Invested
                                                   Beneﬁts (Millions)a                                                         Yieldsb

                                       STUNTING             $3,390                                                               $18
                                                                                                                     $
                                                              $88.6                                                                  $4
                                                                                                        1
                             BREASTFEEDING                                               $
                                                                                                                         $

                                          ANEMIA              $235                           $                                       $6

                                        WASTING               $72.9                                                             $24

a. Total economic benefits over 10 years for women and over the productive lives of children who benefit from these interventions, defined as the period between the age of 18
and a “retirement” age - the life expectancy or the age of 65, whichever is lower.
b. Benefit calculation assumes a 3 percent discount rate for both financing needs and benefits and a GDP growth rate of 3 percent.




104 	                                                                                                                                           in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                             Stunting Reduction 
Financing Needs, Impacts, and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling-Up Nutrition-Specific
Interventions
Using the methodology detailed in An Investment Framework for Nutrition (Shekar et al. 2017), this brief pres-
ents estimates of the resources needed to scale up a package of high-impact nutrition-specific interventions in
Rwanda to meet the global nutrition targets for stunting, anemia, breastfeeding, and wasting, along with their
estimated nutrition, health, and economic impacts. An additional $27.3 million per year over 10 years is needed
to scale up the package of key interventions (Table 7.3). The health and nutrition impacts of this investment are
shown in Table 7.4.


Table 7.3: Estimated 10-Year Financing Needs and Cost-Effectiveness of Scaling Up Nutrition-Specific Interventions, Rwanda

                                                                                       TOTAL 10-YEAR                                              COST PER CASE
                                                                                                                   COST PER DEATH
                INTERVENTION (NUTRITION TARGET)                                      FINANCING NEEDS                                               OF STUNTING
                                                                                                                   AVERTED (US $)
                                                                                          (US $M)                                                 AVERTED (US $)


                                                          For pregnant women and mothers of infants
 Antenatal micronutrient supplementation (stunting, anemia)                                     9.9                        18,452                         6,788
 Infant and young child nutrition counseling (complementary feeding
                                                                                                14.7                       22,770                          327
 education and breastfeeding promotion combined)
 Complementary feeding education (stunting)                                                     12.2                       25,978                          277
 Breastfeeding promotion (stunting, breastfeeding)                                              2.5                         14,154                         2,918
 Balanced energy protein supplementation for pregnant women (stunting)                          47.5                       70,024                         52,172
 Intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-
                                                                                                1.9                        12,399                          260
 endemic regions (stunting, anemia)


                                                                   For infants and young children
 Prophylactic zinc supplementation (stunting)                                                  54.4                        28,336                          833
 Public provision of complementary food (stunting)                                             96.0                        107,055                         1,332
 Treatment of severe acute malnutrition (wasting)                                               3.8                         5,370                           n.a


                                                      For non-pregnant women and general population
 Iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant women (anemia)                            16.3                                                        n.a
                                                                                                                           30,331
 Staple food fortification (anemia)                                                             3.9                                                         n.a
 Pro-breastfeeding social policies (breastfeeding)                                               5                           n.a                            n.a
 National breastfeeding promotion campaigns (breastfeeding)                                     20                           n.a                            n.a


                                                                         TOTAL:               273.3                       44,059                          1,168

Note: Financing needs and impacts assume a linear scale-up of interventions from the current coverage level to 90 percent over five years, then maintained at 90 percent
for an additional five years. Unit costs for each intervention were drawn from available unit costs from neighboring countries, global unit costs, or estimates available in the
literature. The estimated financing needs include an additional 12 percent (11 percent for pro-breastfeeding social policies and promotion campaigns) to account for monitoring,
evaluation, capacity, and policy development that may be necessary to reach full scale-up of the interventions. The Lives Saved Tool (LiST; see LiST 2015) was used to estimate
the impacts of interventions that target pregnant women and children. The impacts of interventions that target the general population or non-pregnant women were estimated
using a Microsoft Excel model. It should be noted that the LiST model does not capture potential synergies between specific interventions (e.g. the fact that the impact of
behavior change communication interventions may be higher in populations that have access to affordable and diversified foods or in populations with higher levels of educa-
tional attainment). Therefore, it is possible that the impact estimates generated using LiST in fact underestimate the true impact of the interventions in some contexts.

n.a. = not applicable.




CHAPTER 7 Rwanda: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                                  105
           Among the set of proposed interventions, complementary feeding education, prophylactic zinc supplementa-
           tion, and the public provision of complementary foods would be the most effective in preventing stunting, with
                                                      ANEMIA
           each averting 44,000, 65,000, and 72,000 cases of stunting, respectively. Although the intermittent presumptive
                                                    Total 13%:
           treatment of malaria in pregnancy would be the most cost-effective for preventing stunting, it would prevent
           fewer than 8,000 cases. Breastfeeding promotion by counseling mothers would be projected to increase the
           number of infants exclusively breastfed by 28,000, at a cost $88 per child exclusively breastfed, with a total
           additional financing need of $2.5 million over 10 years. For preventing   anemia in women, staple food fortifi-
                                                                                  WASTING
           cation would be the most cost-effective for non-pregnant women, at a     cost
                                                                                  Total:of
                                                                                         17%$10 for each case-year of anemia
           prevented. Over 10 years, staple food fortification and iron and folic acid supplementation for non-pregnant
           women would prevent about 391,000 and 859,000 case-years of anemia in women, respectively, and require $3.9
           million and  $16.3 million. Among pregnant women, antenatal micronutrient supplementation would prevent
                      STUNTING
Ethiopia   264,000 case-years of anemia, at a cost of $37 per case-year prevented,  or $9.9 million over 10 years.
                                                                                  BREASTFEEDING
                      Total 76%:
                                                                                                                             Total: 13%
           Interventions to reduce stunting would require the most resources, accounting for over 80 percent of the total
           amount required for scale-up. However, some of the stunting interventions would also affect the breastfeed-
                                                                         of total financing
           ing and anemia targets. Figure 7.8 represents the distributionTOTAL    TEN-YEAR  needs across interventions
                                                                                              FINANCING                to
                                                                                                             NEEDS: $2.2  billion
           address the four targets.

           Figure 7.8: Ten-Year Financing Needs for Scaling Up a Package of Nutrition-Specific Interventions in Rwanda, by Percent per
           Intervention
                                                                                      WASTING
                                                               ANEMIA                 Total: 1%
                                                              Total 12%:
                                                                                                               BREASTFEEDING
                                                                                                                  Total: 13%




                                                                                                                             TOTAL TEN-YEAR
 Rwanda                              STUNTING
                                     Total 82%:                                                                              FINANCING NEEDS:
                                                                                                                             $273 million



           Note: Some costs for anemia, breastfeeding, and stunting are shared across interventions. Costs for breastfeeding promotion ($2.5 million) have been included in both the
           total cost for the breastfeeding target and the total cost for the stunting target; the costs of intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic
           regions ($1.9 million) and antenatal micronutrient supplementation ($9.9 million) have been included in both the total cost for the anemia target and the total cost for the
           stunting target.




           Two Alternative Investment Packages
                                       ANEMIA
                                                                        Total 10%:
           In an environment of constrained resources in which Rwanda may not be able to raise $273 million over the
           next 10 years, two alternative investment packages are laid out for consideration.

                                                                                    WASTINGthat are the most cost-effective;
           The Priority Package: The first—the “priority package”—includes interventions
                                                                                    averted),
           that is, have the lowest cost per health outcome (e.g., case of stunting Total: 22%and that have well-established
           global policy guidelines and delivery platforms. Based on those two criteria, the priority package includes
           antenatal micronutrient supplementation, infant and young child nutrition counseling, intermittent presump-
 NIGER     tive treatment  of malaria in pregnancy in malaria-endemic regions, the treatment of severe acute malnutrition,
                      STUNTING
           weekly iron   and 71%:
                       Total                                                        BREASTFEEDING
                              folic acid supplementation for girls 15–19 years of age attending school, and fortification of
                                                                                                                              Total: 8%


           106 	                                                                                                                                           in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                        Stunting Reduction 
                                                                                                      TOTAL TEN-YEAR FINANCING NEEDS: $771 million
Table 7.4: Benefits and Cost-Effectiveness by Investment Package, Rwanda

         GLOBAL                                                             PRIORITY                     CATALYZING                FULL PACKAGE:
                                           BENEFIT                                                                              All interventions needed
         TARGET                                                             PACKAGE                   PROGRESS PACKAGE               to meet targets
                                                                       $5.7 million/year in             $12.2 million/year in    $27.3 million/year in
                                                                         financing need                   financing need           financing need

                                Cases of stunting reduced by
        STUNTING                                                              39,000                           75,000                   183,000
                                      2025 (vs 2015)a


                                 Cases of anemia in women
         ANEMIA                                                               754,000                         955,000                  1.5 million
                                    prevented by 2025


                                       Additional babies
    BREASTFEEDING                                                             28,000                          28,000                    28,000
                                    breastfed over 10 years

                                    Child deaths averted
                                                                               2,400                           3,600                    6,200
                                        over 10 years
      ALL TARGETS                   Cost per death averted                     23,034                          33,409                   44,059
                                       Cost per case of
                                                                                686                             1,171                    1,225
                                       stunting averted

a. Total impacts of proposed intervention package combined with other health and poverty reduction efforts.




wheat and maize flour. These interventions would be scaled up to full program coverage in the first five years
and maintained at full coverage levels for the last five years. This priority package would require an estimated
$57 million over 10 years, or $5.7 million annually (see Table 7.4).

During the 10 years of scale up, this package would prevent more than 39,000 cases of stunting and avert 2,400
deaths in children under five years of age. It would also prevent more than 754,000 case-years of anemia in
women and result in 28,000 children under six months of age being exclusively breastfed.

The Catalyzing Progress Package: The second alternative—the “catalyzing progress package”—includes
scale-up of all interventions in the priority package, plus a phased approach to scaling up public provision
of complementary foods, balanced energy protein supplementation, prophylactic zinc supplementation, and
weekly iron and folic acid supplementation for women outside of schools. It is assumed that, for the latter set of
interventions, during the first five years emphasis will be placed on establishing global guidelines and on oper-
ational research to develop effective delivery platforms, or to develop less expensive products or more cost-ef-
fective technologies. Financing needs are approximated as the cost of scaling up this set of interventions from 0
to 10 percent coverage only in the first five years. In the subsequent five years, it is assumed that the coverage
expansion of those interventions will accelerate and reach 60 percent by 2025. This package would require $12.2
million per year, a total of $122 million over 10 years (Table 7.4). It would prevent 3,600 deaths and more than
75,000 cases of stunting among children under age five, increase the number of exclusively breastfed children
under six months of age by 28,000, and prevent more than 955,000 case-years of anemia in women.

In comparing the relative cost-effectiveness of the three investment packages, the two alternative packages
are more cost-effective in preventing deaths and stunting. However, neither is as effective as the full package
in making progress toward achieving the stunting, wasting, and anemia targets. The priority and catalyzing
progress packages would prevent 2,400 and 3,600 deaths respectively, compared with 6,200 deaths prevented



CHAPTER 7 Rwanda: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                                                                 107
with the full package over 10 years. Under the full package scenario, 183,000 cases of childhood stunting would
be prevented, compared with 75,000 cases under the catalyzing progress scenario and 39,000 cases under the
priority package scenario. Furthermore, there would be nearly 750,000 and 545,000 more case-years of anemia
prevented in women under the priority package and catalyzing progress package, respectively.



A Call to Action
As the world stands on the cusp of the new Sustainable Development Goals, there is an unprecedented oppor-
tunity to save children’s lives, build future human capital and cognitive development, and drive faster eco-
nomic growth. Scaling up key nutrition interventions during the critical 1,000 day window of early childhood
would pay lifelong dividends, translating to healthier societies and more robust economies. If this window is
missed, it is missed for life.

The additional financing needed to reach the global nutrition targets will require coordinated efforts by all
stakeholders and a supportive policy environment. To achieve these targets, Rwanda would require an increase
in the funding allocated to nutrition by $27.3 million annually, roughly equivalent to a 12 percent increase in
current general government expenditure on health.6 These investments are over and above those needed for
improving water and sanitation and for addressing issues around women’s empowerment and food security.
Although this level of domestic financing is ambitious, Rwanda is already moving in this direction. In the long
term, nutrition interventions have significant potential to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity.

Accelerating the reduction of stunting in Rwanda will be essential for maximizing the return on investments
in early childhood development, in education, and more broadly in policies aimed at fostering and enhancing
human capital accumulation and job creation. Investing in the early years is even more critical because the
Africa region is entering a demographic transition with an expected increase in the working-age population
from 54 percent in 2010 to 64 percent in 2090. The scale-up of the key nutrition-specific interventions to reduce
stunting is estimated to generate considerable returns in economic benefits over the productive lives of ben-
eficiaries, and is a necessary condition to build human capital through investment in the early years and to
harness the potential benefits of the demographic dividend.



Endnotes
Note: All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.

1
 Information about the Power of Nutrition initiative is available at https://ciff.org/grant-portfolio/
the-power-of-nutrition/.

2
 ODA is committed from the Children’s Investment Fund Foundation, USAID, the Embassy of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands (EKN), UNICEF, the Government of the Netherlands, and the World Food Programme. Imple-
menting partners include Catholic Relief Services, Caritas, UNICEF, and the World Food Programme.

3
 Current financing by source is from the Results for Development Institute and can be found at http://www.
investinnutrition.org/.

4
 Note that because some funded interventions contribute to more than one target, the sum of funding across
the four targets is less than the total funding for each target added together.

5
 Two of the global nutrition targets—those for low birthweight and for child overweight—were not included
in the analyses because of insufficient data on the prevalence of low birthweight and a lack of consensus on
effective interventions to reach the target for child overweight.




108 	                                                                                               in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
6
 The WHO National Health accounts database indicates that general government health expenditure in
Rwanda was $227 million in 2014. At that level, this will need to be increased by 12% to accommodate the
$27.3 million per year required for scale-up of the 11 nutrition-specific interventions.




References
Aguayo, V. M., R. Nair, N. Badgaiyan, and V. Krishna. 2016. “Determinants of Stunting and Poor Linear Growth
in Children under 2 Years of Age in India: An In-Depth Analysis of Maharashtra’s Comprehensive Nutrition
Survey.” Maternal & Child Nutrition 12 (Suppl. 1): 121–40.

Alderman , H ., J. R. Behrman , and C. Puett . 2016 . “ Big Numbers about Small Children: Estimating the Eco-
nomic Benefits of Addressing Undernutrition .” World Bank Research Observer 31 ( 2 ).

Black, R. E., L. H. Allen, Z. A. Bhutta, L. E. Caulfield, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, C. Mathers, J. Rivera, and the
Maternal and Child Undernutrition Study Group. 2008. “Maternal and Child Undernutrition: Global and
Regional Exposures and Health Consequences.” The Lancet 371 (9608): 243–60.

Black, R. E., C. G .Victora, S. P. Walker, Z. A. Bhutta, P. Christian, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati, S. Grantham-Mcgregor,
J. Katz, R. Martorell, R. Uauy, and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. “Maternal and Child
Undernutrition and Overweight in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries.” The Lancet 382: 427–51.

Copenhagen Consensus Center. 2015. Smart Development Goals: The Post-2015 Consensus. http://www.copenha-
genconsensus.com/sites/default/files/outcomedocument_col.pdf

Daniels, M. C. and L. Adair. 2004. “Growth in Young Filipino Children Predicts Schooling Trajectories through
High School.” Journal of Nutrition 134: 1439–46.

Fink, G., E. Peet, G. Danaei, K. Andrews, D. C. McCoy, C. R. Sudfeld, M. C. Smith Fawzi, M. Ezzati, and W. W.
Fawzi. 2016. “Schooling and Wage Income Losses Due to Early-Childhood Growth Faltering in Developing
Countries: National, Regional, and Global Estimates.” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 104 (1): 104–12.

Hoddinott, J., H. Alderman, J. R. Behrman, L. Haddad, and S. Horton. 2013. “The Economic Rationale for
Investing in Stunting Reduction.” Maternal and Child Nutrition 9 (Suppl. 2): 69–82.

Hoddinott, J., J. A. Maluccio, J. R. Behman, R. Flores, and R. Martorell. 2008. “Effect of a Nutrition Intervention
during Early Childhood on Economic Productivity in Guatemalan Adults.” Lancet 371 (9610): 411–16.

Horton, S. and R. Steckel. 2013. “Malnutrition: Global Economic Losses Attributable to Malnutrition 1900–2000
and Projections to 2050.” In The Economics of Human Challenges, edited by B. Lomborg, 247–72. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.

IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2016. Global Nutrition Report 2016: From Promise to Impact –
Ending Malnutrition by 2030. Washington, DC: IFPRI.

Martorell, R., B. L. Horta, L. S. Adair, A. D. Stein, L. Richter, C. H. D. Fall, S. K. Bhargava, S. K. Dey Biswas,
L. Perez, F. C. Barros, C. G. Victora, and Consortium on Health Orientated Research in Transitional Societies
Group. 2010. “Weight Gain in the First Two Years of Life Is an Important Predictor of Schooling Outcomes in
Pooled Analyses from Five Birth Cohorts from Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” Journal of Nutrition 140:
348–54.




CHAPTER 7 Rwanda: An Investment Framework for Nutrition	                                                             109
Ministry of Health, Republic of Rwanda. 2014. National Food and Nutrition Strategic Plan, 2013–2018. Kigali:
Republic of Rwanda. http://www.moh.gov.rw/fileadmin/templates/policies/National_Food_and_Nutrition_
Strategic_Plan_2013-2018-18_scanned.pdf

Ministry of Local Government, Republic of Rwanda. 2016. Revised Joint Action Plan to Eliminate Malnutrition
(2016-2020).

Ozaltin, E., K. Hill, and S. V. Subramanian. 2010. “Association of Maternal Stature with Offspring Mortality,
Underweight, and Stunting in Low- to Middle-Income Countries.” JAMA 303 (15): 1507–16.

RDHS (Rwanda Demographic Health Survey). 2015. Rwanda: 2014-15 Demographic Health Survey Key Findings.
Rockville, Maryland, USA: NISR, MOH, and ICF International. http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/SR229/
SR229.pdf

Republic of Rwanda. 2012. Rwanda Vision 2020, Revised 2012. http://www.minecofin.gov.rw/fileadmin/tem-
plates/documents/NDPR/Vision_2020_.pdf

Save the Children. 2011a. A Cost of Diet Analysis in a Northern Highland District of Rwanda. Save the Children,
UK. https://www.google.
com/#q=A+cost+of+diet+analysis+in+a+northern+highland+district+of+Rwanda&spf=1495722395282

———. 2011b. Household Economy Analysis Rwanda. Save the Children, UK.

Shekar, M., J. Kakietek, J. D. Eberwein, and D. Walters. 2017. An Investment Framework for Nutrition: Reaching
the Global Targets for Stunting, Anemia, Breastfeeding, and Wasting. Directions in Development. Washington, DC:
World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1010-7. https://tinyurl.com/InvestmentFrameworkNutrition

UN DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2015. World Population Prospects, the
2015 Revision. https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/

V20. 2017. Climate Vulnerable Forum. http://www.v-20.org. Accessed May, 2017.

WFP (World Food Programme). 2013. The Cost of Hunger in Rwanda: Social and Economic Impacts of Child Under-
nutrition in Rwanda. Implications on National Development and Vision 2020. http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/
groups/public/documents/newsroom/wfp263106.pdf?_ga=1.118450383.790854755.1490990329

WHO (World Health Organization). 2014. Comprehensive Implementation Plan on Maternal, Infant and Young Child
Nutrition. Geneva: WHO. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/113048/1/WHO_NMH_NHD_14.1_eng.
pdf?ua=1

World Bank. 2016. Rwanda Economic Update: Rwanda at Work. Edition No. 9. Kigali: World Bank. http://docu-
ments.worldbank.org/curated/en/126991468197359041/pdf/103618-WP-P156677-PUBLIC-Rwanda-Econom-
ic-Update-Feb-25-2016.pdf

———. 2017. World Development Indicators (database), World Bank, Washington, DC (accessed May 1, 2017),
http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators




110 	                                                                                               in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
ANNEX 1: Income Elasticity Tables
Table A.1: Data Sources
        Determinant               Category                           Variable                                    Definition details                         Source
 Outcome                   Chronic undernutrition                                            Prevalence of stunting, height for age (% of children
                                                       Stunting rate (%)                                                                                  JME*
                                                                                             under 5)
 Basic                     Macro-fiscal                Constant GNI per capita (USD)         Constant GNI per capita (USD)                                WDI
                                                       GNI per cap. growth (%)               GNI per capita growth (annual %)                             WDI
                                                                                             Negative GNI per capita growth recorded in a year
                                                       Economic recession episodes                                                                        WDI
                                                                                             (calculated)
                                                                                             Herfindhal index calculated over three sectors--value        WDI
                                                       Economic diversification (1=high
                                                                                             added agriculture, industry, and services (each expressed
                                                       ; 0=low)                                                                                           WDI
                                                                                             as % of GDP)
                                                                                             General government health expenditure (GGHE) as %
                                                       Public health exp. (% GDP)                                                                         WHO GHED
                                                                                             of GDP
                                                                                             General government health expenditure (GGHE) as % of
                                                       Public health exp. (% GGE)                                                                         WHO GHED
                                                                                             general government expenditure
                                                       Public education exp. (% GDP)         Government expenditure on education (% of GDP)               WDI
                           Inclusiveness               GINI index                            GINI index (World Bank estimate)                             WDI
                                                       Share bottom 40%                      Income share held by bottom 40% of population                WDI
                           Governance                                                        Control of corruption measured on a scale of -2.5 (weak)
                                                       Control of corruption                                                                              WGI
                                                                                             to 2.5 (strong)
                                                                                             Government effectiveness measured on a scale of -2.5
                                                       Government effectiveness                                                                           WGI
                                                                                             (weak) to 2.5 (strong)
                                                                                             Political stability and absence of violence/terrorism
                                                       Political stability                                                                                WGI
                                                                                             measured on a scale of -2.5 (weak) to 2.5 (strong)
                                                                                             Regulatory quality measured on a scale of -2.5 (weak) to
                                                       Regulatory quality                                                                                 WGI
                                                                                             2.5 (strong)
                                                                                             Rule of law measured on a scale of -2.5 (weak) to 2.5
                                                       Rule of law                                                                                        WGI
                                                                                             (strong)
                                                                                             Voice and accountability measured on a scale of -2.5
                                                       Voice and accountability                                                                           WGI
                                                                                             (weak) to 2.5 (strong)
                           Conflicts                                                         State Fragility Index (effectiveness score+legitimacy
                                                       State fragility index                                                                              CSP
                                                                                             score=25 points max)
                                                                                             Total of magnitude scores of major international and civil
                                                       Violence episodes                                                                                  CSP
                                                                                             politically violent episodes
                                                                                             Number of conflicts (involving goverments) that occured
                                                       Number of conflicts (UCDP)                                                                         UCDP
                                                                                             this year with at least 25 deaths recorded
 Underlying                Food security                                                     Food availability as measured in kilocalories per capita
                                                       Food supply availability                                                                           FAO
                                                                                             per day
                                                       Depth of food deficit                 Food deficit as measured in kilocalories per capita per day WDI
                           Household environment                                             Improved sanitation facilities (% of population with
                                                       Improved sanitation                                                                                WDI
                                                                                             access)

                                                       Improved water source                 Improved water source (% of population with access)          WDI

JME=Joint Malnutrition Estimates (UNICEF, WHO, The World Bank); WDI=World Development Indicators;
WHO GHED=World Health Organization Government Health Expenditure Database; WGI=Worldwide Governance Indicators;
CSP=Center for Systemic Peace; UCDP=Uppsala Conflict Data Program; FAO=United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
* JME was prioritized for the stunting rate variable. However, when stunting data was missing for a year, these sources were used:
WDI, HealthStats (Health, Nutrition and Population Statistics), WHO, and DHS (Demographic and Health Surveys).




112 	                                                                                                                                       in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                         Stunting Reduction 
Table A.2: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                            T-TEST: H0: (2) - (3) = 0
                                                        MEAN      MEAN
                                             MEAN
                                                       NON-SSA     SSA
                                               (1)                         t-stat              p-value
                                                         (2)       (3)
                                                                             (4)                 (5)
 Stunting rate (%)                            30.1       25.8      38.7    -13.6                 0.0
 Constant GNI per capita (USD)               10791.3    13619.9   1860.8    45.1                 0.0
 Constant GDP per capita (PPP)               15077.7    18727.3   3965.9   39.8                  0.0
 GNI per cap. growth (%)                       2.1        2.3      1.5      3.8                  0.0
 GDP per cap. growth (%)                       2.1       2.4       1.3      5.9                  0.0
 Economic recession episodes                   0.1        0.1      0.2     -13.8                 0.0
 Economic diversification (1=high ; 0=low)    0.5        0.5       0.4     30.6                  0.0
 Rents (% GDP)                                 9.5       8.4       12.3    -10.1                 0.0
 Agriculture sector (% GDP)                   18.9       13.8      30.9    -41.0                 0.0
 Trade openned (X+M % GDP)                    78.4       81.6      69.6     10.2                 0.0
 Public health exp. (% GDP)                    3.7       4.2       2.4     26.6                  0.0
 Public health exp. (% GGE)                   11.2       11.7      9.8      12.4                 0.0
 Public education exp. (% GDP)                4.4        4.4       4.4      0.7                  0.5
 GINI index                                   39.8       39.1      44.7     -7.7                 0.0
 Share bottom 40%                             17.0       17.2      14.9     7.1                  0.0
 Female to male life expectancy ratio          1.1        1.1       1.1    25.8                  0.0
 Female having completed lower secondary
                                              64.6       67.8      28.5     11.0                 0.0
 education (%)
 Control of corruption                        0.0        0.2       -0.6    26.5                  0.0
 Government effectiveness                     0.0        0.2       -0.8    32.8                  0.0
 Political stability                          0.0         0.1      -0.6     17.8                 0.0
 Regulatory quality                           0.0        0.2       -0.7    29.7                  0.0
 Rule of law                                  0.0        0.2       -0.7    30.0                  0.0
 Voice and accountability                     0.0        0.2       -0.6     24.1                 0.0
 State fragility index                         9.4        7.1      15.4    -41.1                 0.0
 Violence episodes                            0.7        0.7       0.8      -2.0                 0.0
 # Conflicts (UCDP)                            1.4        1.4      1.2      5.3                  0.0
 Food supply availability (kcal/cap/d)       2567.2     2694.5    2187.9   54.5                  0.0
 Depth of food deficit                        137.8      111.2    188.6    -17.2                 0.0
 Coverage Vitamin A (% pop)                   60.7       63.5      58.8     2.1                  0.0
 Open defecation (% pop)                      12.9       6.8       31.1    -33.1                 0.0
 Improved sanitation (% pop)                  69.5       81.5     30.8     70.5                  0.0
 Improved water source (% pop)                84.4       90.6     64.4     45.9                  0.0




ANNEXES		                                                                                                113
Table A.3: Summary of Existing Empirical Evidence
                                                                        NUTRITIONAL OUTCOME
 STUDY                   INCOME ELASTICITY      INCOME VARIABLE                                    SAMPLE              ESTIMATION METHOD
                                                                        VARIABLE
                                                                                                   "1970-1995
 Haddad et al. (2002)    -0.51 (long-run)       GDP per capita          Underweight prevalence                         OLS, country fixed effects
                                                                                                   61 countries”
                                                                                                                       "OLS, country fixed
                                                % change in GDP per     Change in stunting rates   “1985-2009
 Headey (2013)           -0.18                                                                                         effects (first differences
                                                capita                  (percentage points)        115 countries”
                                                                                                                       approach)”
                                                % change in GDP per     Change in stunting rate                        OLS (first differences
 Heltberg (2009)*        -0.2                                                                      1969-2000
                                                capita                  (percentage points)                            approach)
                         "-1.07 (urban bottom
                         quintile)              % change in GNI per                                “1985-86, 1986-87
 Sahn (1994)                                                            Height-for-age z-score                         OLS
                         -0.28 (rural bottom    capita"                                            Côte d’Ivoire”
                         quintile)”
                                                Log of per capita                                  “1970-1996 63
 Smith & Haddad (2000)   -1.26                                          Underweight prevalence                         OLS, country fixed effects
                                                household expenditure                              countries”
                                                                                                   “1970-1996 63
 Smith & Haddad (2002)   -0.63                  GDP per capita          Underweight prevalence                         OLS, random effects
                                                                                                   countries”
                                                                                                                       “Long-run: 2SLS/IV,
                         “-0.63 (long-run)                                                         “1970-2012          country fixed effects;
 Smith & Haddad (2015)                          GDP per capita          Stunting prevalence
                         -0.17 (short-run)”                                                        116 countries”      Short-run: OLS, first
                                                                                                                       differences”
                                                                                                   “1980-2007
 Webb & Block (2010)     -0.32                  GDP per capita          Stunting prevalence                            OLS
                                                                                                   29 countries”




114 	                                                                                                                   in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                     Stunting Reduction 
Table A.4: Regression Results (Pooled OLS and IV-2SLS)
 DEPENDENT: LN(STUNTING)                    POOLED OLS (1)           POOLED OLS (2)             IV-2SLS (3)     POOLED OLS (4)   POOLED OLS (5)

 GDP per cap. (Ln)                              -0.504***               -0.500***                   -0.463***      -0.566***        -0.568***
                                                 (0.0158)                (0.0159)                   (0.0406)        (0.0192)         (0.0192)

 Interaction GDP*SSA                                                                                               0.377***
                                                                                                                   (0.0314)

 Interaction GDP*South SSA                                                                                                          0.476***
                                                                                                                                    (0.0316)

 Interaction GDP*West SSA                                                                                                            0.419***
                                                                                                                                    (0.0484)

 Interaction GDP*Central SSA                                                                                                        0.445***
                                                                                                                                    (0.0335)

 Interaction GDP*East SSA                                                                                                           0.328***
                                                                                                                                    (0.0363)

 Sub-Saharan Africa                                                                                                -2.560***
                                                                                                                    (0.215)

 Southern SSA                                                                                                                       -3.268***
                                                                                                                                     (0.248)

 Western SSA                                                                                                                        -2.935***
                                                                                                                                     (0.320)

 Central SSA                                                                                                                        -2.954***
                                                                                                                                     (0.230)

 Eastern SSA                                                                                                                        -2.152***
                                                                                                                                     (0.236)

 Constant                                       6.982***                 7.034***                   6.786***       7.549***         7.566***
                                                (0.109)                   (0.109)                   (0.299)         (0.141)          (0.141)
 INCOME ELASTICITIES

 Non-SSA                                            .                        .                          .          -0.566***        -0.568***
                                                    .                        .                          .           (0.0192)         (0.0192)

 SSA                                                .                        .                          .          -.189***             .
                                                    .                        .                          .           (.025)              .

 South SSA                                          .                        .                          .              .            -.092***
                                                    .                        .                          .              .             (.025)

 West SSA                                           .                       .                           .              .            -.149***
                                                    .                       .                           .              .             (.045)

 Central SSA                                        .                       .                           .              .             -.123***
                                                    .                       .                           .              .             (.028)

 East SSA                                           .                       .                           .              .             -.24***
                                                    .                       .                           .              .              (.031)
 ENDOGENEITY TESTS
 Sargan-Hansen J-stat.                              .                       .                         .639             ..               ..
                                p-value             .                       .                         .424
 KP LM-stat                                         .                       .                        94.639            ..               ..
                                p-value             .                       .                          0
 KP F-stat                                          .                       .                        36.479            ..               ..
                 KP F-critical value 10%            .                       .                         19.93
 Wu-Hausman F-test                                  .                       .                         .295             ..               ..
                                p-value             .                       .                         .587
 Durbin Wu-Hausman Chi2-test                        .                       .                         .296             ..               ..
                                p-value             .                       .                         .586
 Observations                                     808                      808                        728            808              808
 R-squared                                       0.607                    0.617                      0.617          0.662            0.672
 Time trend                                        NO                      YES                        YES            YES              YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Instrumental variables for income include M2 as % of GDP, and the investment share of the economy


ANNEXES		                                                                                                                                         115
Table A.5: Panel Regression Results (Random/Fixed/Mixed Effects)
                                                           PANEL REGRESSION MODELS
 DEPENDENT:
                             RANDOM EFFECTS                           FIXED EFFECTS                             MIXED EFFECTS
 LN(STUNTING)
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)                        (4)               (5)                    (6)

                                 -0.552***    -0.549***   -0.498***               -0.489***            -0.546***           -0.544***
 GDP per cap. (Ln)
                                 (0.0319)      (0.0319)   (0.0458)                (0.0460)             (0.0309)            (0.0305)
                                 0.348***                  0.318***                                     0.341***
 Interaction GDP*SSA
                                 (0.0550)                 (0.0694)                                     (0.0529)
 Interaction GDP*South                        0.490***                            0.465***                                  0.483***
 SSA                                           (0.133)                             (0.155)                                   (0.128)
 Interaction GDP*West                         0.314***                                0.253**                                0.313***
 SSA                                          (0.0976)                                (0.108)                               (0.0958)
 Interaction GDP*Central                      0.371***                                0.287*                                0.373***
 SSA                                          (0.110)                                 (0.146)                               (0.102)
                                              0.323***                            0.296**                                   0.313***
 Interaction GDP*East SSA
                                              (0.106)                             (0.117)                                   (0.104)
                                 -2.256***                                                             -2.230***
 Sub-Saharan Africa
                                  (0.413)                                                               (0.464)
                                              -3.268***                                                                     -3.319***
 Southern SSA
                                               (1.076)                                                                       (1.042)
                                              -2.115***                                                                     -2.213***
 Western SSA
                                              (0.673)                                                                        (0.677)
                                              -2.286***                                                                     -2.410***
 Central SSA
                                               (0.874)                                                                       (0.829)
                                              -1.988***                                                                     -2.037***
 Eastern SSA
                                               (0.701)                                                                       (0.706)
                                 7.335***     7.307***    6.305***                6.293***              7.314***            7.317***
 Constant
                                 (0.264)      (0.264)     (0.294)                 (0.299)               (0.273)             (0.268)
 INCOME ELASTICITIES
                                 -0.552***    -0.549***   -0.498***               -0.489***            -0.546***           -0.544***
 Non-SSA
                                 (0.0319)      (0.0319)   (0.0458)                (0.0460)             (0.0309)            (0.0305)
                                 -.204***         .        -.181***                      .             -.205***                    .
 SSA
                                  (.048)          .         (.061)                       .              (.046)                     .
                                     .         -.058          .                       -.024                .                    -.062
 South SSA
                                     .         (.131)         .                       (.152)               .                    (.126)
                                     .          -.235         .                       -.236**              .                 -.232**
 West SSA
                                     .         (.093)         .                          (.1)              .                 (.092)
                                     .          -.177         .                        -.201               .                     -.171*
 Central SSA
                                     .         (.106)         .                        (.141)              .                    (.098)
                                     .        -.226***        .                       -.193*               .                 -.232**
 East SSA
                                     .          (.105)        .                       (.116)               .                  (.102)
 Observations                      808          808         808                        808               808                     808
 Sargan-Hansen statistic           2.961       3.646          .                          .                 .                       .
 p-value                           .398         .724          .                          .                 .                       .
 Time Trend                        YES          YES         YES                        YES               YES                     YES
 R-squared                           .            .         .461                        .46                .                       .
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




116 	                                                                                                              in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                Stunting Reduction 
Table A.6: Quantile Regression Results
                                                                       QUANTILE REGRESSION MODELS
 DEPENDENT:                                25th percentile                         50th percentile                        75th percentile
 LN(STUNTING)
                                     (1)                      (2)            (3)                      (4)        (5)                         (6)

                                  -0.662***             -0.666***         -0.540***             -0.542***      -0.418***                -0.428***
 GNI per cap. (Ln)
                                  (0.0303)              (0.0290)           (0.0185)             (0.0180)       (0.0165)                  (0.0158)
                                  0.446***                                0.368***                             0.263***
 Interaction GNI*SSA
                                  (0.0649)                                (0.0396)                             (0.0354)
 Interaction GNI*South                                   0.558***                                0.441***                               0.359***
 SSA                                                      (0.157)                                (0.0977)                               (0.0858)
 Interaction GNI*West                                    0.459***                                 0.401***                              0.330***
 SSA                                                      (0.144)                                (0.0896)                               (0.0787)
 Interaction GNI*Central                                 0.472***                                0.377***                               0.357***
 SSA                                                     (0.120)                                 (0.0743)                               (0.0653)
                                                         0.399**                                 0.264***                                0.200**
 Interaction GNI*East SSA
                                                         (0.164)                                  (0.102)                               (0.0892)
                                  -2.969***                               -2.520***                            -1.830***
 Sub-Saharan Africa
                                   (0.460)                                 (0.281)                              (0.251)
                                                         -3.694***                               -3.075***                              -2.643***
 Southern SSA
                                                          (1.220)                                 (0.758)                                (0.665)
                                                         -3.177***                               -2.839***                              -2.374***
 Western SSA
                                                         (0.966)                                  (0.600)                                (0.526)
                                                         -3.082***                               -2.560***                              -2.467***
 Central SSA
                                                          (0.904)                                 (0.561)                                (0.493)
                                                         -2.547**                                -1.793***                              -1.405**
 Eastern SSA
                                                          (1.042)                                 (0.647)                               (0.568)
                                  8.013***               8.055***         7.404***               7.423***      6.756***                 6.815***
 Constant
                                  (0.244)                (0.234)           (0.149)                (0.145)       (0.133)                 (0.128)
 INCOME ELASTICITIES
                                  -0.662***             -0.666***         -0.540***             -0.542***      -0.418***                -0.428***
 Non-SSA
                                  (0.0303)              (0.0290)           (0.0185)             (0.0180)       (0.0165)                  (0.0158)
                                  -.216***                      .          -.172***                     .      -.155***                       .
 SSA
                                   (.058)                       .           (.035)                      .       (.031)                        .
                                      .                      -.108            .                       -.101        .                          -.07
 South SSA
                                      .                      (.155)           .                      (.096)        .                        (.084)
                                      .                      -.208            .                        -.141       .                        -.098
 West SSA
                                      .                      (.142)           .                      (.088)        .                        (.077)
                                      .                      -.195*           .                      -.165**       .                         -.072
 Central SSA
                                      .                      (.116)           .                      (.072)        .                        (.063)
                                      .                      -.268*           .                  -.278***          .                    -.228***
 East SSA
                                      .                       (.161)          .                     (.1)           .                     (.088)
 Observations                       808                       808           808                       808        808                         808
 Time trend                         YES                       YES           YES                       YES        YES                         YES
Standard errors in parentheses	
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1	




ANNEXES		                                                                                                                                            117
Table A.7a: Mixed Effects Regression Results
 DEPENDENT:                                                         MULTILEVEL MIXED-EFFECTS MODEL
 LN(STUNTING)                             (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)

                                       -0.546***   -0.546***   -0.552***   -0.514***   -0.564***    -0.545***     -0.514***    -0.419***
 GDP per cap. (Ln)
                                        (0.031)     (0.034)     (0.032)     (0.047)     (0.045)      (0.031)       (0.036)      (0.039)
                                       0.341***    0.323***    0.345***    0.265***    0.334***      0.334***     0.369***     0.266***
 Interaction GDP*SSA
                                       (0.053)     (0.059)     (0.055)     (0.083)     (0.076)       (0.053)      (0.061)      (0.055)
                                       -2.230***   -2.179***   -2.264***   -1.674***   -2.180***    -2.204***     -2.444***    -1.822***
 Sub-Saharan Africa
                                        (0.464)    (0.496)      (0.477)     (0.623)     (0.581)      (0.455)       (0.499)      (0.448)
 Past economic recession (GNI pc                    0.029
 growth<0)                                         (0.023)
 Diversification of GDP                            -1.018***
 (1-Herfindhal)                                     (0.278)
                                                                0.000
 Trade (% of GDP)
                                                               (0.000)
 Lagged public health exp.                                                 -0.034*
 (%GDP)                                                                    (0.019)
 Lagged public education exp.                                              -0.029*
 (%GDP)                                                                    (0.016)
                                                                                        0.002
 GINI coefficient
                                                                                       (0.003)
 Female/Male life expectancy                                                                         -0.883
 ratio                                                                                               (0.551)
 (Ln) Food supply (kcal/capita/                                                                                   -0.422**
 day) (FAO)                                                                                                        (0.165)
 People practicing open                                                                                                        -0.002
 defecation (% of population)                                                                                                  (0.002)
 Improved sanitation facilities (%                                                                                             -0.007***
 of population with access)                                                                                                     (0.002)
 Improved water source (% of                                                                                                    -0.001
 population with access)                                                                                                       (0.002)
                                       7.314***    7.776***    7.358***    7.305***    7.379***      8.258***     10.374***    6.923***
 Constant
                                       (0.273)     (0.292)     (0.278)     (0.383)     (0.383)       (0.645)       (1.177)     (0.306)
 INCOME ELASTICITIES
                                       -0.546***   -0.546***   -0.552***   -0.514***   -0.564***    -0.545***     -0.514***    -0.419***
                          Non-SSA
                                        (0.031)     (0.034)     (0.032)     (0.047)     (0.045)      (0.031)       (0.036)      (0.039)
                                       -.205***    -.224***    -.207***    -.249***    -.249***      -.249***     -.249***     -.249***
                                 SSA
                                        (.046)      (.053)      (.048)       (.071)      (.071)        (.071)       (.071)       (.071)
 RANDOM-EFFECTS PARAMETERS
 Standard deviation                     .222***     .22***      .22***      .127***     .183***      .204***       .202***      .178***
 (region effect)                     (.077)     (.077)      (.077)      (.073)      (.072)        (.074)        (.072)      (.074)
 Standard deviation                     .457***     .457***     .458***     .42***      .394***      .458***       .432***      .434***
 (country effect)                      (.03)       (.031)      (.03)      (.034)       (.032)       (.03)         (.03)        (.03)
                                        .215***     .211***     .216***     .183***     .212***       .214***      .214***       .19***
 Standard deviation (residual) 
                                        (.006)      (.006)      (.006)        (.01)     (.008)        (.006)       (.006)       (.006)
 Observations                            808         738         779         289         476           806          717          690
 Time trend                              YES         YES         YES         YES         YES           YES          YES          YES
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




118 	                                                                                                                 in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                   Stunting Reduction 
Table A.7b: Mixed Effects Regression Results (continued)
 DEPENDENT:                                                            MULTILEVEL MIXED-EFFECTS MODEL
 LN(STUNTING)                         (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)

                                   -0.546***   -0.448***   -0.432***     -0.493***    -0.467***   -0.444***   -0.477***   -0.564***   -0.483***
 GDP per cap. (Ln)
                                    (0.031)     (0.041)     (0.043)       (0.040)      (0.041)     (0.041)     (0.038)     (0.030)     (0.050)
                                   0.341***    0.272***    0.262***      0.285***     0.280***    0.276***    0.338***    0.385***    0.327***
 Interaction GDP*SSA
                                   (0.053)     (0.063)     (0.063)       (0.064)      (0.064)     (0.063)     (0.056)     (0.051)     (0.084)
                                   -2.230***   -1.643***   -1.586***      -1.758***   -1.709***   -1.687***   -2.164***   -2.541***   -2.049***
 Sub-Saharan Africa
                                    (0.464)     (0.529)     (0.531)        (0.526)     (0.527)     (0.528)     (0.472)     (0.453)     (0.649)
                                               -0.103***
 Control of corruption
                                                (0.038)
                                                           -0.127***
 Government effectiveness
                                                           (0.045)
 Political stability and                                                   0.005
 absence of violence                                                      (0.024)
                                                                                      -0.053
 Regulatory quality
                                                                                      (0.037)
                                                                                                  -0.123***
 Rule of law
                                                                                                   (0.041)
                                                                                                               0.011**
 State fragility index
                                                                                                              (0.006)
                                                                                                                           0.000
 Political violence episodes
                                                                                                                          (0.007)
                                                                                                                                       -0.033
 Number of conflicts
                                                                                                                                      (0.023)
                                    7.314***   6.613***    6.479***      6.986***     6.767***    6.556***    6.704***    7.480***    6.924***
 Constant
                                    (0.273)    (0.345)     (0.363)       (0.334)      (0.349)     (0.349)     (0.349)     (0.265)     (0.416)
 INCOME ELASTICITIES
                                   -0.546***   -0.448***   -0.432***     -0.493***    -0.467***   -0.444***   -0.477***   -0.564***   -0.483***
                         Non-SSA
                                    (0.031)     (0.041)    (0.043)        (0.040)      (0.041)     (0.041)    (0.038)     (0.030)     (0.050)
                                   -.205***     -.177***    -.17***       -.208***     -.187***    -.168***    -.139***    -.179***    -.156*
                            SSA
                                    (.046)      (.055)      (.056)         (.057)      (.057)      (.056)      (.051)      (.044)      (.081)
 RANDOM-EFFECTS PARAMETERS
 Standard deviation                 .222***     .222***     .222***       .204***      .208***     .227***     .205***     .228***     .267***
 (region effect)                  (.077)       (.08)      (.081)         (.079)      (.079)      (.081)      (.073)      (.074)       (.114)
 Standard deviation                 .457***     .441***     .443***       .458***      .453***     .437***      .41***     .402***     .357***
 (country effect)                  (.03)       (.03)       (.03)         (.031)      (.031)       (.03)       (.03)      (.027)      (.044)
 Standard deviation                 .215***     .187***     .187***        .187***     .187***     .188***     .185***     .209***     .145***
 (residual)                       (.006)      (.007)      (.007)         (.007)      (.007)      (.007)      (.006)      (.006)       (.01)
 Observations                        808         526         525            525         525          526        593          777        168
 Time trend                          YES         YES         YES            YES         YES         YES         YES         YES         YES

Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




ANNEXES		                                                                                                                                        119
ANNEX 2: Brief Review of Empirical Evidence of the Determinants
of Undernutrition
To better understand the drivers of child undernutrition, past studies have conducted cross-country regressions
and/or run analyses on country-level data.



Immediate Causes
Because of the lack of child-level data on dietary intake and health status (two immediate determinants), the
econometric analyses have focused on the underlying and basic determinants as defined in UNICEF’s concep-
tual framework on the factors determining child nutritional status.



Underlying Causes
The main underlying determinants considered in past studies of child undernutrition include the following:
food security, resources for/knowledge of the caregiver, and resources in the household environment.


Food Security
National food supply is the main variable used in this category of underlying causes since the indicator is
readily available. The literature calls for better measurement of food security since national food availability
does not encompass food access/distribution or intake. Meanwhile, studies continue to use food availability to
identify a “food secure” country without considering differences between regions, communities, households,
and within households. Dietary energy availability/food supply (Frongillo, de Onis, and Hanson 1997; Smith
and Haddad 2000, 2002, 2015) and food production per capita (Headey 2012) are measures employed by previ-
ous studies; these variables are shown to have significant positive effects on nutritional outcomes.


Resources for/Knowledge of the Caregiver
The most common measure of adequacy/quality of care for a child is female/mother’s education or literacy
rate. A couple of micro-level studies use the number of adult women in the household: (Sahn 1994) with data
from Côte d’Ivoire and (Marini and Gragnolati 2003) with data from Guatemala.

Both cross-country and country-level results point to the importance of female education/literacy to reduce
stunting prevalence (Christiaensen and Alderman 2001; Delpeuch et al. 2000; Frongillo, de Onis, and Hanson
1997; Headey 2012; Kabubo-Mariara, Ndenge, and Kirii 2006; Milman et al. 2005; Marini and Gragnolati 2003;
Sahn 1994; Smith and Haddad 2000, 2002, 2015). This variable has the most consistent results; more education
for the caregiver will always result in better nutritional outcomes for children.


Enabling Environment Resources
This underlying determinant encompasses improved sanitation, improved water sources, and health care
access for households. Safe water has been found to be a significant driver of stunting reduction (Christiaensen
and Alderman 2001; Milman, et al. 2005; Marini and Gragnolati 2003; Smith and Haddad 2000, 2002, 2015).
However, household infrastructure variables, such as safe water, have not been consistently significant across
studies. For example, Headey (2012) found that improved sanitation, improved water, and electricity had no
effect on nutritional outcomes (Headey 2012). Likewise, Brown et al. (2017) found no significant effect from
improved sanitation and water (Brown, Ravallion, and van de Walle 2017).




120 	                                                                                              in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                Stunting Reduction 
A key determinant belonging to this category, health care access, is generally not included in cross-country
studies because of the lack of quality data. Thus, infrastructure quality variables—easily available and univer-
sally recorded in household surveys—are relied upon to evaluate the local environment/community resources.
Only Headey (2012) decided to include two variables that proxy for health care access: percentage of births in
a medical facility and percentage of children vaccinated (Headey 2012). Country-level studies, however, may
have adequate data to assess whether access to health care significantly contributes to child nutrition. Glewwe
et al. (2004) use data from Vietnam and show that distance to the nearest medical facility and the availability of
oral rehydration salts are significant factors that reduce stunting (Glewwe, Koch, and Nguyen 2004).



Basic Causes
Following the conceptual framework, the basic determinants fall into five main categories: income, other mac-
ro-fiscal, inclusiveness, governance, and conflict.


Income
Most cross-country studies on the drivers of nutritional outcomes use GDP per capita as the main income
variable; only Heltberg uses change in GNI per capita as the main independent variable (Heltberg 2002, 2009).
There seems to be a general consensus that increases in income have a positive influence on stunting rates, but
also that growth-promoting policies should be complemented with direct health-related interventions.

Overall, income per capita has a significant effect on nutritional status of children (Alderman et al. 2001;
Headey 2012; Heltberg 2009; Smith and Haddad 2000, 2002, 2015). The brief spotlight on Sub-Saharan Africa
in Smith & Haddad (2000), in contrast, concluded that, because of declining national income in the region
between 1975 and 1990, national income did not have a positive influence on undernutrition reduction (Smith
and Haddad 2000). Heltberg’s 2009 study had a region-by-region analysis that concluded that there indeed was
a small but significant effect of income per capita on stunting rates across all regions, including Sub-Saharan
Africa, although no formal statistical test was provided to assess whether the income elasticity in Sub-Saharan
Africa was different than in other regions of the world (Heltberg 2009).

Income composition has also been considered in past cross-country studies with mixed results. Webb and Block
(2012) suggest that increasing agricultural income per capita would directly improve nutritional outcomes
(Webb and Block 2012). However, Headey (2012) found the opposite effect: non-agricultural growth (measured
as a percentage change of GDP per capita) had a significant effect on reducing stunting (Headey 2012).

A significant income effect on improving stunting rates has further been found in micro level studies. These
country-level analyses use household consumption/expenditure per capita (or per adult equivalent) or an asset
index. They support the general findings from cross-country regressions that increasing income per capita at
the household-level improves child nutritional outcomes. Table A2.1 identifies these micro-level papers and
their countries of study.

It is important to note that a few studies found a minimal or no significant association between income and
child nutrition. Using Demographic and Health Survey data from 36 countries and income data from the Penn
World Tables, Vollmer et al. (2014) found a very small association between income and nutritional outcomes
(Vollmer, et al. 2014). Additionally, two country-level studies did not find a significant effect: (1) Subra-
manyam et al. (2011) found no association between state-level economic growth and undernutrition in India




ANNEXES		                                                                                                       121
(Subramanyam, et al. 2011); and (2) Glewwe et al. (2004) found no significant effect of household per capita
expenditures on nutrition in Vietnam (Glewwe, Koch, and Nguyen 2004).

Economic diversification is also an uncommon variable in these cross-country studies. One study (Milman et al.
2005) concluded that countries with a more economically diverse economy improved stunting rates more than
countries with economies concentrated in agriculture. This variable may play an important role when looking
at subregions of Sub-Saharan Africa where subsistence agriculture dominates many local economies or in coun-
tries where GDP growth is mostly driven by natural resource rents. Lack of economic diversification, especially
if GDP is concentrated in primary commodities or in extractive industries, is also often associated with higher
macroeconomic volatility, which in turn may have a detrimental incidence on stunting reduction for a given
level of economic growth.

No studies reviewed included the following variables: economic recession, economic rents, or government
expenditure on education.



Inclusiveness
The GINI index was used in a few studies to control for economic inequality within a country: (Haddad, et al.
2002; Heltberg 2009; and Tiwari, Zaman, and Saavedra 2013). Only Milman et al. (2005) controlled for coun-
tries’ income distribution—that is, the share of income held by the richest 20 percent of the population. Once
income distribution was controlled for in this study, the significance of GNI per capita on stunting disappeared
(Milman et al. 2005).



Governance
Governance variables in past studies have had different effects, depending on the source and type of variable
used. Milman et al. 2005 shows that democracy—a measure of civil liberties and political rights—is not a signif-
icant factor affecting child undernutrition, whereas Smith and Haddad (2000, 2002) demonstrate that a democ-
racy index positively influences almost all the variables included in their study (Milman, et al. 2005; Smith and
Haddad 2000, 2002). Smith and Haddad (2015) note that the regression results are sensitive to the type of gov-
ernance indicator used: when they used Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI), they found no impact from
governance on nutritional outcomes; however, when they employed governance indicators published by the
Political Risk Services Group (International Country Risk Guide indicators), they found a significant impact on
the stunting rate. As a side note, this significant effect did not hold in the short run (Smith and Haddad 2015).



Conflict
Variables on political violence have not been statistically significant, as shown in one study. Milman et al. (2005)
found no significant effect with using conflict variables from Polity IV country reports 2003 and the State Fail-
ure Problem Set 1955-2001 (Milman et al. 2005). The analysis undertaken in this section of the report employs
three novel variables concerned with conflict: the state fragility index, the frequency of violent conflicts involv-
ing governments, and the magnitude score of politically violent episodes (see Table 1).



Endnotes
Note: All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.

1
    Information about WGI can be found at http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/.




122 	                                                                                                in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                  Stunting Reduction 
ANNEX 3: Levels of Malnutrition and World Bank Investments, by Selected Countries

                                                                                                                                          WORLD BANK GROUP INVESTMENTS BY GLOBAL PRACTICE
                                        PERCENTAGE OF CHILDREN UNDER 5 YEARS OF AGE (%) 1                          ANEMIC –               (nutrition and food security themed projects/components) (US $millions)3
                                                                                                                   PERCENTAGE
 COUNTRY                                                                                                           OF WOMEN               HEALTH
                                                                                    VITAMIN A                      15-49 YEARS            NUTRITION           AGRI-           SOCIAL
                                STUNTED     4
                                                UNDERWEIGHT          WASTED                           ANEMIC                                                                                     EDUCATION         TOTAL
                                                                                    DEFICIENT                      OLD2                   AND                 CULTURE         PROTECTION
                                                                                                                                          POPULATION

 ANGOLA                             37.6             19.0                4.9            64.3            53.3               47.3                                                                                       0.0
 BENIN                              34.0             18.0                4.5              -             58.3               51.5                 22.0               1.5                                                23.5
 BURKINA FASO                       27.3              19.2               7.6              -             86.1               50.5                                                     5.0                                5.0
 CAMEROON                           31.7             14.8                5.2            38.8            60.3               41.7                 10.0                               10.0                               20.0
 CENTRAL AFRICAN
                                    40.7             23.5                7.4            68.2              -                46.2                                                                                       0.0
 REPUBLIC
 CONGO                              32.1              16.9               11.1             -             66.7               53.8                                                                                       0.0
 COTE D'IVOIRE                      29.6              15.7               7.6              -             74.8               51.8                 57.0               2.7                                                59.7
 DEMOCRATIC
 REPUBLIC OF                        42.6             23.4                8.1             61.1           59.8               44.7                 23.0                                                                  23.0
 CONGO
 ERITREA                            50.3             38.8               15.3              -               -                36.9                                                                                       0.0
 ETHIOPIA                           38.4             23.6                9.9              -             44.2               21.7                 179.8             35.0             210.0                             422.8
 GAMBIA                             17.5              6.5                3.4            64.0            72.8               57.2                 10.8                                                                  10.8
 GHANA                              18.8              11.0               4.7              -             65.7              48.6                  16.6                                                                  16.6
 KENYA                              26.0              11.0               4.0            84.4            36.3               27.5                 26.2                                                                  26.2
 LESOTHO                            33.2             10.3                2.8            78.0            50.8               27.2                                                                                       0.0
 MADAGASCAR                         49.2             36.8               15.2             42.1           45.3               36.6                 55.8                                                                  55.8
 MALAWI                             42.4              16.7               3.8            59.2            62.6               32.3                 138.7                                                                138.7
 MALI                               38.5              27.9              15.3              -             85.4               54.8                                                     7.0                               7.00
 MAURITANIA                         27.9             24.9               14.8              -               -                37.2                                                                                       0.0
 MOZAMBIQUE                         43.1              15.6               6.1            68.8            68.7               49.9                 49.6                                                   16             65.6
 NIGER                              23.0              5.7                1.5              -             73.4               49.2                 20.6               1.8              3.2                6.7            32.4
 NIGERIA                            32.9              19.4               7.2            29.5            68.4               49.9                720.0                                                                 720.0
 RWANDA                             37.9              9.3                2.2             6.4            36.5               19.4                 25.0                                5.0                               30.0
 SENEGAL                            20.5              15.5               7.8              -             60.3               53.5                 35.8                                8.1                60            103.9
 SUDAN                              14.7             26.3               21.4              -               -                29.4                                                                                       0.0
 TANZANIA                           26.8              13.3               9.9            24.2            57.7               38.6                 30.0                                                                  30.0
 UGANDA                             34.2               12                4.3            27.9            52.8               29.6                  3.0              27.6                                                30.6
 ZAMBIA                            40.0              14.8                6.3             54.1             -                31.2                 13.2                                                                  13.2
 ZIMBABWE                           27.6              11.2               3.3            35.8            36.8               30.1                                                                                       0.0

Note: - indicates data not available.
1 Stunting, wasting, and underweight prevalence data from the 2017 version of the Joint Malnutrition Estimates; prevalence of vitamin A deficiency data were extracted from country profiles available through the WHO’s
Nutrition Landscape Information System (NLiS), with country data being collected between 1993 and 2003; anemia prevalence data were retrieved from statcompiler.com and sourced from the most recent Demographic and
Health Surveys (DHS) or Malaria Indicator Surveys (MIS).
2 Data for prevalence of anemia in women of reproductive age were retrieved from the WHO Global Targets Tracking Tool.
3 Data on active and pipeline World Bank Group investments as of September 1, 2017, and include operations with nutrition and food security theme. Project appraisal documents, project information documents, and project
papers were reviewed to extract committed or proposed amounts to be dedicated to nutrition and food security theme (detailed on next page).
4 Cutoffs      >40%        30-40%          20-30%    <20%



            ANNEXES		                                                                                                                                                                                        123
Notes on current and planned World Bank Group nutrition and food security investments by country:
 ANGOLA                       None

 BENIN                        75% of $28M project - Benin Multisectoral Food Health Nutrition Project (P143652) FY2014; 60% of $2.48M project - Nutrition
                              Sensitive Agriculture & Capacity Building of Small & Marginal Farmers Project (P155822) FY 2016; $45M additional financing
                              project (Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Additional Financing (P160029) FY 2017) has clear nutrition component but
                              unclear how much is dedicated to this so not included in total.
 BURKINA FASO                 10% of $50M project - Social Safety Net Project (P124015) FY 2014

 CAMEROON                     10% of $100M project - Health System Performance Reinforcement Project (P156679) FY 2016; 20% of $50M project - Cameroon
                              Social Safety Nets (P128534) FY 2013
 CENTRAL AFRICAN              None
 REPUBLIC
 CONGO                        None
 COTE D'IVOIRE                $50M Multisectoral nutrition project FY 2018 (pipeline); 20% of $35M project - Health Systems Strengthening and Ebola
                              Preparedness Project (P147740) FY 2015; $2.7M project – Support to Nutrition-sensitive Agriculture and Capacity Development of
                              Small and Marginal Farmers (P155081) FY 2018
 DEMOCRATIC                   10% of $230M project - Health System Strengthening for Better Maternal and Child Health. Results Project (PDSS) (P147555) FY
 REPUBLIC OF CONGO            2015
 ERITREA                      None

 ETHIOPIA                     $2.75M Promoting young women’s livelihoods and nutrition project (P157716) FY 2017; 10% of $350M IDA to Second Agricultural
                              Growth Project (P148591) FY 2015; 10% of $600M project - ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (PSNP 4) (P146883) FY 2015;
                              $175M of $700M project across 4 sectors – Enhancing Shared Prosperity Through Equitable Services (P161373) FY 2018; 25% of
                              $600M project – Ethiopia Rural Safety Net Project (P163438) FY 2018
 GAMBIA                       35% of $3.68M on project Maternal and Child Nutrition and Health Results Project (P143650) FY 2014; 40% of $5M additional
                              financing on project GM Maternal and Child Nutrition and Health Results Project (P154007) FY 2015; $7.5M additional financing -
                              AF Maternal and Child Nutrition and Health Results Project (P159693) FY 2017
 GHANA                        20% of $68M project - Ghana - Maternal, Child Health and Nutrition Project (P145792) FY 2014; $3M Improved Feeding Practices
                              for first 1,000 Days (P159735) FY 2018
 KENYA                        10% of $150M project - Transforming Health Systems for Universal Care (P152394) FY 2016; 20% of $56.8M project - Health
                              Sector Support Additional Financing (P128663) FY 2012
 LESOTHO                      None

 MADAGASCAR                   15% of $65M - Madagascar Emergency Support to Critical Education, Health and Nutrition Services Project (P131945) FY 2013;
                              60% of $10M additional financing - Madagascar Emergency Support to Critical Education, Health and Nutrition Services Project
                              (P131945); $40M project - Madagascar: An Integrated Approach to Improving Nutrition Outcomes (P160848) FY 2018
 MALAWI                       30% of $80M project - Malawi Nutrition and HIV/AIDS Project (P125237) FY 2012; $12.27M of $22.6M additional financing -
                              Additional Financing to Nutrition and HIV/AIDS Project (P156129) FY 2016; $100M project – Investing in the Early Years for Growth
                              and Productivity in Malawi (P164771) FY 2019
 MALI                         10% of $70M project - Emergency Safety Nets project (Jigiséméjiri) (P127328) FY 2013

 MAURITANIA                   None

 MOZAMBIQUE                   80% of $37M - Mozambique Nutrition Additional Financing (P125477) FY 2013; 40% of $40M project - MZ- AF to Education
                              Sector Support Project (P124729) FY 2012; Mozambique Primary Health Care Strengthening Project (P160967) FY 2018
 NIGER                        20% of $103M project - Population and Health Support Project (P147638) FY 2015; 70% of $2.5M project - Nutrition-Sensitive
                              Agriculture and Capacity Building of Small and Marginal Farmers (P156863) FY 2016; 15% of $22.5M project - Adaptive Social
                              Safety Nets Project (P155846) FY 2016; 8% of $84.2M project - Niger - GPE - Support to Quality Education Project (P132405) FY
                              2015
 NIGERIA                      40% of $50M project - Second Additional Financing to Third National Fadama Development Proj (P158535) FY 2016; $350M
                              project - Accelerating Nutrition Results in Nigeria (P162069) FY 2018; $500M project - Nigeria - Program to Support Saving One
                              Million Lives (P146583) FY 2015 - has significant nutrition component but unclear how much is allocated so not included in total;
                              $350M project - Accelerating Nutrition results in Nigeria (P162069) FY 2018




124 	                                                                                                                               in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                 Stunting Reduction 
 RWANDA     $80M project - Strengthening Social Protection - Rwanda(P162646) FY 2018 - This is combined allocation to component with
            nutrition and ECD activities; $25M project – Rwanda Stunting Prevention and Reduction Project (P164845) FY 2018
 SENEGAL    60% of $3M project - Building Resilience to Food and Nutrition Insecurity Shocks (P155475) FY 2017; 20% of $20M project -
            Senegal Health & Nutrition Financing (P129472) FY 2014; 20% of $40.5M project - Building Resilience to Food and Nutrition
            Insecurity Shocks (P155475) FY 2014; $30M project – Investing in Maternal and Child Health project (P162042) FY 2018; $60M
            project - Investing in the early years for human development in Senegal (P161322) FY 2018
 SUDAN      None

 TANZANIA   15% of $200M project - Strengthening Primary Health Care for Results (P152736) FY 2015

 UGANDA     $3M project - An Innovative, Integrated Approach to Enhance Smallholder Family Nutrition (P143324) FY 2013; $27.64M project -
            Uganda Multisectoral Food Security and Nutrition Project (P149286) FY 2015
 ZAMBIA     $2.75M project - Zambia Livelihood and Nutrition Project (P147745) FY 2015; 20% of $52M project - Health Services Improvement
            Project (P145335) FY 2014
 ZIMBABWE   None




ANNEXES		                                                                                                                                125
