Tobacco Tax Reform

AT THE
CROSSROADS
OF HEALTH AND
DEVELOPMENT
A Multisectoral Perspective



Executive Summary




Prepared by a team led by
Patricio V. Marquez and
Blanca Moreno-Dodson
TOBACCO USE
 Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




NOT ONLY KILLS
MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE EACH
YEAR BUT PLACES
A STAGGERING
POVERTY AND
ECONOMIC
BURDEN ON LOW
INCOME FAMILIE
 2 // Executive Summary
     ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
     This report was prepared under the lead of Patricio V. Marquez and Blanca Moreno-­
     Dodson, Co-Coordinators, World Bank Group Global Tobacco Control Program, with the
     editorial contribution of Alexander Irwin, by an international team comprised of (by
     chapter order):

       Chapter 1: Patricio V. Marquez (Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice,
       World Bank Group)

       Chapter 2: Prabhat Jha (Center for Global Health Research, St. Michael’s Hospital




S
       and Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada) and
       Richard Peto (Clinical Trial Service Unit and Epidemiological Studies Unit, Nuffield
       Department of Population Health, Richard Doll Building, University of Oxford, Oxford,
       United Kingdom)

       Chapter 3: Blanca Moreno-Dodson (Global Tax Team, Governance Global Practice,
       World Bank Group)

       Chapter 4: Mark Goodchild (World Health Organization), Anne-Marie Perucic (World
       Health Organization), Rose Zheng (University of International Business and Economics,
       Beijing, China), Evan Blecher (World Health Organization), and Jeremias Paul (World
       Health Organization)

       Chapter 5: Annerie Bouw (European Commission)

       Chapter 6: Rouselle F. Lavado (World Bank Group, now at Asian Development Bank),
       Moritz Meyer (Poverty and Equity Global Practice, World Bank Group), Iryna Postolovska
       (World Bank Group), and Renzo Efren Sotomayor (World Bank Group)

       Chapter 7: Hana Ross (University of Cape Town, South Africa)

       Chapter 8: Teh-Wei Hu (Public Health Institute’s Center for International Tobacco
       Control, Oakland, California), Angela Lisulo (Consultant, World Bank Group), and
       Melissa Brown (Agriculture Global Practice, World Bank Group)

       Chapter 9: Enrique Fanta (Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice, World Bank




W-
       Group) and Magaly Garcia (World Bank Group)




ES
                                                                                                3
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Paul Isenman (former World Bank Group Director and Principal Economist) reviewed and
commented upon drafts of all portions of the report, providing extensive technical inputs
and suggestions, and enhancing the volume’s robustness and quality. Additional comments,
and technical inputs provided by Alan Fuchs (World Bank Group), Francisco Meneses (Duke
University, United States, and Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Chile), and Alberto Gonima
(Consultant, World Bank Group). Vito Tanzi, former Director of the Fiscal Affairs Depart-
ment at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), provided comments and
guidance on an initial version of different chapters in the report.

Sheila Dutta (World Bank Group) contributed to the Conclusions chapter, distilling the
main messages of the report.

Overall technical guidance and oversight provided by Enis Baris (Program Manager,
Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice, World Bank Group), and Tim Evans
(Senior Director, Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice, World Bank Group),
James Brumby (Director, Governance Global Practice, World Bank Group), Alma Kanani
(Program Manager, Governance Global Practice), and Marijn Verhoeven (Lead Economist,
and Cluster Lead of the Global Tax Team, Governance Global Practice, World Bank Group).

Akosua Dakwa (World Bank Group) provided administrative support.

The preparation of this report was carried out under the World Bank Global Tobacco
Control Program, supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the Bloomberg
Foundation.

The authors alone are responsible for the views expressed herein and they do not
necessarily represent the views, decisions or policies of the institutions with which
they are affiliated.

Washington, D.C.
September 26, 2017




Cover photos (clockwise from left): City view of Beirut, Lebanon. Photo by Dominic Chavez/World Bank.
Flags by Simone D. McCourtie/World Bank. Terraced rice paddies in northern Vietnam. Photo by Tran Thi
Hoa/World Bank. School children attending parade. South Africa. Photo by Trevor Samson/World Bank.




4 // Executive Summary
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
There is a policy measure that can simultaneously save millions of lives, reduce poverty,
and increase countries’ domestic resources for financing development.

The policy measure consists of increasing excise tax rates on tobacco in order to reduce
its affordability and, as evidence shows, lower its consumption.

Today, this powerful human development and poverty reduction measure remains largely
underutilized, especially in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). This report
provides decision support for policy makers on tobacco tax reform, as well as analytical
and empirical tools for using tobacco excise taxes to save lives and increase government
revenues. The report sets forth the public health, economic, and anti-poverty case for
higher tobacco taxes; shows how some countries have already delivered ambitious reforms;
and documents measurable results. It shows that, by implementing tobacco tax reforms
now, policy makers can choose a fast road to healthier, more prosperous societies.



THE TOBACCO USE CHALLENGE
Few people today doubt that smoking is bad. But many, including seasoned policy makers,
do not realize just how bad it is. Bad for people, bad for economies, and bad for poverty
reduction. In fact, tobacco use not only kills millions of people each year but places
a staggering poverty and economic burden on low-income families and less-developed
countries that is deepening inequalities between and within countries.


Health Damage
Tobacco kills at least half of long-term smokers, accounting for more deaths each year than
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria combined. And the burden of sickness and death
from tobacco is becoming heavier. There were about 100 million deaths from tobacco in
the 20th century. If current patterns persist, tobacco will kill some 1 billion people in this
century, most in LMICs (Jha 2009; Peto and Lopez, 2001). Health systems suffer along with
individuals. Treatment of the numerous chronic diseases caused or exacerbated by smoking
swells countries’ annual health care costs and diverts resources that could be used to
solve other health challenges or address development priorities.




                                                                                                 5
       Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




       Figure ES1: Adult Male Smoking Prevalence by Country Income Classification and Quintile of the
       Welfare Distribution
                                                       40
                                                                 38
                                                            37
Smoking prevalence (% of male population ages 15–49)




                                                       35                    33
                                                                        35
                                                                                              31
                                                       30               32
                                                                             30                                      30
                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                     28

                                                       25
                                                            23

                                                       20
                                                                             18
                                                                        19

                                                       15
                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                      13

                                                       10                                                    Income
                                                                                                                LIC
                                                        5                                                       LMIC
                                                                                                                UMIC

                                                       0
                                                            Q1 (poor)   Q2   Q3              Q4                 Q5 (rich)


       Data Source: Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) latest year since 2007; World Bank income classification.



       Economic Damage
       Tobacco-related deaths are not only preventable tragedies but have an important
       economic cost. Worldwide, the total economic damage of smoking (including productivity
       losses from death and disability) has been estimated at more than US$ 1.4 trillion
       per year, equivalent to 1.8 percent of the world’s annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
       (Goodchild, Nargis, and Tursan d’Espaignet 2017).


       Worsening Poverty
       This economic burden mainly falls on the people and countries that can least afford it.
       More than 80 percent of the world’s smokers live in LMICs. Within countries, tobacco
       addiction is concentrated among people with lower incomes and education (Figure ES 1).
       Poor smokers spend a larger portion of their income on tobacco products than wealthier
       smokers, and the poor also suffer most from smoking-related illnesses. The medical
       expenses and loss of earnings associated with these illnesses contribute to pushing
       millions of households into financial crisis and deeper poverty every year. Meanwhile,
       tobacco use reduces future earning potential, especially among young adults, and reduces
       adult workers’ economic productivity.




       6 // Executive Summary
                                                  THE TOBACCO TAX IMPERATIVE
                                                  There is an extraordinary divergence between high-income countries, which are increasingly
                                                  using price and non-price tools to lower their death rates from tobacco, and LMICs, where
                                                  the absolute number of tobacco deaths continues to grow. About half of the difference in
                                                  mortality rates between rich and poor smokers is due to smoking. Equality of opportunity
                                                  between countries worldwide demands action on tobacco.

                                                  By adopting the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), all countries have
                                                                                                                        communicable
                                                  committed to achieving a 30 percent reduction in death rates from non-­
                                                  diseases like cancer, stroke, and heart disease by 2030. Reducing tobacco use is critical for
                                                  countries to reach this goal (Jha, Marquez, and Dutta 2017). How can LMICs cut smoking rates
                                                  on the scale required and achieve faster progress than even that achieved by high-income
                                                  countries? Bold increases in tobacco excise tax rates are by far the most powerful tool.

                                                  Leaders who raise tobacco excise tax rates can expect the following:

                                                  Longer lives and better health for the people: The main reason to implement tobacco
                                                  excise tax rate increases is that they save lives and reduce serious illnesses like cancer and
                                                  heart disease. Evidence across a wide range of countries shows that a 50 percent increase
                                                  in cigarette price typically leads to a 20 percent decline in cigarette consumption (Figure ES2).
                                                  Reduced consumption has a powerful impact on subsequent tobacco-related sickness and




   Figure ES2: Smoking, Male Lung Cancer, and Cigarette Price: France 1980–2010
                                   6.0
                                                                                                Number cigarettes/
                                   5.5                                                             adult/day                                300

                                   5.0          Lung cancer death rates per 100,000
Number/adult/day and death rates




                                                  (divided by four); men age 35–44
                                                                                                                                            250
                                                                                                                                                  Price (% relative to 1980)



                                   4.5

                                   4.0
                                                                                                                                            200
                                   3.5

                                   3.0
                                                                                                                                            150
                                   2.5
                                                                                               Relative price
                                   2.0                                                                                                      100
                                   1.5

                                   1.0                                                                                                      50
                                         1980            1985             1990         1995           2000           2005            2010
                                                                                        Year
   Source: Jha (2012). The lung cancer death rates per 100,000 are divided by 4, so as to enable these to be on the same scale as
   smoking amount per day.

                                                                                                                                                             7
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




death within several years. About half of this effect comes from getting current smokers
to quit. Higher tobacco prices also reduce smoking initiation among young people and so
help stop them from becoming addicted to tobacco in the first place (IARC 2011).

More resources for development: Even as they lower cigarette use and improve
population health, higher tobacco taxes can substantially boost government tax revenues.
Economic modeling carried out for this report shows that raising cigarette excise tax
rates in all developing countries by the equivalent of US$ 0.25 per pack would generate
an extra US$ 41 billion in government tobacco excise revenue for LMICs: raising these
countries’ tobacco excise revenue intake by 29 percent from the 2014 level. This additional
revenue could fund development investments (see also Goodchild, Perucic, and Nargis 2016).



EARLY WINS IN SOME COUNTRIES
The links between tobacco taxes, public health, and government revenues are not just
theoretical. Between 2012 and 2014, over a hundred governments used tobacco tax hikes
to save lives and increase government revenues. In most cases these tax hikes were still
too small to yield substantial declines in cigarette consumption. But this report shows
that some countries are taking bolder steps and reaping significant public health and
fiscal revenue benefits. It also shows that much more can be achieved. As of 2015, WHO
reported that only 28 LMICs had adopted comprehensive tobacco control policies covering
retail-counter cigarette advertising, restrictions on public smoking, and appropriately high
excise tax rates. As leaders in more countries weigh the public-health and economic
arguments for tobacco taxation, there are opportunities for exceptional progress now.



MAKING IT HAPPEN
If leaders want to move forward on tobacco excise taxation, what are the critical steps?
What are the common pitfalls they should avoid? This report distills a large body of
evidence on successful practice in tobacco taxation and the decision-making process.
Key lessons include:

   •	 Go big, go fast. Tax strategies should focus on health gains first, then on fiscal
      benefits. This means going for big tobacco excise tax rate increases starting early in
      the process. Adopting a slow, cautious timeline might sound prudent. But it means
      condemning large numbers of people to avoidable illness and premature death.
      In tobacco taxation, the rewards go to those who act boldly.
   •	 Attack affordability. Tobacco taxes only reduce tobacco consumption if they reduce
      cigarette affordability. In most LMICs, wages are rising. Thus, cigarettes will become



8 // Executive Summary
  de facto more affordable for consumers, increasing consumption, unless tobacco taxes
  rise even faster. Effective strategies will generally involve combining big initial tax
  increases with recurrent hikes over time, to keep cigarette prices climbing more steeply
  than per capita real income growth (including inflation).
•	 Change expectations. Communication with the public is also critical. Governments
  must make sure consumers know that a tax-rate hike is not just a one-off, but that
  cigarette prices will keep going up. This is a motivator for current smokers to quit and
  young people not to start.
•	 Tax by quantity. Tobacco tax rates should be simplified and based on the quantity
  of cigarettes, not their price. This is done in two ways, both of which preempt smokers’
  switching to cheaper cigarette brands after a tax-rate hike on the brands they previously
  smoked (a response called “downward substitution”). The first key move is to use specific
  excises, as opposed to ad valorem (value-based) excises or other taxes. A key factor that
  needs to be taken into account is that specific rates require to be adjusted over time
  to at least keep pace with inflation and, preferably, at a faster rate so that affordability is
  reduced over time. Any strategy for adopting them should be therefore accompanied
  by a framework/instrument to allow for annual increases over time (such as the United
  Kingdom’s tobacco duty escalator). The second is to merge the multiple tobacco tax “tiers”
  used by most developing countries. This way, tax hikes raise prices by the same large
  amount on all brands at once, pushing smokers to quit completely, rather than switch.
•	 “Soft earmarks” can win support. Earmarking tax revenues through legislation
  is criticized by fiscal experts as contributing to rigidities, fragmentation, and eventual
  distortions in public expenditures. However, “soft” earmarking of funds — for example,
  linking increased taxes to increased health spending — has helped generate grass-
  roots support for the tax hikes. This has been shown by experience in other sectors,
  and it has worked for tobacco taxes in countries like Australia, Philippines, and
  the United States.
•	 Regional collaboration can boost results. Momentum for ambitious tobacco
  tax reform can be enhanced, and cross-border threats like cigarette smuggling
  minimized, when countries work together in a regional structure. The European
  Union (EU) provides an example. The EU experience shows that regional cooperation
  can help countries achieve the dual goals of reducing tobacco consumption while
  increasing government revenues. Lessons also concern the pace of reforms. EU
  lawmakers faced early political pressure to “go slow,” by setting a low initial minimum
  tobacco excise rate to apply to all Member States. However, the EU accelerated
  progress by convincing Member States to agree up front to relatively high minimum
  tobacco excise rates, with longer transition periods authorized for some countries
  facing special challenges.



                                                                                                    9
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




   •	 Build broad alliances. Country leaders face sharp resistance to tax rate increases and
      other tobacco control measures from the tobacco industry. The industry is both
      financially powerful and politically astute. Tobacco industry advice to governments
      promotes the most ineffective interventions and in particular seeks to undercut
      and weaken tax measures. To counter these pressures requires robust scientific and
      economic analysis, as well as multi-sectoral policy development. It also demands
      the mobilization of civil society and opinion leaders. Support from international
      partners is also required, particularly in low-income countries, to strengthen country
      capacity for lining up and coordinating all parts of government, while engaging a
      wide set of stakeholders outside of government.



KEY POLICY CHALLENGES
As countries plan and implement tobacco tax rate increases, they should anticipate
challenges in specific areas. Several issues are important, both intrinsically and because
the tobacco industry exploits them to influence public opinion and policy debates.
The three most salient of these issues are: (1) how higher tobacco tax rates affect
poor people; (2) how tobacco taxes affect employment; and (3) connections between
tobacco tax rate hikes and the illicit tobacco trade.



TOBACCO AND EQUITY:
PUTTING POOR PEOPLE AT THE CENTER
As noted above, accumulated evidence from across the globe shows how tobacco taxes
help reduce poverty. Yet one of the industry’s most insidious arguments against raising
tobacco taxes is that these taxes hurt poor people disproportionately. This is based on
the claim that tobacco taxes are regressive: meaning that they take a greater share of
disposable income from the poor than from the rich. Almost by definition, poor smokers
do generally spend a greater proportion of their incomes on tobacco than wealthier
smokers. However, poorer smokers respond more to a unit change in price than do richer
smokers. Thus, tobacco tax hikes more effectively reduce cigarette affordability among
poor people than among the rich. Reducing cigarette affordability does not hurt poor
smokers. On the contrary, it will increase their disposable income for other goods and
services, and can save many of their lives.

Faced with tobacco tax rate increases, relatively poorer households adjust their behavior
relatively more than richer households. A 50 percent increase in cigarette prices will lead
to a 30-40 percent decline in tobacco consumption for the poor, a much larger relative
decline than among the rich. This also means that poor people get the largest share of



10 // Executive Summary
health and economic benefits from smoking cessation following a tax rate hike. Evidence
from Thailand, for example, shows that the poor paid only 6 percent of increased tobacco
taxes but got 58 percent of the health benefits (Jha, Joseph, Moser, et al. 2012).

The health benefits poor people obtain by quitting smoking also translate into long-term
economic gains. Households in which someone smokes earn less over time than otherwise
similar households where there are no smokers. So by favoring smoking cessation among
people at the lower end of the welfare scale, tobacco taxes boost incomes among the
poor relative to the better-off, directly advancing equity.

The bottom line is this: when we look at all the facts, tobacco taxes are not regressive, but
highly progressive, as the full health and economic benefits of this measure far outweigh
its relative cost.



TOBACCO TAXATION AND EMPLOYMENT:
BRIDGING TO BETTER LIVELIHOODS
The tobacco industry warns of potential job losses in agriculture, manufacturing, and
distribution as an argument against higher tobacco taxes. However, governments can
help facilitate the adjustment of the relatively small numbers of vulnerable workers
whose jobs will be affected by tobacco tax rate increases.

On tobacco taxes and employment, the following points merit attention:

   •	 Job losses in tobacco worldwide have come mostly from manufacturers’ own
      policies, not from tax hikes. Analysis has shown that observed reductions in
      tobacco-related employment have come largely from automation and consolidation
      by the industry itself (NCI and WHO 2016).
   •	 Today, few jobs in LMICs are completely dependent on tobacco, even in large
      producer countries. With few exceptions, the share of total employment involved with
      tobacco is already very small. Even China, the world’s largest producer and consumer of
      tobacco products, has only about 2 percent of its farmers growing tobacco (Hu, Mao,
      Shi et al. 2008).
   •	 Following a tobacco tax rate hike, consumer spending shifts to non-tobacco
      sectors, creating alternative jobs. When cigarette consumption drops after a tax rate
      hike, money not spent on tobacco products will mostly flow to other economic sectors,
      stimulating their production and so creating jobs there, while contributing to economic
      diversification. Studies show that over time there is likely to be a net gain rather than a
      loss in employment in nearly all countries that raise tobacco excise rates (IARC 2011;
      NCI and WHO 2016).


                                                                                                    11
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




   •	 Tobacco tax plans must nonetheless incorporate support for affected
      workers, especially those with low skills. Though the numbers are small, some
      tobacco workers who lack skills to adapt will lose employment and income, as demand
      for tobacco falls. Governments must anticipate this challenge and be ready with
      solutions. Successful transitions can be achieved, helping workers access equal or better
      livelihoods outside tobacco. Policy makers should tackle this issue head-on: on equity
      grounds, to assist vulnerable workers and their families; and for strategic reasons, to
      prevent the tobacco industry from appropriating employment as a political weapon
      against tax rate increases.


Helping Tobacco Farmers Switch to Other Crops
In the very few countries that are net tobacco producers, an important share of employ-
ment in the tobacco industry comes from farming. Governments and their partners can
coordinate tobacco tax rate hikes with programs to encourage and help tobacco farmers’
transition to other crops. In virtually all settings, alternative crops exist that are both more
profitable for farmers than tobacco and without the health risks of tobacco farming, which
include green tobacco sickness, a systemic poisoning due to nicotine exposure through
contact with tobacco plants.

Today, only a minimum percentage of farmers rely exclusively on tobacco for their livelihoods.
In most settings, tobacco is part of multi-cropping schemes, and where demand is
decreasing farmers are diversifying away from dependence on tobacco. Tobacco cultivation
is a small and shrinking contributor to economies worldwide. However, targeted support,
for example through input credits, agricultural extension, and irrigation, will be needed
for some small tobacco farmers, particularly those who are trapped in dependency on the
tobacco industry. Industry practices foster such dependency, for example by providing
farmers with free inputs and guaranteed purchase of their entire tobacco crop, though
often at such low rates that farmers fail to break even and end up in chronic debt to the
firms (Kagaruki 2010).



CURBING THE ILLICIT TOBACCO TRADE
The tobacco industry counsels policy makers that raising tobacco tax rates will spur
increases in the illicit tobacco trade, while lowering tobacco tax rates might reduce such
criminal activity. The key message for governments on this point is clear: even in the
presence of substantial levels of smuggling, higher tobacco tax rates cut cigarette con-
sumption and raise fiscal revenues. Evidence from Canada, which has 3000 miles of open
border with the United States, shows that large-scale smuggling occurred only when




12 // Executive Summary
the cigarette industry colluded with criminal networks (Kelton and Givel 2008). The main
driver of the illicit tobacco trade is not higher tax rates but lax enforcement and organized
criminal networks. The core strategy for governments remains to go after the criminals
and improve tax administration and enforcement of control measures, not to lower
tobacco taxes. Turkey, for example, substantially reduced illegal sales by tackling evasion,
and simultaneously raised taxes.

A robust repertoire of proven control and enforcement measures exist to curb illicit
tobacco. Measures have been successfully implemented by LMICs, as well as rich countries.
Many are captured in the WHO Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products.
Effective tools include track-and-trace systems to follow tobacco products through the
supply chain; detection equipment at customs posts; and tougher sanctions. Today, it
is imperative that the international community advocate and encourage national
lawmakers in all countries to ratify and implement the WHO Protocol, securing its status
as binding international law (Marquez 2015). Many countries that have adopted broad
control and enforcement programs have achieved impressive results. For example, since
the “Tackling Tobacco Smuggling” strategy was introduced in the U.K. in 2000, the size
of the illicit cigarette market has been cut by almost half, to about 9 percent of national
sales, with more than 20 billion cigarettes and over 2,700 tons of hand-rolling tobacco
seized (Figure ES3). Additionally, the U.K. has seen more than 3,300 criminal prosecutions
for tobacco offenses following action by law enforcement officers. In Chile, a country
that has one of the highest tax rates on cigarettes in the world, with taxes accounting
for  78 percent of the price of each pack, the government has also achieved success
in increasing seizures of smuggled tobacco products. This has affected the country’s
tobacco supply and is helping curtail the slight growth in illicit trade observed after a
2013 increase in tobacco prices.



THE ROAD AHEAD
As we move into the third decade of the 21st century, the achievement of smoke-free
societies should be a critical marker of sustainable development. Advancing tobacco
taxation today requires intensified efforts in the following areas:

Demand-driven technical assistance to countries. Effective technical assistance
requires sharing good practice experiences and engaging high-level government officials
from Ministries of Finance and Health, together with multilateral and bilateral organiza-
tions and civil society. Higher and better-structured tobacco taxes should be increasingly
a default part of broader tax-system and fiscal reforms.




                                                                                              13
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Capacity development and knowledge sharing. Countries that have successfully
raised tobacco taxes have gained valuable expertise and can share evidence and good
practices with others. The global community must also be ready to respond to country-­
level demand for further capacity development. This should include capacity building on
the use of simulation models, which can assess fiscal and health implications of alterna-
tive tax levels and structures.

Further strengthening the global evidence base. In addition to fostering knowledge
exchange between countries, the global tobacco-taxation evidence base should be
deliberately reinforced in the following areas:
   •	 Progressivity, employment, and poverty: Current evidence indicates that
      tobacco taxes are highly progressive on a net basis, given that the poor are more
      price responsive and so gain greater health benefits than the rich. To complete this
      picture, we need additional country-specific examples of the impacts of tobacco
      taxation on poverty, health, and employment.
   •	 Better economic surveillance: There is a need for global efforts to create rapidly
      accessible data on tobacco prices, illicit sales, and demand for tobacco products, along
      with better tracking of industry practices. This includes a much stronger information
      base concerning the response to non-price strategies, most specifically industry efforts
      to subvert bans on tobacco and advertising and efforts to lobby Ministries of Finance.
   •	 Illicit trade: Research as well as technical assistance is needed to strengthen
      countries’ institutional capacity to curtail illicit tobacco trade through customs and
      related instruments. This should be incorporated within a broader package of
      public-sector modernization efforts.

Driving policy change nationally and globally. This report has identified national
policy entry points and shown how regional collaboration can also strengthen results.
Global treaties can provide additional leverage for change. One such treaty is the WHO
Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products, a supplementary agreement to the
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. Forty formal country ratifications are
needed to make the Protocol binding international law, but the total has not yet been
reached. It is imperative that the international community encourage lawmakers from all
countries and across the political spectrum to ratify and implement the Protocol. Lives
and the social well-being of nations depend on it. This is just one example of how global
collaboration can support national policy action, while country-level choices (e.g., treaty
ratification) can empower global policy instruments for the common good. National and
global policy action reinforce each other.




14 // Executive Summary
CONCLUSION:
EXPANDING THE GLOBAL COALITION
Higher tobacco tax rates could save millions of lives each decade, reduce poverty, and
boost public resources for development investment. Yet, today, tobacco taxation remains
one of the world’s least-used tobacco control measures (Marquez 2017).

The power to change this situation exists. Not in the hands of any single leader or
institution, but in a global coalition uniting governments, multilateral agencies, civil
society, researchers, the private sector, and communities: a coalition dedicated to
ensuring that the life-saving impact of tobacco tax reform reaches the largest possible
number of people in the shortest possible time.

Since 2015, the World Bank Group, WHO, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the
Bloomberg Foundation, and others have worked with countries to reinforce the global
coalition for tobacco tax reform. In April 2017, the conference “Tobacco Taxation:
Win-Win for Public Health and Domestic Resource Mobilization” provided an opportunity
to measure progress. Convened at World Bank Headquarters in Washington, D.C., this
tobacco tax policy summit drew high-level delegations from the Health and Finance
Ministries of 35 countries, who reported on progress and committed to further accelerate
reforms. Participants noted that, as countries reframe their development finance plans
around domestic resource mobilization, the case for tobacco taxation increasingly resonates.

Measured against the distance to be traveled, these are still early steps. Countries acting
boldly remain outnumbered by those that hesitate. The World Bank will leverage its
access to Ministries of Finance to further expand country-level policy dialog; ramp up
technical support and capacity building; nurture peer-to-peer collaboration among
countries; and advance a learning agenda to further improve tobacco tax policy designs,
hone advocacy, and increase impact.

Many countries stand at the crossroads on tobacco tax reform: a critical crossroads
for health and development. The good news is that countries and partners can come
together, not just around a problem, but around a proven solution. A stronger, united
effort is required to advance the global tobacco taxation agenda toward better health,
less poverty, and greater development opportunity for all.




                                                                                               15
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




REFERENCES CITED
Furman J. 2016. “Policy, Politics, and the Tripling of Federal Tobacco Taxes in the United States to Deter
People from Smoking, Save Lives, and Mobilize Revenue over the last 30 years. Six Lessons from the
U.S. Experience with Tobacco Taxes.” Presentation at the World Bank Conference. “Winning the Tax Wars:
Global Solutions for Developing Countries,” Washington, DC, May 24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.org/en/
topic/health/brief/tobacco

Goodchild M, Nargis N, Tursan d’Espaignet E. 2017. “Global economic cost of smoking-attributable diseases.”
Tob Control Online First: 30 January 2017. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2016-053305.

Goodchild M, Perucic AM, Nargis N. 2016. Modelling the impact of raising tobacco taxes on public health
and finance. Bull World Health Organ 94: 250-257.

Hu T-w, Mao Z, Shi J, Chen W. 2008. Tobacco Taxation and Its Potential Impact in China. Paris: International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2011. Effectiveness of Tax and Price Policies for
Tobacco Control. Volume 14, IARC Handbooks.

Jha P. 2009. “Avoidable global cancer deaths and total deaths from smoking.” Nat Rev Cancer 9: 655-64.

Jha P. 2012. “Death and Taxes: Epidemiological and Economic Evidence on Smoking.” Global Heart: 139-142.

Jha P, Joseph RC, Moser P, et al., for the Asia Development Bank. 2012. Tobacco Taxes: A Win-Win Measure
for Fiscal Space and Health. Manila: Asian Development Bank. (Accessed May 8, 2017 at http://www.adb.
org/publications/tobacco-taxes-win-win-measure-fiscal-space-and-health)

Jha P, Marquez PV, Dutta S. 2017. “Tripling Tobacco Taxes: Key for Achieving the UN Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals by 2030.” The World Bank Blogs, January 24, 2017. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/
health/role-excise- tax-meeting-sdg

Junquera-Varela, Raul Felix, Marijn Verhoeven, Gangadhar P. Shukla, Bernard Haven, Rajul Awasthi, and
Blanca Moreno-Dodson. 2017. Strengthening Domestic Resource Mobilization: Moving from Theory to Practice
in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1073-2.

Kagaruki LK. 2010. Community-based advocacy opportunities for tobacco control: experience from
Tanzania. Global Health Promotion 17(2) Suppl: 41-4.

Kaiser K, Bredenkamp C, Iglesias R. 2016. “Sin Tax Reform in the Philippines: Transforming Public Finance, Health,
and Governance for More Inclusive Development. Directions in Development—Countries and Regions.”
Washington, DC: World Bank. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/24617

Kelton MH, Givel MS. 2008. Public policy implications of tobacco industry smuggling through Native
American reservations into Canada. Int J Health Serv 38(3):471-87.

Marquez PV. 2015. “World No Tobacco Day 2015: On Illicit Trade and Taxes.” The World Bank Blogs, May 29,
2015. http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/world-no-tobacco-day-2015-illicit-trade-and-taxes

Marquez PV. 2017. “Taxation: Most effective but still the least-used tobacco control measure.” The World
Bank Blogs, July 19, 2017. https://blogs.worldbank.org/health/taxation-most-effective-still-least-used-
tobacco-control-measure




16 // Executive Summary
NCI (U.S. National Cancer Institute) and WHO (World Health Organization). 2016. Monograph 21: The
Economics of Tobacco and Tobacco Control. Bethesda, MD, USA: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, National Institutes of Health. Available at: https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/
monographs/21/docs/m21_exec_sum.pdf

Paul J. 2016. “The Impact of the 2013 Sin Tax Reform in the Philippines.” Presentation at World Bank
Conference: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for Developing Countries,” Washington, DC, May 24,
2016. http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco

Peto R, Lopez AD. 2001. “Future worldwide health effects of current smoking patterns.” In: Koop, C.E., Pearson,
C.E., Schwarz, M.R., eds. Critical issues in global health. San Francisco: Wiley (Jossey-Bass): 154-61.

Webber L, Andreeva TI, Sotomayor R, Marquez PV, et al. 2017. “Modeling the Long-Term Health and Cost
Impacts of Reducing Smoking Prevalence through Tobacco Taxation in Ukraine.” Washington, DC: The
World Bank Group.

World Bank Group. 2016. Tobacco Tax Modelling in Armenia, Colombia, Moldova, and Ukraine. Internal
Working Documents.




                                                                                                                  17
TOBACCO USE
NOT ONLY KILLS
MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE EACH
YEAR BUT PLACE
A STAGGERING
POVERTY AND
ECONOMIC
BURDEN ON LOW
INCOME FAMILIE
           19
20 // Executive Summary
