Tobacco Tax Reform

AT THE
CROSSROADS
OF HEALTH AND
DEVELOPMENT
A Multisectoral Perspective




Prepared by a team led by
Patricio V. Marquez and
Blanca Moreno-Dodson
Tobacco Tax Reform

AT THE
CROSSROADS
OF HEALTH AND
DEVELOPMENT
A Multisectoral Perspective
Prepared by a team led by Patricio V. Marquez
Prepared by a team led by Patricio V. Marquez
and Blanca Moreno-Dodson, including:

Alexander Irwin                            Renzo Efren Sotomayor
Prabhat Jha                                Hana Ross
Richard Peto                               Teh-Wei Hu
Mark Goodchild                             Angela Lisulo
Anne-Marie Perucic                         Melissa Brown
Rose Zheng                                 Enrique Fanta
Evan Blecher                               Magaly Garcia
Jeremias Paul                              Paul Isenman
Annerie Bouw                               Sheila Dutta
Rouselle F. Lavado                         Alberto Gonima
Moritz Meyer                               Akosua Dakwa
Iryna Postolovska




Cover photos (clockwise from left): City view of Hanoi, Vietnam. Photo by Dominic Chavez/World Bank.
Children in the village of Ambohimahatsinjo in rural Madagascar. Photo by Mohammad Al-Arief/World
Bank. Rice paddies. Photo by A’Melody Lee/World Bank. A construction worker takes a break. Photo by
Alex Baluyut/World Bank.
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments	                                                            7

Executive Summary	                                                         11
    The Tobacco Use Challenge	                                             12
    The Tobacco Tax Imperative	                                            13
    Early Wins in Some Countries	                                          13
    Making it Happen	                                                      14
    Key Policy Challenges	                                                 15
    Tobacco and Equity: Putting Poor People at the Center	                 16
    Tobacco Taxation and Employment: Bridging to Better Livelihoods	       16
    Curbing the Illicit Tobacco Trade	                                     18
    Conclusion: Expanding the Global Coalition	                            19
    References	                                                            20

Introduction	                                                              23
    A Map for the Crossroads	                                              24
    Why This Report Now?	                                                  24
    Structure of This Volume	                                              25
    References	                                                            29

Chapter 1: Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority	                 31
    Abstract	                                                              30
    The Tobacco Use Challenge	                                             31
    Addressing the Tobacco Use Challenge	                                  33
    The Imperative of Tobacco Taxation	                                    34
    Global Tobacco Control: What is the World Bank Group Doing?	           37
    Recent Examples of World Bank Group Analytical Work, Technical	        38
    and Operational Support, and Results Achieved in Selected Countries	
    Advancing the Tobacco Taxation Agenda	                                 46
    References	                                                            48
Chapter 2: Death and Taxes: Global Effects of Smoking,	                         55
of Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco	
     Abstract	                                                                  54
     Background	                                                                55
     Three Key Messages for the Individual Cigarette Smoker in the 21st Century	 56
     Slow Emergence of the Full Eventual Hazards of Smoking	                    58
     Relatively Rapid Emergence of Substantial Benefits of Stopping	            61
     Triple Price, Halve Smoking, Double Revenue	                               62
     Other Effective Interventions: Information, Regulations,	                  66
     and Support for Quitting	
     Death and Taxes	                                                           67
     Acknowledgments	                                                           68
     References	                                                                68

Chapter 3: Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How: 	                         73
Where Public Health and Economics Converge	
     Abstract	                                                                  73
     Background	                                                                74
     Analytical Approach	                                                       75
     The “Why?”: Arguments for Tobacco Taxation	                                75
     The “What?”: Nuts and Bolts of Tobacco Taxation	                           82
     The “How?”: Options for Policy Making and Implementation	                  83
     Tobacco Taxation Effects: What to Expect	                                  86
     References	                                                                92

Chapter 4: The Health Impact of Raising Tobacco Taxes 	                         95
in Developing Countries	
     Abstract	                                                                  94
     Introduction	                                                              95
     Tobacco Taxation and the Global Development Agenda	                        95
     Modeling the Impact of Higher Tobacco Taxes	                               96
     Tax Policy and Practice in Developing Countries	                          102
     Conclusion	                                                               105
     References	                                                               106
Chapter 5: Harmonizing Tobacco Taxation at the Regional Level: 	         109
The European Union Experience	
     Abstract	                                                           108
     Introduction	                                                       109
     Beginning of the European Union	                                    109
     Why Harmonize Excise Duties on Tobacco Products?	                   110
     Current Excise Duties on Tobacco Products in the EU	                114
     Association Agreements	                                             118
     Lessons Learned	                                                    118
     Conclusion	                                                         120

Chapter 6: Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes:	   123
Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?	
     Abstract	                                                           122
     Introduction	                                                       123
     Who Smokes? Social and Economic Patterns of Prevalence	             124
     How Households Adjust when Tobacco Taxes Rise	                      130
     Empirical Evidence from Countries	                                  139
     Long-Term Health Gains from Tobacco Taxation: The Experience 	      141
     of High-Income Countries	
     Conclusions	                                                        144
     References	                                                         145

Chapter 7: The Effects of Tobacco Taxes on Employment 	                  153
and Labor Productivity	
     Abstract	                                                           153
     Introduction	                                                       154
     The Impact of Tobacco Taxes on Employment	                          154
     The Impact of Tobacco Taxes on Labor Productivity	                  165
     References	                                                         169
Chapter 8: The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption: 	                      175
What Will It Take for Farmers to Switch to Other Crops?	
     Abstract	                                                            175
     Introduction	                                                        176
     Potential Effects of Higher Tobacco Taxes on Global	                 177
     and Local Tobacco Supply	
     Relative Returns From Tobacco Versus Alternative Crops	              182
     Negative Externalities From Tobacco Production	                      187
     Barriers and Feasibility of Switching from Tobacco to Other Crops	   189
     Summary and Conclusions	                                             192
     References	                                                          194

Chapter 9: Preventing and Controlling Illicit Tobacco Flows	              197
     Abstract	                                                            197
     Background: Why Is Control Important?	                               198
     Measures to Control Illicit Tobacco Flows	                           203
     Case studies	                                                        210
     Conclusions	                                                         213
     References	                                                          214

Conclusion		                                                              217
     From Evidence to Action	                                             217
     Seizing the “Win-Win-Win”	                                           218
     The Road Ahead	                                                      220
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report was prepared under the lead of Patricio V. Marquez and Blanca Moreno-­
Dodson, Co-Coordinators, World Bank Group Global Tobacco Control Program, with the
editorial contribution of Alexander Irwin, by an international team comprised of (by
chapter order):

  Chapter 1: Patricio V. Marquez (Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice,
  World Bank Group)

  Chapter 2: Prabhat Jha (Center for Global Health Research, St. Michael’s Hospital
  and Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada) and
  Richard Peto (Clinical Trial Service Unit and Epidemiological Studies Unit, Nuffield
  Department of Population Health, Richard Doll Building, University of Oxford, Oxford,
  United Kingdom)

  Chapter 3: Blanca Moreno-Dodson (Global Tax Team, Governance Global Practice,
  World Bank Group)

  Chapter 4: Mark Goodchild (World Health Organization), Anne-Marie Perucic (World
  Health Organization), Rose Zheng (University of International Business and Economics,
  Beijing, China), Evan Blecher (World Health Organization), and Jeremias Paul (World
  Health Organization)

  Chapter 5: Annerie Bouw (European Commission)

  Chapter 6: Rouselle F. Lavado (World Bank Group, now at Asian Development Bank),
  Moritz Meyer (Poverty and Equity Global Practice, World Bank Group), Iryna Postolovska
  (World Bank Group), and Renzo Efren Sotomayor (World Bank Group)

  Chapter 7: Hana Ross (University of Cape Town, South Africa)

  Chapter 8: Teh-Wei Hu (Public Health Institute’s Center for International Tobacco
  Control, Oakland, California), Angela Lisulo (Consultant, World Bank Group), and
  Melissa Brown (Agriculture Global Practice, World Bank Group)

  Chapter 9: Enrique Fanta (Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice, World Bank
  Group) and Magaly Garcia (World Bank Group)
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Paul Isenman (former World Bank Group Director and Principal Economist) reviewed and
commented upon drafts of all portions of the report, providing extensive technical inputs
and suggestions, and enhancing the volume’s robustness and quality. Additional comments,
and technical inputs provided by Alan Fuchs (World Bank Group), Francisco Meneses (Duke
University, United States, and Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Chile), and Alberto Gonima
(Consultant, World Bank Group). Vito Tanzi, former Director of the Fiscal Affairs Depart-
ment at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), provided comments and
guidance on an initial version of different chapters in the report.

Sheila Dutta (World Bank Group) contributed to the Conclusions chapter, distilling the
main messages of the report.

Overall technical guidance and oversight provided by Enis Baris (Program Manager,
Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice, World Bank Group), and Tim Evans
(Senior Director, Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice, World Bank Group),
James Brumby (Director, Governance Global Practice, World Bank Group), Alma Kanani
(Program Manager, Governance Global Practice), and Marijn Verhoeven (Lead Economist
and Cluster Lead of the Global Tax Team, Governance Global Practice, World Bank Group).

Akosua Dakwa (World Bank Group) provided administrative support.

The preparation of this report was carried out under the World Bank Global Tobacco
Control Program, supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the Bloomberg
Foundation.

The authors alone are responsible for the views expressed herein and they do not
necessarily represent the views, decisions or policies of the institutions with which
they are affiliated.

Washington, D.C.
September 26, 2017




8 // Acknowledgments
TOBACCO USE
NOT ONLY KILLS
MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE EACH
YEAR BUT PLACES
A STAGGERING
POVERTY AND
ECONOMIC
BURDEN ON LOW
INCOME FAMILIE
     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
     There is a policy measure that can simultaneously save millions of lives,
     reduce poverty, and increase countries’ domestic resources for financing
     development.

     The policy measure consists of increasing excise tax rates on tobacco
     in order to reduce its affordability and, as evidence shows, lower its
     consumption.




S
     Today, this powerful human development and poverty reduction measure
     remains largely underutilized, especially in low- and middle-income
     countries (LMICs). This report provides decision support for policy makers
     on tobacco tax reform, as well as analytical and empirical tools for using
     tobacco excise taxes to save lives and increase government revenues.
     The report sets forth the public health, economic, and anti-poverty case
     for higher tobacco taxes; shows how some countries have already
     delivered ambitious reforms; and documents measurable results. It
     shows that, by implementing tobacco tax reforms now, policy makers
     can choose a fast road to healthier, more prosperous societies.




W-
ES
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




THE TOBACCO USE CHALLENGE
Few people today doubt that smoking is bad. But many, including seasoned policy makers,
do not realize just how bad it is. Bad for people, bad for economies, and bad for poverty
reduction. In fact, tobacco use not only kills millions of people each year but places
a staggering poverty and economic burden on low-income families and less-developed
countries that is deepening inequalities between and within countries.


Health Damage
Tobacco kills at least half of long-term smokers, accounting for more deaths each year
than HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria combined. And the burden of sickness and
death from tobacco is becoming heavier. There were about 100 million deaths from
tobacco in the 20th century. If current patterns persist, tobacco will kill some 1 billion
people in this century, most in LMICs (Jha 2009; Peto and Lopez, 2001). Health systems
suffer along with individuals. Treatment of the numerous chronic diseases caused or
exacerbated by smoking swells countries’ annual health care costs and diverts resources
that could be used to solve other health challenges or address development priorities.


Economic Damage
Tobacco-related deaths are not only preventable tragedies but have an important economic
cost. Worldwide, the total economic damage of smoking (including productivity losses
from death and disability) has been estimated at more than US$ 1.4 trillion per year,
equivalent to 1.8 percent of the world’s annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (Goodchild,
Nargis, and Tursan d’Espaignet 2017).


Worsening Poverty
This economic burden mainly falls on the people and countries that can least afford it.
More than 80 percent of the world’s smokers live in LMICs. Within countries, tobacco
addiction is concentrated among people with lower incomes and education. Poor smokers
spend a larger portion of their income on tobacco products than wealthier smokers,
and the poor also suffer most from smoking-related illnesses. The medical expenses
and loss of earnings associated with these illnesses contribute to pushing millions of
households into financial crisis and deeper poverty every year. Meanwhile, tobacco use
reduces future earning potential, especially among young adults, and reduces adult
workers’ economic productivity.




12 // Executive Summary
THE TOBACCO TAX IMPERATIVE
There is an extraordinary divergence between high-income countries, which are
increasingly using price and non-price tools to lower their death rates from tobacco, and
LMICs, where the absolute number of tobacco deaths continues to grow. About half
of the difference in mortality rates between rich and poor smokers is due to smoking.
Equality of opportunity between countries worldwide demands action on tobacco.

By adopting the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), all countries have
committed to achieving a 30 percent reduction in death rates from non-communicable
diseases like cancer, stroke, and heart disease by 2030. Reducing tobacco use is critical for
countries to reach this goal (Jha, Marquez, and Dutta 2017). How can LMICs cut smoking
rates on the scale required and achieve faster progress than even that achieved by high-­
income countries? Bold increases in tobacco excise tax rates are by far the most powerful tool.

Leaders who raise tobacco excise tax rates can expect the following:

Longer lives and better health for the people: The main reason to implement tobacco
excise tax rate increases is that they save lives and reduce serious illnesses like cancer and
heart disease. Evidence across a wide range of countries shows that a 50 percent increase
in cigarette price typically leads to a 20 percent decline in cigarette consumption. Reduced
consumption has a powerful impact on subsequent tobacco-related sickness and death
within several years. About half of this effect comes from getting current smokers to quit.
Higher tobacco prices also reduce smoking initiation among young people and so help
stop them from becoming addicted to tobacco in the first place (IARC 2011).

More resources for development: Even as they lower cigarette use and improve
population health, higher tobacco taxes can substantially boost government tax revenues.
Economic modeling carried out for this report shows that raising cigarette excise tax
rates in all developing countries by the equivalent of US$ 0.25 per pack would generate
an extra US$ 41 billion in government tobacco excise revenue for LMICs: raising these
countries’ tobacco excise revenue intake by 29 percent from the 2014 level. This
additional revenue could fund development investments (see also Goodchild, Perucic,
and Nargis 2016).



EARLY WINS IN SOME COUNTRIES
The links between tobacco taxes, public health, and government revenues are not just
theoretical. Between 2012 and 2014, over a hundred governments used tobacco tax hikes
to save lives and increase government revenues. In most cases these tax hikes were still
too small to yield substantial declines in cigarette consumption. But this report shows
that some countries are taking bolder steps and reaping significant public health and


                                                                                                 13
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




fiscal revenue benefits. It also shows that much more can be achieved. As of 2015, WHO
reported that only 28 LMICs had adopted comprehensive tobacco control policies covering
retail-counter cigarette advertising, restrictions on public smoking, and appropriately high
excise tax rates. As leaders in more countries weigh the public-health and economic
arguments for tobacco taxation, there are opportunities for exceptional progress now.



MAKING IT HAPPEN
If leaders want to move forward on tobacco excise taxation, what are the critical steps?
What are the common pitfalls they should avoid? This report distills a large body of
evidence on successful practice in tobacco taxation and the decision-making process.
Key lessons include:

   •	 Go big, go fast. Tax strategies should focus on health gains first, then on fiscal
      benefits. This means going for big tobacco excise tax rate increases starting early in
      the process. Adopting a slow, cautious timeline might sound prudent. But it means
      condemning large numbers of people to avoidable illness and premature death.
      In tobacco taxation, the rewards go to those who act boldly.
   •	 Attack affordability. Tobacco taxes only reduce tobacco consumption if they reduce
      cigarette affordability. In most LMICs, wages are rising. Thus, cigarettes will become de
      facto more affordable for consumers, increasing consumption, unless tobacco taxes rise
      even faster. Effective strategies will generally involve combining big initial tax increases
      with recurrent hikes over time, to keep cigarette prices climbing more steeply than per
      capita real income growth (including inflation).
   •	 Change expectations: Communication with the public is also critical. Governments
      must make sure consumers know that a tax-rate hike is not just a one-off, but that
      cigarette prices will keep going up. This is a motivator for current smokers to quit and
      young people not to start.
   •	 Tax by quantity. Tobacco tax rates should be simplified and based on the quantity
      of cigarettes, not their price. This is done in two ways, both of which preempt smokers’
      switching to cheaper cigarette brands after a tax-rate hike on the brands they previously
      smoked (a response called “downward substitution”). The first key move is to use specific
      excises, as opposed to ad valorem (value-based) excises or other taxes. A key factor that
      needs to be taken into account is that specific rates require to be adjusted over time
      to at least keep pace with inflation and, preferably, at a faster rate so that affordability is
      reduced over time. Any strategy for adopting them should be therefore accompanied
      by a framework/instrument to allow for annual increases over time (such as the United
      Kingdom’s tobacco duty escalator). The second is to merge the multiple tobacco tax “tiers”
      used by most developing countries. This way, tax hikes raise prices by the same large
      amount on all brands at once, pushing smokers to quit completely, rather than switch.

14 // Executive Summary
   •	 “Soft earmarks” can win support. Earmarking tax revenues through legislation
      is criticized by fiscal experts as contributing to rigidities, fragmentation, and eventual
      distortions in public expenditures. However, “soft” earmarking of funds — for example,
      linking increased taxes to increased health spending — has helped generate grassroots
      support for the tax hikes. This has been shown by experience in other sectors, and it has
      worked for tobacco taxes in countries like Australia, Philippines, and the United States.
   •	 Regional collaboration can boost results. Momentum for ambitious tobacco tax
      reform can be enhanced, and cross-border threats like cigarette smuggling minimized,
      when countries work together in a regional structure. The European Union (EU) provides
      an example. The EU experience shows that regional cooperation can help countries
      achieve the dual goals of reducing tobacco consumption while increasing government
      revenues. Lessons also concern the pace of reforms. EU lawmakers faced early political
      pressure to “go slow,” by setting a low initial minimum tobacco excise rate to apply
      to all Member States. However, the EU accelerated progress by convincing Member
      States to agree up front to relatively high minimum tobacco excise rates, with longer
      transition periods authorized for some countries facing special challenges.
   •	 Build broad alliances. Country leaders face sharp resistance to tax rate increases and
      other tobacco control measures from the tobacco industry. The industry is both
      financially powerful and politically astute. Tobacco industry advice to governments
      promotes the most ineffective interventions and in particular seeks to undercut
      and weaken tax measures. To counter these pressures requires robust scientific and
      economic analysis, as well as multi-sectoral policy development. It also demands
      the mobilization of civil society and opinion leaders. Support from international
      partners is also required, particularly in low-income countries, to strengthen country
      capacity for lining up and coordinating all parts of government, while engaging a
      wide set of stakeholders outside of government.



KEY POLICY CHALLENGES
As countries plan and implement tobacco tax rate increases, they should anticipate
challenges in specific areas. Several issues are important, both intrinsically and because
the tobacco industry exploits them to influence public opinion and policy debates. The
three most salient of these issues are: (1) how higher tobacco tax rates affect poor
people; (2) how tobacco taxes affect employment; and (3) connections between tobacco
tax rate hikes and the illicit tobacco trade.




                                                                                                   15
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




TOBACCO AND EQUITY:
PUTTING POOR PEOPLE AT THE CENTER
As noted above, accumulated evidence from across the globe shows how tobacco taxes
help reduce poverty. Yet one of the industry’s most insidious arguments against raising
tobacco taxes is that these taxes hurt poor people disproportionately. This is based on
the claim that tobacco taxes are regressive: meaning that they take a greater share of
disposable income from the poor than from the rich. Almost by definition, poor smokers
do generally spend a greater proportion of their incomes on tobacco than wealthier
smokers. However, poorer smokers respond more to a unit change in price than do richer
smokers. Thus, tobacco tax hikes more effectively reduce cigarette affordability among
poor people than among the rich. Reducing cigarette affordability does not hurt poor
smokers. On the contrary, it will increase their disposable income for other goods and
services, and can save many of their lives.

Faced with tobacco tax rate increases, relatively poorer households adjust their behavior
relatively more than richer households. A 50 percent increase in cigarette prices will lead to a
30–40 percent decline in tobacco consumption for the poor, a much larger relative decline
than among the rich. This also means that poor people get the largest share of health and
economic benefits from smoking cessation following a tax rate hike. Evidence from Thailand,
for example, shows that the poor paid only 6 percent of increased tobacco taxes but got
58 percent of the health benefits (Jha, Joseph, Moser, et al. 2012).

The health benefits poor people obtain by quitting smoking also translate into long-term
economic gains. Households in which someone smokes earn less over time than other-
wise similar households where there are no smokers. So by favoring smoking cessation
among people at the lower end of the welfare scale, tobacco taxes boost incomes among
the poor relative to the better-off, directly advancing equity.

The bottom line is this: when we look at all the facts, tobacco taxes are not regressive, but
highly progressive, as the full health and economic benefits of this measure far outweigh
its relative cost.



TOBACCO TAXATION AND EMPLOYMENT:
BRIDGING TO BETTER LIVELIHOODS
The tobacco industry warns of potential job losses in agriculture, manufacturing, and
distribution as an argument against higher tobacco taxes. However, governments can
help facilitate the adjustment of the relatively small numbers of vulnerable workers
whose jobs will be affected by tobacco tax rate increases.




16 // Executive Summary
On tobacco taxes and employment, the following points merit attention:

   •	 Job losses in tobacco worldwide have come mostly from manufacturers’ own
      policies, not from tax hikes. Analysis has shown that observed reductions in
      tobacco-related employment have come largely from automation and consolidation
      by the industry itself (NCI and WHO 2016).
   •	 Today, few jobs in LMICs are completely dependent on tobacco, even in large
      producer countries. With few exceptions, the share of total employment involved with
      tobacco is already very small. Even China, the world’s largest producer and consumer
      of tobacco products, has only about 2 percent of its farmers growing tobacco (Hu,
      Mao, Shi et al. 2008).
   •	 Following a tobacco tax rate hike, consumer spending shifts to non-
      tobacco sectors, creating alternative jobs. When cigarette consumption drops after a
      tax rate hike, money not spent on tobacco products will mostly flow to other economic
      sectors, stimulating their production and so creating jobs there, while contributing
      to economic diversification. Studies show that over time there is likely to be a net gain
      rather than a loss in employment in nearly all countries that raise tobacco excise rates
      (IARC 2011; NCI and WHO 2016).
   •	 Tobacco tax plans must nonetheless incorporate support for affected
      workers, especially those with low skills. Though the numbers are small, some
      tobacco workers who lack skills to adapt will lose employment and income, as
      demand for tobacco falls. Governments must anticipate this challenge and be ready
      with solutions. Successful transitions can be achieved, helping workers access
      equal or better livelihoods outside tobacco. Policy makers should tackle this issue
      head-on: on equity grounds, to assist vulnerable workers and their families; and for
      strategic reasons, to prevent the tobacco industry from appropriating employment
      as a political weapon against tax rate increases.


Helping Tobacco Farmers Switch to Other Crops
In the very few countries that are net tobacco producers, an important share of employment
in the tobacco industry comes from farming. Governments and their partners can
coordinate tobacco tax rate hikes with programs to encourage and help tobacco farmers’
transition to other crops. In virtually all settings, alternative crops exist that are both more
profitable for farmers than tobacco and without the health risks of tobacco farming, which
include green tobacco sickness, a systemic poisoning due to nicotine exposure through
contact with tobacco plants.

Today, only a minimum percentage of farmers rely exclusively on tobacco for their
livelihoods. In most settings, tobacco is part of multi-cropping schemes, and where




                                                                                              17
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




demand is decreasing farmers are diversifying away from dependence on tobacco.
Tobacco cultivation is a small and shrinking contributor to economies worldwide.
However, targeted support, for example through input credits, agricultural extension,
and irrigation, will be needed for some small tobacco farmers, particularly those who are
trapped in dependency on the tobacco industry. Industry practices foster such dependency,
for example by providing farmers with free inputs and guaranteed purchase of their
entire tobacco crop, though often at such low rates that farmers fail to break even and end
up in chronic debt to the firms (Kagaruki 2010).



CURBING THE ILLICIT TOBACCO TRADE
The tobacco industry counsels policy makers that raising tobacco tax rates will spur
increases in the illicit tobacco trade, while lowering tobacco tax rates might reduce
such criminal activity. The key message for governments on this point is clear: even in
the presence of substantial levels of smuggling, higher tobacco tax rates cut cigarette
consumption and raise fiscal revenues. Evidence from Canada, which has 3000 miles of
open border with the United States, shows that large-scale smuggling occurred only
when the cigarette industry colluded with criminal networks (Kelton and Givel 2008).
The main driver of the illicit tobacco trade is not higher tax rates but lax enforcement and
organized criminal networks. The core strategy for governments remains to go after the
criminals and improve tax administration and enforcement of control measures, not to
lower tobacco taxes. Turkey, for example, substantially reduced illegal sales by tackling
evasion, and simultaneously raised taxes.

A robust repertoire of proven control and enforcement measures exist to curb illicit
tobacco. Measures have been successfully implemented by LMICs, as well as rich countries.
Many are captured in the WHO Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products.
Effective tools include track-and-trace systems to follow tobacco products through the
supply chain; detection equipment at customs posts; and tougher sanctions. Today, it is
imperative that the international community advocate and encourage national lawmakers
in all countries to ratify and implement the WHO Protocol, securing its status as binding
international law (Marquez 2015). Many countries that have adopted broad control and
enforcement programs have achieved impressive results. For example, since the “Tackling
Tobacco Smuggling” strategy was introduced in the U.K. in 2000, the size of the illicit
cigarette market has been cut by almost half, to about 9 percent of national sales, with
more than 20 billion cigarettes and over 2,700 tons of hand-rolling tobacco seized.
Additionally, the U.K. has seen more than 3,300 criminal prosecutions for tobacco
offenses following action by law enforcement officers. In Chile, a country that has one
of the highest tax rates on cigarettes in the world, with taxes accounting for 78 percent of
the price of each pack, the government has also achieved success in increasing seizures


18 // Executive Summary
of smuggled tobacco products. This has affected the country’s tobacco supply and is
helping curtail the slight growth in illicit trade observed after a 2013 increase in tobacco prices.



CONCLUSION:
EXPANDING THE GLOBAL COALITION
Higher tobacco tax rates could save millions of lives each decade, reduce poverty, and
boost public resources for development investment. Yet, today, tobacco taxation remains
one of the world’s least-used tobacco control measures (Marquez 2017).

The power to change this situation exists. Not in the hands of any single leader or
institution, but in a global coalition uniting governments, multilateral agencies, civil
society, researchers, the private sector, and communities: a coalition dedicated to ensuring
that the life-saving impact of tobacco tax reform reaches the largest possible number of
people in the shortest possible time.

Since 2015, the World Bank Group, WHO, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the Bloomberg
Foundation, and others have worked with countries to reinforce the global coalition for
tobacco tax reform. In April 2017, the conference “Tobacco Taxation: Win-Win for Public
Health and Domestic Resource Mobilization” provided an opportunity to measure progress.
Convened at World Bank Headquarters in Washington, D.C., this tobacco tax policy summit
drew high-level delegations from the Health and Finance Ministries of 35 countries, who
reported on progress and committed to further accelerate reforms. Participants noted that,
as countries reframe their development finance plans around domestic resource mobilization,
the case for tobacco taxation increasingly resonates.

Measured against the distance to be traveled, these are still early steps. Countries acting
boldly remain outnumbered by those that hesitate. The World Bank will leverage its
access to Ministries of Finance to further expand country-level policy dialog; ramp up
technical support and capacity building; nurture peer-to-peer collaboration among
countries; and advance a learning agenda to further improve tobacco tax policy designs,
hone advocacy, and increase impact.

Many countries stand at the crossroads on tobacco tax reform: a critical crossroads for
health and development. The good news is that countries and partners can come
together, not just around a problem, but around a proven solution. A stronger, united
effort is required to advance the global tobacco taxation agenda toward better health,
less poverty, and greater development opportunity for all.




                                                                                                 19
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




REFERENCES
Furman, J. 2016. “Policy, Politics, and the Tripling of Federal Tobacco Taxes in the United States to Deter
People from Smoking, Save Lives, and Mobilize Revenue over the last 30 years. Six Lessons from the
U.S. Experience with Tobacco Taxes.” Presentation at the World Bank Conference. “Winning the Tax Wars:
Global Solutions for Developing Countries,” Washington, DC, May 24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.org/en/
topic/health/brief/tobacco

Goodchild M, Nargis N, Tursan d’Espaignet E. 2017. “Global economic cost of smoking-attributable diseases.”
Tob Control Online First: 30 January 2017. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2016-053305.

Goodchild M, Perucic AM, Nargis N. 2016. Modelling the impact of raising tobacco taxes on public health
and finance. Bull World Health Organ 94: 250–257.

Hu T-w, Mao Z, Shi J, Chen W. 2008. Tobacco Taxation and Its Potential Impact in China. Paris: International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2011. Effectiveness of Tax and Price Policies for
Tobacco Control. Volume 14, IARC Handbooks.

Jha P. 2009. “Avoidable global cancer deaths and total deaths from smoking.” Nat Rev Cancer 9: 655–64.

Jha P, Joseph RC, Moser P et al, for the Asia Development Bank. 2012. Tobacco Taxes: A Win-Win Measure
for Fiscal Space and Health. Manila: Asian Development Bank. (Accessed May 8, 2017 at http://www.adb.org/
publications/tobacco-taxes-win-win-measure-fiscal-space-and-health)

Jha, P., Marquez, P.V., and Dutta, S. 2017. “Tripling Tobacco Taxes: Key for Achieving the UN Sustainable
Development Goals by 2030.” The World Bank Blogs, January 24, 2017. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.
org/health/role-excise- tax-meeting-sdg

Junquera-Varela, Raul Felix, Marijn Verhoeven, Gangadhar P. Shukla, Bernard Haven, Rajul Awasthi, and
Blanca Moreno-Dodson. 2017. Strengthening Domestic Resource Mobilization: Moving from Theory to Practice
in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1073-2.

Kagaruki, L. K. 2010. Community-based advocacy opportunities for tobacco control: experience from
Tanzania. Global Health Promotion 17(2) Suppl: 41–4.

Kaiser, K, Bredenkamp, C., Iglesias, R. 2016. “Sin Tax Reform in the Philippines: Transforming Public Finance,
Health, and Governance for More Inclusive Development. Directions in Development  —  Countries and
Regions.” Washington, DC: World Bank. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/24617

Kelton MH, Givel MS. 2008. Public policy implications of tobacco industry smuggling through Native
American reservations into Canada. Int J Health Serv 38(3):471–87.

Marquez, P.V. 2015. “World No Tobacco Day 2015: On Illicit Trade and Taxes.” The World Bank Blogs, May
29, 2015. http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/world-no-tobacco-day-2015-illicit-trade-and-taxes

Marquez, P.V. 2017. “Taxation: Most effective but still the least-used tobacco control measure.” The World
Bank Blogs, July 19, 2017. https://blogs.worldbank.org/health/taxation-most-effective-still-least-used-
tobacco-control-measure

NCI (U.S. National Cancer Institute) and WHO (World Health Organization). 2016. Monograph 21: The Eco-
nomics of Tobacco and Tobacco Control. Bethesda, MD, USA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, National Institutes of Health. Available at: https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/monographs/21/
docs/m21_exec_sum.pdf




20 // Executive Summary
Paul, J. 2016. “The Impact of the 2013 Sin Tax Reform in the Philippines.” Presentation at World Bank
Conference: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for Developing Countries,” Washington, DC, May 24,
2016. http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco

Peto, R., Lopez, A.D. 2001. “Future worldwide health effects of current smoking patterns.” In: Koop, C.E.,
Pearson, C.E., Schwarz, M.R., eds. Critical issues in global health. San Francisco: Wiley (Jossey-Bass): 154–61.

Webber, L., Andreeva, T.I., Sotomayor, R., Marquez, P.V., et al. 2017. “Modeling the Long-Term Health and
Cost Impacts of Reducing Smoking Prevalence through Tobacco Taxation in Ukraine.” Washington, DC:
The World Bank Group.

World Bank Group. 2016. Tobacco Tax Modelling in Armenia, Colombia, Moldova, and Ukraine. Internal
Working Documents.




                                                                                                              21
TOBACCO USE
NOT ONLY KILLS
MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE EACH
YEAR BUT PLACES
A STAGGERING
POVERTY AND
ECONOMIC
BURDEN ON LOW
INCOME FAMILIE
 22 // Executive Summary
     INTRODUCTION
     There is a policy measure that can simultaneously save millions of lives, reduce poverty, and
     increase countries’ domestic resources for financing development. For most countries, this
     measure is the most effective way to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 3.4, reducing
     deaths from noncommunicable diseases, such as cancer and heart disease. It will also
     advance other key development objectives.

     The policy measure consists of increasing excise tax rates on tobacco in order to reduce
     its affordability and, as evidence shows, lower its consumption.




S
     Today, this powerful health and human development tool remains largely underutilized,
     especially where it could do the most good: in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs).

     Those countries that have raised tobacco excise tax rates report impressive results:

        •	 The “Sin Tax” reform in the Philippines shows striking results. Tobacco accounts
           for about 80 percent of the US$ 3.9 billion in additional revenues generated by
           the Philippines’ tobacco and alcohol tax policy reform in its first three years of
           implementation. The additional fiscal space created by the reform increased the
           Department of Health budget threefold. The number of families whose health
           insurance premiums were paid by the national government rose from 5.2 million
           primary members in 2012 to 15.3 million in 2015.
        •	 As shown by the Global Adult Tobacco Survey compared to 2010, in 2017, there
           was a 20 percent relative reduction in the proportion of the population who smoke
           tobacco daily. This is largely due to a reduction in smoking among men, as there
           were no significant reductions seen in the proportion of women who smoke. In
           total in 2017, 7.2 million adult Ukrainians smoke daily (35.9 percent of all adult men
           and 7.0 percent of all adult women). This reflects the beneficial impact of Ukraine’s
           tobacco control across many of the indicators measured: the percentage of those
           who were exposed to secondhand tobacco smoke at home, in the workplace and
           in public has reduced, as has the proportion of the population who have been
           exposed to tobacco promotion through marketing of tobacco products; prices for




W-
           tobacco products has increased significantly, as has people’s awareness of the
           harms of tobacco use (Ministry of Health of Ukraine, et al, 2017).
        •	 Building upon its previous experience with an alcohol levy, Botswana introduced
           a tobacco levy of 30 percent of unit cost in 2014, on top of the Southern Africa
           Customs Union (SACU) average excise tax on tobacco. The aim is to control the




ES
           growing burden noncommunicable diseases, many of them tobacco-related.
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




      With the introduction of the levy, the retail price for a pack of 20 cigarettes of the
      most-sold brand now stands at US$ 3.12, and total taxes as a percentage of retail
      price rose to 62.68 percent, up from 51.99 percent in 2012.

Regarding tobacco taxation, the global community stands at a crossroads. Leaders must
choose, time is short, and the stakes are life-and-death. That is why the World Bank Group
Tobacco Control Program has worked with its partners to create this report.




A MAP FOR THE CROSSROADS
This report provides policy makers and those who advise them with decision support
for informed choices on tobacco tax policy. The book draws on a vast body of scien-
tific literature and distills the key facts into accessible form, focusing on core issues for
tobacco taxation in LMICs.

Contributors explain the “Why?,” “What?,” and “How?” of tobacco tax reform. Starting with
the overall rationale (the “Why?”) they summarize the arguments that support tobacco
taxation as a unique “win-win” for public health and public finance. And they show how
tobacco taxes can work as a development catalyst.

Authors also weigh the evidence on which specific tobacco tax designs work best (the
“What?”). They review the advantages and drawbacks of different tax models, especially
specific (quantity-based) vs. ad valorem (value-based) tobacco excise regimes. They describe
both what leading experts recommend, and what countries are doing in practice.

On “How-to?” issues, the report provides options for decision makers and implementers to
translate good policy models into action and results. Contributors review implementation
challenges countries have encountered, the solutions used, and the outcomes obtained.
Authors provide both high-grade quantitative evidence and qualitative insights into
political processes in countries.



WHY THIS REPORT NOW?
The literature on tobacco and its health effects is vast. Recent landmark publications,
such as the technical monographs from the U.S. National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the
World Health Organization (WHO), have organized an immense body of knowledge on
the medicine, public health, economics, law, and political economy of tobacco use and
tobacco control. Since the passage of the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control (FCTC), WHO and its partners have continued to produce a steady and remarkable
array of research, analysis, and policy recommendations for States Parties to use.



24 // Introduction
Yet the experience of World Bank teams and other partners providing frontline tobacco
tax advice in countries is that policy makers and their advisers are still hungry for
decision-oriented evidence and options on tobacco taxation. Precisely because the
scientific (and pseudoscientific) literature is vast, decision makers may search in vain for a
clear bottom line. All the more so, since the tobacco industry works hard to maintain
confusion around critical issues.

This report builds on the existing outstanding resources in the tobacco control literature.
It cannot replace them. The distinctive expertise of the World Bank Group in tax policy can,
though, help us to present key information in a format and a level of detail that policy makers
and their teams can use to plan policies, take action, and save lives.

We focus on a series of topics that are fundamental for the design, political management,
and implementation of tobacco taxes in LMICs. Our choice of topics had been guided by
ongoing frontline policy dialog on these issues involving national policy makers, World Bank
staff, technical experts from other agencies, academic researchers, civil society organiza-
tions, and other stakeholders. We aim to provide answers to the questions decision makers
and stakeholders actually ask, when our technical teams are on the ground in countries.
Often, policy makers’ concerns are prompted by the misinformation the tobacco industry
puts out. Thus, our choice of topics also privileges the subjects we regularly see the industry
try to exploit to cast doubt on tobacco taxation.



STRUCTURE OF THIS VOLUME
The remainder of this report is structured as follows. The first five chapters offer a detailed
public health, public finance, and development case for tobacco taxation. Chapter 1
presents the book’s main arguments through the lens of integrated development. The
chapter analyzes the tobacco epidemic’s economic impact and development consequences.
Turning from problems to solutions, it shows how higher tobacco taxes can contribute to
development gains and details the outstanding progress some countries have made. It
describes how the World Bank Group is playing a leading role in broadening and strength-
ening a global partnership to support countries in tobacco tax reform, with impressive
early results. The chapter situates these issues within the context of the SDGs and current
debates in development finance, emphasizing the transformative potential of improved
domestic resource mobilization.

Chapter 2 further anchors the discussion in the epidemiology of the global tobacco
epidemic, tracing the epidemic’s past, present, and possible futures. The chapter offers
powerful public-health arguments for tobacco tax hikes. To inform policy makers and
opinion leaders, the authors provide a summary of the hazards of smoking from early adult




                                                                                                 25
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




life, the benefits of stopping at various ages, the eventual magnitude of the epidemic
if current smoking patterns persist, and the effectiveness of tax increases and other
interventions to reduce cigarette consumption. Worldwide, a reduction of smoking
prevalence by about a third could be obtained by doubling the real price of cigarettes,
which in many low- and middle-income countries could be achieved by tripling the real
excise tax on tobacco. Without large price increases, a one-third reduction in smoking will
be difficult to achieve, leaving large numbers of people exposed to sickness and death
that could have been prevented.

Chapter 3 focuses on the pragmatic aspects of tobacco tax reform, linking policy makers’
practical concerns to the key arguments deployed throughout the report. This chapter
further clarifies the rationale for raising tobacco taxes; compares specific tax designs; and
explores successful approaches to implementing tobacco tax hikes in the real world. It also
explains what employment and social equity effects policy makers can anticipate when
they raise tobacco taxes, thus preparing leaders to proactively address the concerns of
vulnerable social constituencies (e.g., tobacco farmers). Protecting these constituencies
is intrinsically important for equity reasons. It may also be strategic, given that in some
settings they exert significant political influence.

Chapter 4 uses an economic model of the global cigarette market to quantify the health
and fiscal benefits that would accrue to countries by raising tobacco taxes. Hiking cigarette
excise by the equivalent of US$ 0.25 per pack in all developing countries (an average
increase of 40 percent) is forecast to cut cigarette consumption in LMICs by 8 percent and
generate an extra US$ 41 billion in revenue. This would mean a 29 percent increase in
LMICs’ total cigarette excise revenues. The chapter closes with empirical data confirming
that countries taking leadership are already translating such mathematical tobacco tax
opportunities into real-world policy change, lives saved, and money in the bank.

Chapter 5 further builds the case for bold tobacco tax reform by showing how regional
collaboration can enhance results. The chapter focuses on the example of the European
Union (EU). The EU experience with harmonizing tobacco taxation at the regional level
shows that regional cooperation can help countries achieve the dual goals of reducing
tobacco consumption and increasing government revenues. Lessons also concern the
pace of reforms. EU lawmakers faced early political pressure to “go slow,” by setting a
low initial minimum tobacco excise rate to apply to all Member States. However, the
EU accelerated progress by convincing Member States to agree up front to relatively
high minimum tobacco excise rates, with longer transition periods authorized for
some countries facing special challenges.

With the broad public health and economic case for tobacco taxation in place, Chapters
6–9 focus on a series of key issues for the actual design, political marketing, and imple-
mentation of higher tobacco taxes. These chapters provide evidence that decision makers


26 // Introduction
and implementers can use to tackle specific challenges that typically arise in tobacco
taxation. While the topics are important in their own right, their practical significance
increases, because these are subjects that the global tobacco industry preferentially
exploits in its efforts to manipulate public opinion and influence policy. Thus, these are
topics on which it is important that decision makers and opinion shapers be armed with
the best evidence.

Chapter 6 looks at how tobacco tax hikes affect poor people. The starting point is the
often-cited concern that tobacco tax hikes are regressive: i.e., that they disproportionately
burden poorer smokers, who spend a larger portion of their incomes on tobacco
products than do wealthier people. To assess this argument, our authors provide an
in-depth analysis of the demographics of tobacco use; compare poorer and wealthier
smokers’ adjustment behaviors when tobacco taxes rise; and make explicit the assumptions
and limitations of traditional fiscal incidence analyses — which ignore health benefits
and effects on productivity and risk — for tobacco taxation. The authors propose an
alternative analytic approach, incorporating a wider view of longer-term health and
economic costs and benefits by income group. This more inclusive analytic model reverses
the initial appearance of tobacco tax regressivity. Far from unfairly burdening the poor,
tobacco taxes deliver the greatest share of their potent long-term benefits to people with
low incomes. It is smoking that is regressive and tobacco tax increases that are progressive.

Chapters 7 and 8 explore another area crucial for the political marketing of tobacco
taxes. This is the question of how tax hikes and the resulting drop in smoking prevalence
will affect employment in a country. Policy makers are sensitive to this issue for
understandable reasons. Industry-sponsored research habitually predicts major job losses
when higher tobacco taxes are imposed. Fully reviewing the evidence, our chapters show
that employment in tobacco is already low in most countries, that losses in tobacco
employment come mostly from industry practices rather than tobacco taxes, and that
declines from tobacco taxes will be quite gradual. They agree, though, that because
of political sensitivity and difficulties for some workers to find alternate equivalent
employment, programs to help such workers and encourage transition are crucial.

Chapter 7 shows that higher tobacco taxes’ net employment impact is generally the
opposite of industry forecasts. Higher tobacco taxes lead to a redistribution of consumer
spending and accelerated job creation in non-tobacco sectors. In most cases, the new
taxes actually generate a modest net gain in employment for the economy as a whole.
Meanwhile, by cutting smoking rates, higher tobacco taxes will increase overall worker
productivity across the economy by reducing work time lost to smoking breaks and
tobacco-related illness. The chapter explicitly deconstructs the flawed methodologies
utilized by industry-supported researchers and explains the systematic distortion in
their results.



                                                                                             27
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Chapter 8 addresses the special situation of tobacco farmers. The chapter shows, first, that
any effects of tobacco taxes on farm livelihoods will be gradual and initially very small,
providing ample time for farmers to adjust, with appropriate support. Equally important,
contrary to industry claims, tobacco is generally not the most profitable crop these farmers
could be growing. In fact, tobacco has numerous downsides, including for farmers’ own
health. Currently, however, many tobacco farmers are not well informed about the risks
they run, and unaware of their other options. Even those farmers who may already want
to shift away from tobacco to alternative crops often find themselves caught in a cycle
of dependence on tobacco firms for loans, inputs, and market opportunities, effectively
making it impossible for many farmers to undertake otherwise profitable crop substitution.
This chapter argues that national policy makers and international partners can work
together to protect and empower farmers, and to assist them to transition from tobacco
to other, better livelihoods.

Chapter 9 examines a crucial nuts-and-bolts consideration for policy makers that has also
provided a foothold for industry misinformation. This is the challenge of controlling the
illicit tobacco trade. Industry experts often “counsel” policy makers that the fiscal gains
from higher tobacco taxes will be erased by surges in cigarette smuggling and other
illicit activities when cigarette prices rise. The chapter marshals extensive empirical
evidence to disprove this claim and show that numerous countries have successfully
controlled illicit trade, including forms involving the tobacco industry itself, while raising
tobacco taxes. It provides examples of good practice, as well as pitfalls to avoid, and
furnishes details on specific technical solutions countries have adopted with success.

The volume’s Conclusion recommends key lines of collaborative action at country and
global level, as well as a research agenda, to accelerate progress in tobacco tax reform in
the years ahead.




28 // Introduction
REFERENCES
Jamison, D., Summer, L., Alleyne, G., Arrow, K., Berkley, S., Binagwaho, A., Bustreo, F., Evans, D., Feachem, R.,
Frenk, J., Ghosh, G., Goldie, S., Guo, Y., Gupta, S., Horton, R., Kruk, M., Mahmoud, A., Mohohlo, L., Ncube, M.,
Pablos-Mendez, A., Reddy, K.S., Saxenian, H., Soucat, A., Ulltveit-Moe, K, & Yamey, G. 2013. “Global Health
2035: a world converging within a generation.” Lancet 382: 1898–955.

Junquera-Varela, Raul Felix, Marijn Verhoeven, Gangadhar P. Shukla, Bernard Haven, Rajul Awasthi, and
Blanca Moreno-Dodson. 2017. Strengthening Domestic Resource Mobilization: Moving from Theory to
Practice in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1073-2.

Webber, L., Andreeva, T.I., Sotomayor, R., Marquez, P.V., et al. 2017. “Modeling the Long-Term Health and
Cost Impacts of Reducing Smoking Prevalence through Tobacco Taxation in Ukraine.” Washington, DC:
The World Bank Group.

Zheng, R., Yang, W., Xiaoxia, E., Hu, X., Marquez, P.V. 2017. “Cigarette affordability in China: 2001–2016.”
Washington, DC: The World Bank Group.




                                                                                                               29
ABSTRACT
Tobacco use imposes an unparalleled health and economic burden 
on countries, hindering development gains worldwide.

The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
include the commitment to reduce premature mortality from
non-communicable disease by one-third by 2030. The achievement
of this and related health and development targets may require a
significant increase in tobacco excise taxes to control tobacco use,
with taxes regularly adjusted to match or outpace inflation and
per capita income growth. The aim is to make tobacco products
unaffordable relative to rising incomes, reduce tobacco use, and
improve health conditions in low- and middle-income countries,
while enhancing countries’ domestic resource mobilization. By
boosting revenue collection, tobacco taxes can help countries
fund investments and programs that benefit the entire population.
Momentum for tobacco taxation builds, as domestic resource
mobilization claims center stage in development strategies.

The World Bank Group, working with the World Health Organization,
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the Bloomberg Foundation,
and other partners, is committed to support tobacco taxation as an
essential intervention to tackle non-communicable diseases, build
healthy and productive societies, and advance inclusive development.
Today, more and more countries are adopting tobacco tax policy
reforms, and many already report strong results. Their successes
confirm tobacco tax reform as one of the most powerful health and
development catalysts for the 21st century.




30 // Executive Summary
1
      Global Tobacco Control

    A DEVELOPMENT PRIORITY
    Patricio V. Marquez




    This chapter presents the public-health and economic rationale for tobacco taxation,
    situating these arguments in the context of the global development agenda. Then it
    looks at how countries are designing and implementing tobacco tax hikes today, and
    how the World Bank Group is supporting this work. Tobacco tax reform is still in early
    stages in many countries, but initial results are compelling.



    THE TOBACCO USE CHALLENGE
    The scientific evidence accumulated over the past five decades is clear: tobacco kills.
    Smokers who begin early in adult life and do not stop smoking face a three-fold higher
    risk of death compared to otherwise similar non-smokers, resulting in a loss, on average,
    of at least one decade of life (Jha and Peto 2014). The landmark Surgeon General’s Report
    on Smoking and Health, issued in 1964 by U.S. Surgeon General Dr. Luther Terry, first
    drew wide public attention to the evidence linking smoking and ill health, including lung
    cancer and heart disease. Since then, a vast, rigorous body of evidence has accumulated,
    showing that tobacco use imposes an unparalleled health and economic burden across
    countries, hindering development gains worldwide (Marquez 2017c; NCI and WHO 2016;
    U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare 1964).

    Cigarette smoking is one of the leading causes of preventable death. Both active smoking
    and exposure to secondhand smoke cause disease and kill prematurely (Marquez 2017c).
    More than 7 million people die from tobacco use every year, a figure that is predicted to
    grow to more than 8 million a year by 2030, without intensified action (WHO 2017). Most
    of these deaths are due to direct tobacco use, while close to 10 percent of deaths are the
    result of non-smokers’ being exposed to secondhand smoke. The number of deaths from
    tobacco-related diseases is more than the deaths from HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria
    combined (WHO 2008).

    Accumulated evidence shows that nicotine (a chemical in tobacco): (1) is a highly addictive
    stimulant that at high levels produces acute toxicity; (2) activates multiple biological
    pathways through which smoking increases risk for disease; (3) adversely affects maternal
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




and fetal health during pregnancy, contributing to adverse outcomes such as preterm
delivery and stillbirth, as well as congenital malformations (e.g., cleft lips or palates); and
(4) during fetal development and adolescence has lasting adverse consequences for
brain development. Evidence also shows that tar, the resinous, partially combusted
particulate matter produced by the burning of tobacco, is toxic and damages the
smoker’s lungs over time. Carbon monoxide, a colorless, odorless gas produced from
the incomplete burning of tobacco, accumulates indoors and reduces the oxygen-carrying
capacity of the blood.

Cigarette smoking is causally linked to diseases of nearly all organs of the body (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services 2014). The evidence is sufficient to conclude
that the risk of developing lung cancer from cigarette smoking has actually increased
since the 1950s, due to changes in the design and composition of
cigarettes. There is also evidence for a causal relationship between
smoking and other types of cancer, including liver, colorectal, and             Cigarette smoking
prostate cancers. Smoking or chewing tobacco can immediately raise              is causally linked to
blood pressure, albeit temporarily, as the chemicals in tobacco can             diseases of nearly all
damage the lining of artery walls, causing arteries to narrow, increasing       organs of the body.
blood pressure. Secondhand smoke can increase blood pressure, as
well. Smoking is the dominant cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), including emphysema and chronic bronchitis. Smoking also increases the
risk of tuberculosis. Research continues to identify diseases caused or exacerbated by
smoking, including such common diseases as diabetes. Scientists now know that the
risk of developing diabetes is 30–40 percent higher for active smokers than nonsmokers.

Smoking-related illness costs billions of dollars each year, imposing a heavy economic
toll on countries, both in terms of direct medical care costs and lost productivity among
affected workers (NCI and WHO 2016; Xu et al. 2015). According to recent estimates,
tobacco-related diseases account for US$ 422 billion in health care expenditures annually,
representing almost 6 percent of total global spending on health. The total economic cost
of smoking (including productivity losses from death and disability) amounts to more than
US$ 1.4 trillion per year, equivalent to 1.8 percent of the world’s annual Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) (Goodchild, Nargis, and Tursan d’Espaignet 2017).

Already 40 percent of these economic costs are estimated to be borne by low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs), and there is a risk that these costs will escalate, if
effective and sustained action is not supported over the medium term. This poses a
major challenge for countries, such as those in Sub-Saharan Africa, with large youth
populations vulnerable to manipulation and deception by tobacco advertisement, and
where smoking is on the rise. These countries often lack the resource base, the health
systems, or the social safety nets required to protect their populations from the negative



32 // Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority
health, social, and economic consequences of tobacco-related chronic diseases (Marquez
and Farrington 2013b; for a discussion on the economics of deception and manipulation,
see the work of Nobel Laureates George Akerlof and Robert Schiller [2015]).

While the hazards of smoking accumulate slowly, cessation is effective quickly, helping
to reduce tobacco-related mortality, and more importantly, inequality of mortality.
People who quit by age 40 get back nearly the full decade of life that they would have
lost from continued smoking (Jha and Peto 2014). Cessation is now common among
adults in high-income countries. For example, in Canada there are now over one million
more ex-smokers than just a decade ago. However, due in large part to the marketing
and pricing strategies of the tobacco industry, cessation remains a major public health
challenge in most LMICs, where more than 80 percent of smokers live (Jha, Marquez,
and Dutta 2017).



ADDRESSING THE TOBACCO USE CHALLENGE
Since the World Health Organization’s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO’s
FCTC) was adopted in 2003 and came into force in 2005, over 180 countries have
become Parties to the accord. The FCTC covers nearly 90 percent of the world’s population.
Over the past decade, progress has been made in expanding the coverage of the
FCTC’s supply- and demand-reduction tobacco control measures (WHO 2015). More
than half the world’s countries, accounting for 40 percent of the total global population,
have implemented at least one tobacco control policy measure supported under
WHO’s MPOWER technical assistance package. MPOWER includes the six most important
and effective tobacco control policies: raising taxes and prices; banning advertising,
promotion, and sponsorship; protecting people from secondhand smoke; warning
everyone about the dangers of tobacco; offering help to people who want to quit;
and carefully monitoring the epidemic and prevention policies. These policy actions are
proven to reduce tobacco use (WHO 2008).1

A recent study shows that the accelerated implementation of all key FCTC demand-reduction
measures since 2005 was significantly associated with a decrease in smoking prevalence in all
126 countries studied: from 24.7 percent in 2005 to 22.1 percent in 2015, an average decrease
in prevalence of 2.55 percentage points (Gravely et al. 2017).

However, despite the progress observed in many countries, much more needs to be done
to control this health scourge. This observation is particularly important when taking into



1 The MPOWER package corresponds to the following WHO FCTC articles: article 6 (raise taxes on tobacco), article 8 (protect people
from tobacco smoke), articles 11 and 12 (warn about the dangers of tobacco), article 13 (enforce bans on tobacco advertising, promotion,
and sponsorship [TAPS]), article 14 (offer help to quit tobacco use), and article 20 (monitor tobacco use) (WHO 2008).



                                                                                                                                    33
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




account that the global trends in smoking-prevalence reduction mask important differences
in countries, such as rising smoking rates among youth and women in some urban areas of
Latin America and Eastern Europe, or the marked change in South Asia from consuming local
“bidis” (small, generally untaxed cigarettes) to cigarettes (Mishra et al. 2016).



THE IMPERATIVE OF TOBACCO TAXATION
A scaled-up and stronger tobacco control effort is required to achieve the WHO-­
recommended target of at least 30 percent reduction in smoking prevalence by 2030,
which would avoid at least 200 million deaths among current and future smokers by
the end of the 21st century (WHO 2013). A reduction in smoking prevalence of this
magnitude is also critical to reach the health and social targets of the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (United Nations 2015).

How can such reductions in smoking be achieved in the next decade? The path from policy
to reductions in tobacco use depends on the likelihood that a country will implement
tobacco control measures, and on the measures’ effectiveness (Gravely et al. 2017). Raising
taxes sharply on tobacco products, and then adjusting for inflation and increased
affordability due to growing incomes, is the single most cost-effective measure to reduce
tobacco consumption. It is especially powerful when linked to the rest of the MPOWER
program of tobacco control and especially powerful in LMICs, where smokers are more
price-sensitive (IARC 2011; NCI and WHO 2016; World Bank 1999).

Indeed, as noted in The Economist (2017), “As the success in rich countries shows, there
is no mystery about how to get people to stop smoking: a combination of taxes and
public-health education does the job. This makes the abysmal record in poor countries
a grave failure of public policy. The good news is that, following recent research, it is one
that has just become easier to put right.”

Given this dire situation, experts advocate a focused effort to support countries in raising
tobacco taxes. The only plausible way to reduce smoking on the scale required to meet
the WHO and UN goals would be to triple tobacco excise taxes in most LMICs. A tripling
of the excise tax would roughly double the retail price of cigarettes, reduce tobacco
consumption by about 40 percent (Jha, Marquez, and Dutta 2017), and lower the risk of
tobacco-related diseases and premature death, as shown by recent assessments in China
and Ukraine (Verguet et al. 2015; Webber et al. 2017).


Tobacco Taxes Discourage Tobacco Use
The public-health rationale for tobacco taxation is clear (Furman 2016) (Figure 1).
Research into the relationship between cigarette prices and smoking typically estimates
elasticities of demand: the percentage decrease in cigarette demand that would result


34 // Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority
             from a 1 percent increase in price. Meta-analyses of the relationship between tobacco
             prices and use suggest that the overall elasticity of demand for adults lies between 0.3
             and 0.8, meaning that a 10 percent increase in cigarette prices will lead to a 3 to 8 percent
             decline in consumption (CBO 2012; Chaloupka and Warner 2000; Gallet and List 2003; IARC
             2011). Due to the addictive nature of tobacco products, additional indicators of price-hike
             impacts, beyond the quantity of cigarettes consumed, need to be considered. For example,
             authorities may monitor the impact of prices on smoking initiation, the impact of price on
             quit attempts, or changes in the fraction of the population that smokes (Furman 2016).

             As illustrated by longitudinal data from the Unites States, price plays an important role in
             smoking, and cigarette taxes play an important role in cigarette prices (Furman 2016)
             (Figures 2 and 3).


             Higher Tobacco Taxes Can Boost Government Revenues
             The positive impacts of higher tobacco taxes go beyond direct health gains and indirect
             benefits such as higher productivity and reduced health care expenditures (Furman 2016).
             Increasing tobacco taxes can also enlarge a country’s tax base to augment domestic
             resource mobilization (Marquez 2016h). In turn, this can expand fiscal space to fund
             priority investments and programs, including expansion of universal health coverage,
             education for all, and other activities to help countries achieve the SDGs. Indeed, the
             United Nations has recognized that price and tax measures on tobacco are not just
             effective means to reduce tobacco consumption, disease, and premature death, along
             with health care costs. These measures can also represent a revenue stream to finance
             development in many countries (United Nations 2015).

             This double impact of tobacco taxes was acknowledged in the “Financing for Develop-
             ment Action Agenda,” approved by country leaders at the July 2015 Third International
             Conference on Financing for Development, in Addis Ababa. The principle was again




Figure 1: Rationale for Focusing on Tobacco Taxation: Tax-Hike Impacts on Tobacco Use
»» Higher tobacco taxes help hike up cigarette prices, which can     Price change
   contribute to significantly reduce prevalence and intensity of
   smoking in spite of the addictive nature of tobacco.                                                    LMIC

                                                                                          HIC              -8%
»» The demand for tobacco products is relatively inelastic:              +10%
   »» Price elasticity of demand for high-income countries                                -4%
      (HIC) is estimated to be -0.4 and between -0.6 and -0.8
      in low- and middle-income countries (LMIC) (IARC, 2014)
                                                                                           Consumption change
»» The poor and the young are more responsive to price changes
   than the better off and the old.                                 Source: Postolovska and Lavado 2016.




                                                                                                                  35
                 Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




                 Figure 2: Cigarette Taxes Play an Important Role in Cigarette Prices

                                             AVERAGE U.S. CIGARETTE TAXES AND PRICES, 1954–2014
                                             3.50                                                          7

                                             3.00                                                          6




                                                                                                                   Price Per Pack, 2014 Dollars
            Tax Per Pack, 2014 Dollars




                                             2.50                                                          5                                           Cigarette Tax Rates
                                                                                                                                                       Per Pack (left axis)
                                             2.00                                                          4                                              State
                                                                                                                                                          Federal
                                              1.50                                                         3

                                             1.00                                                          2                                               Average Price
                                                                                                                                                           Per Pack (right axis)
                                             0.50                                                          1

                                             0.00                                                          0
                                                   1954     1964    1974   1984    1994    2004    2014
                 Source: Furman 2016.



      Figure 3: United States Experience: Price Plays an Important Role in Smoking
     U.S. CIGARETTE PRICES AND CONSUMPTION, 1954 2014
        3 CIGARETTE PRICES AND CONSUMPTION, 1954 7 2014
      U.S.
                                             3                                                             67
    Thousands of Cigarettes Per Capita




                                                                                                                        Price Per Pack, 2014 Dollars




                                                                                                               6
Thousands of Cigarettes Per Capita




                                                                                                           5
                                     2
                                                                                                                   Price Per Pack, 2014 Dollars




                                                                                                           45
                                                                                                                                                            Per Capita Cigarette
                                             2                                                                                                              Consumption (left axis)
                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                             Per Capita Cigarette
                                                                                                           3                                                 Consumption
                                                                                                                                                            Average          (left axis)
                                                                                                                                                                     Price Per
                                         1                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                            Pack (right axis)
                                                                                                           2                                                 Average Price Per
                                             1                                                                                                               Pack (right axis)
                                                                                                           1 2

                                                                                                               1
                                   0                                                                       0
                                             1954
                                             0            1964     1974    1984    1994    2004     2014       0
                                                 1954      1964     1974    1984    1994    2004      2014
                 Source: Furman 2016.


                 endorsed in September 2015, during United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) deliberations
                 on strategies to achieve the SDGs. Today, policy makers and development experts concur
                 in seeing LMICs’ domestic resource mobilization as the primary financing engine for the
                 next wave of development, and they point to tobacco taxation as a potentially decisive
                 contributor (Junquera-Varela et al. 2017).

                 A recent study (Goodchild, Perucic, and Nargis 2016) used data for 181 countries to estimate
                 the impact of raising cigarette excise in each country by one international dollar (I$)2 per



                 36 // Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority
20-cigarette pack. Results showed that the tax increase would hike the mean retail price of
cigarettes by 42 percent (from I$ 3.20 to I$ 4.55 per 20-cigarette pack), while raising cigarette
excise revenue by 47 percent (from I$ 402 billion to 593 billion). This would generate an
extra I$ 190 billion in revenue for countries. In LMICs, this increase in revenue could help
create the fiscal space needed to fund development priorities.



GLOBAL TOBACCO CONTROL: WHAT IS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP DOING?
The World Bank Group has long been committed to tobacco control, and has had an
unambiguous global policy on tobacco since the 1990s. According to its Operational
Directive 4.76, the World Bank Group does not: (a) lend directly to tobacco production,
processing, or marketing; (b) provide grants for investment in these activities; or (c)
guarantee investments, loans, or credits for these industries. In any World Bank Group
project, unmanufactured and manufactured tobacco, tobacco processing machinery and
equipment, and related services are on the negative list of imports, that is, goods and
services for which Bank Group funding cannot be used. Going beyond these supply-side
measure, the World Bank Group actively supports use of comprehensive programs to
reduce tobacco consumption. This includes multi-sectoral technical assistance, analytic,
and financial support for country efforts to increase taxes and prices on tobacco products.

Over the past two decades, the World Bank Group has also carried out substantial work
to build the global knowledge base on issues related to tobacco control. A 1999 World
Bank report, Curbing the Epidemic: Governments and the Economics of Tobacco Control,
contributed to the successful negotiations of the WHO FCTC. The World Bank’s Economics
of Tobacco Toolkit helps researchers analyze the economics of tobacco policies in their
countries, while other reports on the challenge posed by non-communicable diseases
(NCDs) in numerous regions and countries highlight the importance of tobacco control
as a priority public policy intervention. World Bank teams, working with country, regional,
and global partners, have provided technical assistance to design and implement tobacco
taxation reforms intended to reduce tobacco use by raising the prices of tobacco products.

Since tobacco use disproportionately affects the poorest people, tobacco control is fully
aligned with the World Bank Group’s twin goals: (1) ending extreme poverty by 2030, and
(2) boosting shared prosperity by increasing the incomes of the bottom 40 percent of
the world’s population. Smoking-attributable diseases are concentrated among the poor,



2 An international dollar would buy in the cited country a comparable amount of goods and services as a U.S. dollar would buy in the
United States. This term is often used in conjunction with Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) data. For detailed discussion on this topic visit:
https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/114944-what-is-an-international-dollar.




                                                                                                                                        37
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




and such diseases can further exacerbate household poverty through income losses,
catastrophic health care expenditures, and premature mortality. This phenomenon is
observed in countries across the development spectrum. For example, data on mortality
inequality in the United States show that, for those who have reached middle age, the
gap in life expectancy between higher-income individuals and lower-income individuals
grew substantially between 1989 and 2014. This trend has been attributed to an increasing
divergence in “ever-smoker” rates between wealthier and poorer people. The share of poor
Americans 50 and older that has ever smoked has grown over the past 25 years, while the
share of the non-poor population 50 and older that has ever smoked has decreased
(Furman 2016; Wan 2017). In Armenia, meanwhile, a lower middle-income country with
almost 30 percent of its population living below the national poverty line, the prevalence
of smoking is particularly high among men in the poorest income quintile (49 percent) and
the second and third income quintiles (60 percent), compared to 42 percent in the highest
income quintile (Postolovska et al. 2017). Such examples from diverse economic contexts
confirm the disproportionate impacts of smoking among poorer households and commu-
nities. They underscore the potential power of tobacco taxation as a lever to reduce poverty.

Recent assessments done in countries such as Chile further demonstrate that tobacco taxes
and other tobacco control measures are progressive. The greatest benefits from these
measures accrue to poor households, which tend to allocate larger shares of their budgets
than do wealthier households to purchase tobacco (Fuchs and Meneses 2017). Since tobacco
taxes have been shown to discourage use, higher taxes reduce some of tobacco’s most
serious adverse effects on poor households. Relevant adverse impacts include lower life
expectancy, higher medical expenses and risk of having a breadwinner’s death or disability
throw families into extreme poverty, added years of disability, higher risks for families for
second-hand smoking, and reductions in smokers’ quality of life. Where tobacco control
has been reinforced, the main driver of higher incomes among the poor appears to be
reduced medical expenses due to fewer tobacco-related health problems.



RECENT EXAMPLES OF WORLD BANK
GROUP ANALYTICAL WORK, TECHNICAL
AND OPERATIONAL SUPPORT, AND RESULTS
ACHIEVED IN SELECTED COUNTRIES
The World Bank Group’s tobacco tax reform efforts have crystallized in a major global
initiative — the WBG Global Tobacco Control Program, in which Bank teams are engaged with
countries and partner organizations. The goal is to make tobacco products unaffordable
relative to rising per capita incomes, reduce consumption, and improve health conditions
in priority LMICs, while enhancing countries’ domestic resource mobilization. The initiative



38 // Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority
advances these aims by supporting countries to design, enact, implement, and monitor
tobacco tax policy reforms.

The World Bank Group is pursuing this initiative in partnership with the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation and the Bloomberg Foundation, and in coordination with WHO and
other partners. Simultaneously, technical assistance is being provided to strengthen
countries’ institutional capacity to curtail the illicit tobacco trade. The World Bank Group
incorporates this support within a broader package of public-sector modernization efforts
to strengthen customs systems.

In its tobacco taxation work, the World Bank Group follows a multi-sectoral approach to
support countries to adopt effective tobacco taxation policies. In practice, this translates
into joint working arrangements involving teams from the World Bank Group’s Health,
Nutrition, and Population Global Practice, along with the Macroeconomics and Fiscal
Management Global Practice, the Global Taxation Team at the Governance Global Practice,
the Poverty and Equity Global Practice, the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice, and
the Agriculture Global Practice. This combined, cross-sectoral effort is allowing World Bank
Group teams to:

   •	 Leverage access to ministries of finance, ministries of health, and other government
      agencies to take tobacco taxation efforts to scale
   •	 Expand the use of policy advice, technical assistance, and funding instruments to
      support countries’ tobacco tax reforms
   •	 Institutionalize tobacco taxation as part of the World Bank Group’s country partnership
      strategies globally. 

The World Bank Group’s multi-sectoral engagement complements WHO’s global and
country work on tobacco control. Partnerships also include other international, regional,
and national actors engaged in tobacco control.

Country Work. Over the 2013–2017 period, multi-sectoral teams supported under the
World Bank Group’s Global Tobacco Control Program have assisted national governments
in adopting tobacco tax reforms in countries such as Armenia, Botswana, Colombia,
Ghana, Lesotho, Moldova, Montenegro, Peru, the Philippines, and Ukraine. The tobacco
taxation reforms adopted in these nations cover a total of more than 262 million people,
and collaboration is expanding to more countries. The work done in these countries is
relevant widely, as follows:

Philippines: The experience generated by the Government of the Philippines over
2012–2016 is one of the most compelling examples of ambitious national tobacco tax
reform. The Philippines’ bold effort was supported by the World Bank Group, WHO, and
other international partners. It involved a fundamental restructuring of the country’s
tobacco excise tax structure, including: reduction in the number of tax tiers; indexation


                                                                                               39
   Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




   Figure 4: Sin Tax Revenues, 2009–15 (Revenues doubled as a share of GDP), Philippines
                                                            REVENUES INCREASED                                                                                                                                     INCREASED HEALTH BUDGET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Budget allocation to DOH
                                 160                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   140




                                                                                                                                                tobacco products (% of GDP)
tobacco products ( , billions)




                                                                                                                                                 Collection from alcohol and
 Collection from alcohol and




                                 140                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        122.6
                                 120                                                                                                      0.8                                                      120
                                                                                       Alcohol and Tobacco ( )
                                                                                                                                                                                                              In 2017, almost 2/3 of the DOH
                                 100                                                                                                      0.6                                                      100
                                                                                                                                                                                                              budget comes from sin tax!




                                                                                                                                                                               Billions of pesos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       83.7      87.0
                                  80                                                                       Tobacco (% of GDP)                                                                                                                                                51.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                   80
                                  60                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       34.9       36.5
                                  40                                                                                                                                                               60                                        50.4                            26.9
                                                                                               Alcohol (% of GDP)                         0.2                                                                                         42.2
                                  20                                                                                                                                                               40                    31.8                 27        13.5      13.3

                                   0                                                                                                       0                                                               24.6                       25.1                                   43.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                   20                    21.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10.8     35.3
                                   2009          2010            2011             2012              2013           2014                2015                                                                 21.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3.3          3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5.1                        37.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7.1          12     12.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                 Source: Department of Finance                                                                                                                                             2010          2011         2012   2013     2014       2015       2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                           National Health Insurance Program
                                                INCREASED HEALTH INSURANCE                                                                                                                                 Health Facilities Enhancement Program
                                                Expansion of Membership in PhilHealth, 2000–2015                                                                                                           Other

                       100.0                                                                                                    93.4
                        90.0                                                                                                                                                                             A challenge for the DOH is its capacity to absorb these large increases.
                                                                                                           80.9
                        80.0                                                                                                    86.2                                                                     Budget execution rates for 2014 and 2015 were at 89%. This is not out of
                                                         69.5           68.4          68.7      70.0
                        70.0                                                                           78.4         76.9                                                                                 line with other government agencies, though. Across agencies, budget
                        60.0
                                                                                             53.4                                                                                                        execution is around 88%. What is of concern is that the sin tax line items
                                                                               64.5
Millions




                        50.0                   43.6              54.6                                                                                                                                    are some of those in which budget execution has typically been among the
                        40.0                                                                                             36.4
                                      29.6              42.4                                               28.5                                                                                          worst — in particular, the HFEP program. The NHIP is pure pass-through,
                        30.0                 37.5                                               22.4                            40.5                                                                     so less worrying.
                        20.0                           15.4 13.4 16.3                 16.5             27.9       31.3
                                                                                                                     3
                                       7.9 9.3 10.2 10                                       20.2
                        10.0                                                   15.9
                         0.0
                                           1
                                       00 0 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 011 012 013 014 015
                                     20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 2    2   2   2   2
                                                           Members             Members and dependents

                                 Source: 2000 to 2006—PhilHealth Corporate Planning Department;
                                 2007 to 2015—PhilHealth Stats and Charts




   of tax rates to inflation; and substantial tax increases to multiply public health impact. The
   Philippines’ experience shows that such a bold reconfiguration of tobacco tax structures
   can be good for both fiscal and public health.

   Tobacco accounts for about 80 percent of the US$ 3.9 billion in additional revenues
   generated by the Philippines’ tobacco and alcohol tax policy reform in its first three
   years of implementation. The additional fiscal space created by the reform increased
   the Department of Health budget threefold. The number of families whose health
   insurance premiums were paid by the national government rose from 5.2 million
   primary members in 2012 to 15.3 million in 2015. The Philippines’ success confirms
   that tobacco taxation may be “low-hanging fruit” for countries that want to increase
   domestic resources to attain the SDGs (Figure 4).

   Ukraine: On December 19, 2016, the Ukrainian Parliament approved the country’s 2017
   budget, which includes a 40 percent specific excise tax increase on tobacco products over
   the 2016 level, while maintaining a 12 percent ad valorem tax. Building upon tobacco tax
   increases in previous years, the average excise tax burden (excise tax as percentage of retail
   price) will increase from 41 percent in 2016 to 46 percent in 2017 (Figure 5). The total tax
   burden (including excise taxes, value added tax [VAT], and other duties on tobacco as a
   percentage of retail price) will increase from 63 percent in 2016 to 67 percent in 2017.

   Modelling work done with support from the World Bank Group estimates that the tobacco
   tax increase included in Ukraine’s 2017 Budget could help generate excise tax revenues


   40 // Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority
Figure 5: Results of Tobacco Excise Policy in Ukraine, 2008–2017
600                                                                                                                   45.0
                                                                                                                597
                                                                                                         42
                                                                                                                      40.0
500
                                                                                            33.2                      35.0
                                                                                                        431
400                                                                                                                   30.0

                                                                                                                      25.0   Cigarette sales, bln sticks
                                                                              22.2
300                                                                                        304                               Average excise per
                                                         17.9         18.1                                            20.0   1000 cigarettes, UAH
                                                16.6                          248
                                   15.3                                                                                      Tobacco excise revenue,
                                                                238
200                        13.1                    202                                                                15.0   bln UAH
                                          174
        10.1     9.2 9.1    8.7 137 8.6         8.35      8.1                                                         10.0   Number of daily
                                                                        7.7                                   6.6
100     125       112 81
                                                                                     6.7         6.9                         smokers, mln
                            95      88          82                                                                    5.0
      3.6                                                 75            73           74            77          71
            29
  0                                                                                                                   0.0
       2008       2009     2010    2011         2012     2013         2014       2015         2016            2017
  Source: World Bank Group 2016.



                           amounting to about 1.7 percent of GDP in 2017, up from 1.5 percent of GDP in 2016. Also,
                           total tobacco tax revenue (combining excise taxes, VAT, and levies on tobacco) will
                           represent about 2.4 percent of GDP in 2017, up from 2.3 percent in 2016. These tax
                           increases are also expected to help reduce tobacco consumption by about 8 percent,
                           generating a public health benefit (World Bank Group 2016).

                           The Ukraine Global Adult Tobacco Survey (GATS) 2017, carried out using the same methods
                           as GATS 2010 to ensure comparability of results and assess changes that occurred during the
                           interval period, show that compared to 2010, in 2017, there was a 20 percent reduction in
                           the proportion of the population who smoke tobacco daily. This is largely due to a reduction
                           in smoking among men, as there were no significant reductions seen in the proportion of
                           women who smoke. In total in 2017, 7.2 million adult Ukrainians smoke daily (35.9 percent
                           of all adult men and 7.0 percent of all adult women) (GATS Ukraine, 2017).

                           Additional World Bank Group-supported microsimulation modelling in Ukraine estimated
                           the public-health impact from tobacco taxation measures along with other tobacco control
                           measures. The health impacts, which were calculated relative to the status quo before
                           the tax hike, were modeled for 2025 and 2035, for coronary heart disease (CHD), stroke,
                           chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and lung cancer. Relative to a scenario
                           with no change in tobacco taxes, the model estimated that, by 2035, Ukraine’s tobacco tax
                           hike will avoid: 126,730 new cases of smoking-related disease; 29,172 premature deaths;
                           and 267,098 potential years of life lost. Reductions in disease and death will save 1.5 billion
                           Ukrainian hryvnia (UAH) (about US$ 57 million) in healthcare costs and UAH 16.5 billion
                           (about US$ 631 million) in premature mortality costs (Webber et al. 2017).



                                                                                                                                                     41
 Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




 Colombia: As part of a broad fiscal reform package approved by Colombia’s Congress on
 December 23, 2016, the specific excise tax on a pack of 20 cigarettes was increased from
 Colombian Pesos (COP) 700 (US$ 0.25) in 2016 to COP 1400 (US$ 0.50) in 2017, and COP
 2100 (US$ 0.75) in 2018, with annual adjustments of Consumer Price Index (CPI)+4 points
 in subsequent years. The ad valorem excise tax component was maintained at 10 percent
 of the total sale price of a 20-cigarette pack, and the general VAT rate was raised from 16
 percent to 19 percent. As a result, the total tax burden as a percentage of the retail price
 of a pack of 20 cigarettes will increase from 50 percent in 2016 to 68 percent in 2018. The
 average price of a pack of 20 cigarettes will increase by 64 percent, from US$ 0.97 in 2016
 to US$ 1.60 in 2018.

 The expected fiscal and health impacts of this measure are noteworthy. It is estimated
 that COP 1 trillion (about US$ 347 million) in additional revenue will be generated through
 2022, along with a reduction of approximately 20 percent in the mortality associated
 with tobacco consumption. In addition, the fiscal reform law mandates the earmarking of
 tobacco tax revenues to finance health insurance coverage (World Bank Group 2016).

 The fiscal reform program adopted by the Colombian government, including tobacco
 and alcohol tax increases, is supported under the World Bank Group’s US$ 600 million
 fiscal Development Policy Operation, approved on March 9, 2017. The tax reforms are
 accompanied by stronger anti-contraband measures to prevent illicit tobacco trade.

 Moldova: On December 12, 2016, Moldova’s Parliament approved the 2017–2019 budget
 submitted by the Ministry of Finance, including a significant increase in tobacco taxes.
 For filter cigarettes, in addition to a 12 percent ad valorem tax, minimum specific excise
 taxes will increase to 480 Moldovan Leu in 2017, 540 in 2018, and 610 in 2019. For nonfilter




 Figure 6: Cigarette Production, Import, Export, and Sales in the Republic of Moldova, 2002–2015
                     12.0
                                                                                                                10.7     10.7

                     10.0                                                                             9.5
                                                                                  9.0
                                    8.4           8.7     8.6
                                                                          8.3                                                           8.2
                                                                                              7.9
                                                                                                                                                                                   Sales
Billion Cigarettes




                     8.0                                                                                                                                7.3
                            6.8
                                                        7.1                                                                                                                        Import
                                            7.1                                                                                 6.2
                                   6.3                              6.2                                                                                       5.6
                     6.0                                                                                               6.0                                                5.2      Production
                                                                                5.0                 4.9
                                                                                            4.9                                             4.8     4.5             4.6
                                                                                                          4.8    4.9     4.8                                                       Export
                     4.0                                            3.4               4.3           4.0                               4.4
                                                                                             4.2                                              3.9             3.7
                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                                                    2.3
                     2.0             1.3          1.7
                                                                                                                                      1.0         1.0
                            0.6                                                              0.3                 0.2     0.3                                  0.4            1.1
                                                                          0.1         0.1                 0.2
                                  0.1 0.0         0.0         0.1                                                                                                           0.5
                     0.0
                            2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010                                                 2011     2012        2013 2014               2015

 Source: World Bank Group 2016.


 42 // Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority
                     cigarettes, the corresponding minimum specific excise taxes will rise to 120 Moldovan Leu
                     in 2017, 160 in 2018, and 200 in 2018. The average excise tax burden (excise tax as percentage
                     of retail price) will increase from 39 percent in 2016 to 45 percent in 2017. The total tax
                     burden (including excise taxes, VAT, and other duties on tobacco as a percentage of retail
                     price) will increase from 56 percent in 2016 to 62 percent in 2017 (World Bank Group 2016).

                     In increasing the tobacco tax rates to raise the price of cigarettes, the goal is to confront a
                     widespread smoking epidemic in Moldova, where a quarter of the population (25.3 percent)
                     currently smokes (Figure 6). Moldovan men smoke much more than women (43.6 percent
                     vs. 5.6 percent), contributing to lung disease mortality rates that are more than twice
                     as high among men as among women. Other characteristics of Moldova’s current
                            -use epidemic include the following: nine out of ten smokers (92.0 percent)
                     tobacco­
                     smoke approximately 17 cigarettes daily; 20 percent of daily smokers are young people
                     aged 24–35; 14 percent of people with at least one chronic disease are smokers.

                     The main causes of death in Moldova are diseases of the circulatory system followed by
                     cancer and diseases of the digestive system. Many of these deaths can be attributed to
                     very heavy tobacco and alcohol consumption — 57.6 percent of total male mortality and
                     62.3 percent of female mortality in 2010 could be attributed to smoking-related causes,
                     while 18.8 percent of male mortality and 13.7 percent of female mortality were related



Figure 7: Tobacco Tax Increases in Armenia, 2017–2021

 PROPOSED CHANGES                                                            REVENUE IMPACT, BLN AMD
                                                                             2017    2018    2019    2020      2021
 Gradual increase of Excise Tax rates on:
 In 2017–2021, GoA increased the excise tax rate by 15% annually on vodka,   +1.69   +1.86   +2.05   +2.24     +2.46
 whiskey, and rum (other than vodka made with fruit and berries)

 Tobacco products
 In 2017: 15% of maximum retail price (MRP), but not less than AMD
                                                                             +4.86
 6,325 for the quantity of 1000;

 In 2018: 15% of maximum retail price (MRP), but not less than AMD
                                                                                     +4.67
 7,275 for the quantity of 1000;

 In 2019: 15% of maximum retail price (MRP), but not less than AMD
                                                                                             +4.52
 8,370 for the quantity of 1000


 In 2020: 15% of maximum retail price (MRP), but not less than AMD
                                                                                                     +5.84
 9,625 for the quantity of 1000;

 In 2021: 15% of maximum retail price (MRP), but not less than AMD
                                                                                                               +6.53
 11,070 for the quantity of 1000

Source: World Bank Group 2016.



                                                                                                                       43
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




to alcohol consumption. Though incidence of chronic liver disease and cirrhosis has
decreased over the last five years, this remains a very significant overall cause of mortality
in Moldova (118.95 per population of 100,000 men and 89.82 per population of 100,000
women in 2010) (Health for All database, WHO/Europe, http://data.euro.who.int/hfadb/,
accessed June 2017). Besides improving health outcomes, tobacco tax revenue collection
is estimated to reach 1.5 percent of GDP, up from less than 1 percent, helping to expand
the fiscal capacity of the government.

Armenia: The tobacco taxation system in Armenia began to change in 2017, as stipulated
in the new Tax Code approved in October 2016. The current excise tax, which only includes
an ad valorem excise tax without mandatory annual indexation, will be replaced by a
combination of a 15 percent ad valorem tax rate and a new specific excise tax, to be
adjusted by 15 percent every year (Figure 7). The current excise tax accounts for 31
percent of the average price of the most popular category of cigarettes smoked in the
country. After introduction of the new tax regime in 2017, the excise tax burden will
double, increasing to 62 percent of the average retail price by 2020. This reform is part
of a larger reconfiguration of the tax code that was included in the US$ 50 million
fiscal consolidation Development Policy Operation approved by the World Bank Group
Board of Directors on December 9, 2016.

Montenegro: A new law setting tobacco tax increases for the next three years (along
with taxes on alcohol and sugary drinks) was approved by Parliament and took effect on
August 1, 2017, to reach EU Tobacco Tax Directive minimum level by 2019. This is an
important achievement in a country that just joined NATO and will soon join the EU.
Montenegro’s action could have a positive spillover impact on the rest of the Balkans.
This measure, along with other fiscal reform measures, will be codified as part of an
upcoming fiscal Development Policy Operation to be approved by the World Bank
Group in October 2017.

The reform includes the following schedule for tax increases:

   Excise on cigarettes:

     Specific excise on cigarettes:

     •	   Until 1 August 2017, EUR 24.00 per 1000 pieces
     •	   From 1 August to 31 December 2017, EUR 30.00
     •	   From 1 January to 31 December 2018, EUR 40.00,
     •	   From January 1 to December 31, 2019, EUR 50.00.

     Proportional excise on cigarettes (ad valorem):

     •	 From 1 August 2017 to 31 December 2017, 32 percent,
     •	 From January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018, 32 percent.

44 // Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority
The average retail price for a pack of 20 cigarettes will increase from the current € 1.80 –
€ 1.90 to € 2.30 – € 2.60. Average excise tax burden (excise tax as percentage of price of a
pack of 20 cigarettes) will increase: from the current 53 percent level to 57.2 percent and
then to 60.0 percent. Total tax burden (including excise tax, VAT, and duties) on a pack of
20 cigarettes is expected to increase from 69 percent in 2016 to 76 percent in 2019. Total
government tax revenue on tobacco is expected to increase from € 60.9 million in 2016
to an estimated € 107.2 million in 2019.

Botswana: Botswana is a member of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), which
comprises five countries in southern Africa, all bordering South Africa (Botswana,
Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa, and Swaziland). The SACU is one of the oldest customs
unions in the world. All member states with the exception of Botswana form part of the
Common Monetary Area. Trade integration takes the form of free movement of goods
and services, internally, and a common external tariff. All tariff revenues form part of
a common revenue pool. Coordination of domestic taxes also occurs, with a harmonized
excise tax regime where domestic excise taxes on products including tobacco and alcohol
are set by South Africa and matched by all other member states. However, member states
are still able to levy excise taxes independently of the customs union (e.g., fuel taxes
in South Africa), or above the South African excise tax (e.g., tobacco and alcohol levies
in Botswana). However, these “extra” excise taxes are termed levies, and they do not form
part of the common revenue pool.

Building upon its previous experience with an alcohol levy, the Government of Botswana
introduced a tobacco levy of 30 percent of unit cost in 2014, on top of SACU average
excise tax on tobacco. The aim was to address the growing burden of tobacco use and
its negative impact on population health, due to the rapid growth of noncommunicable
diseases, many of them tobacco-related. The money obtained from the levy is collected
by the Botswana Unified Revenue Services, within the Ministry of Finance and Development
Planning, and deposited in a central account managed by the Ministry of Health, in
recognition of the impact of tobacco use on the health sector, which deals with the
morbidity and mortality caused by tobacco. With the introduction of the levy, the retail
price for a pack of 20 cigarettes of the most-sold brand now stands at US$ 3.12, and
total taxes as a percentage of retail price of the most-sold brand rose to 62.68 percent,
up from 51.99 percent in 2012.

Work in Other Countries. Besides the technical support provided over 2013–2015 in
Botswana, Gambia, Ghana, Namibia, Peru, and Philippines, ongoing support by World
Bank Group teams is being provided to governments in Azerbaijan, Belarus, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Indonesia, Lesotho, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Tonga, and Trinidad & Tobago
to model the impact of tobacco tax policy reforms on price, consumption, and revenue
flows. Policy dialogue and/or initial work is underway with an expanding group of countries



                                                                                            45
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




around the world, including Bangladesh, China, Cote d’Ivoire, Mongolia, Mozambique,
and Sri Lanka, as well as with the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) and the
West Africa Economic Monetary Union (WAEMU).

Analytical Work. The World Bank Group is supporting analytical work focusing on country
experiences to expand the global tobacco taxation knowledge base and inform policy
making on the basis of evidence. A list of recent assessment reports, which are being
widely disseminated, is provided in Box 1 below.

Knowledge Management. Under the World Bank Group’s Global Tobacco Control Program,
support is also being provided to facilitate knowledge sharing and peer-to-peer exchanges,
building upon existing platforms such as the Joint Learning Network (JLN) for universal
health coverage. Knowledge sharing among policy makers and practitioners is being
fostered through conferences and policy forums, such as “Tobacco Taxation: Win-Win for
Public Health and Domestic Resource Mobilization,” a conference convened at the 2017
World Bank Group-International Monetary Fund (IMF) Spring Meetings, in Washington, DC.3
Delegations from ministries of finance and health from 35 countries, representatives from
regional economic and political bodies, and partner organizations joined this two-day forum
to share their implementation experiences in designing tobacco tax policies that address the
dual goals of reduced tobacco use and increased domestic resource mobilization.4



ADVANCING THE TOBACCO TAXATION AGENDA
While international financial assistance is necessary to help countries grow and develop,
governments of LMICs have an obligation to mobilize domestic resources to realize the
vision of a world free of extreme poverty, where there is opportunity for all. It is clear that
domestic resource mobilization depends in large measure on economic growth, which
is supported by an enabling economic, social, and environmental policy environment,
including counter-cyclical fiscal policies, adequate tax policies and their implementation,
and good governance. However, while growth can energize domestic resource mobiliza-
tion, better domestic revenue generation can also fund investments to ignite economic
growth. As noted before, this mutually supportive relationship is recognized in the 2015
Financing for Development Addis Ababa Action Agenda, which countries collectively
adopted (United Nations 2015). The Action Agenda places the mobilization and use of
domestic resources, reflecting national ownership, at the heart of the common pursuit
of sustainable development (Junquera-Varela 2017).



3 To download a video that summarizes key interventions at the event, see: http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/video/2017/04/18/
tobacco-taxation-win-win-for-public-health-domestic-resources-mobilization-conference-highlights
4 See detailed documentation on this event, including a summary report, at http://www.worldbank.org/en/events/2017/04/18/
tobacco-taxation-win-win-for-public-health-domestic-resources-mobilization-conference



46 // Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority
Box 1 // Recent World Bank Group Reports on Tobacco Taxation and its Impact in Countries
“Estimating the distributional impact of increasing taxes on    “Are Tobacco Taxes Really Regressive? Evidence from
tobacco products in Armenia” (2017): http://documents.          Chile” (2017): http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
worldbank.org/curated/en/604501492414938391/Estimat-            en/389891484567069411/Are-tobacco-taxes-really-­
ing-the-distributional-impact-of-increasing-taxes-on-           regressive-evidence-from-Chile
tobacco-products-in-Armenia-results-from-an-extended-
                                                                “Sin Tax Reform in the Philippines Transforming Public
cost-effectiveness-analysis
                                                                Finance, Health, and Governance for More Inclusive Devel-
“Tobacco Taxation in Turkey: An Overview of Policy Mea-         opment” (2016): https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
sures and Results” (2017): http://documents.worldbank.org/      handle/10986/24617
curated/en/320121492424907154/Tobacco-taxation-in-Tur-
                                                                Section on tobacco taxation included in: “Indonesia: Health
key-an-overview-of-policy-measures-and-results
                                                                Financing System Assessment: Spend More & Better” (2016):
“Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001–2016” (2017): http://   https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/26311
documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/130301492424519317/
                                                                “Ukraine — Public Finance Review” (2017) see tobacco taxa-
Cigarette-affordability­-in-China-2001-2016
                                                                tion section: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/
“Tobacco taxation in the European Union: an overview”           476521500449393161/Ukraine-Public-finance-review
(2017): http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/
493581492415549898/Tobacco-taxation-in-the-European-            Infographics: “Stop Smoking: It’s Deadly and Bad for the
Union-an-overview                                               Economy” (2017): http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/
                                                                infographic/2017/05/31/stop-smoking-its-deadly-and-bad-
“Modeling the Long-Term Health and Cost Impacts of              for-the-economy
Reducing Smoking Prevalence through Tobacco Taxation in
Ukraine” (2017): http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/        A dedicated Tobacco Control site has been established to
en/417831489985759573/Modeling-the-long-term-                   offer access to posted WBG reports, blogs, and other
health-and-cost-impacts-of-reducing-smoking-­prevalence-        documentation: http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/
through-tobacco-taxation-in-Ukraine                             brief/tobacco

“Expanding the Global Tax Base: Taxing to Promote
Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes” (2016): http://documents.
worldbank.org/curated/en/820951485943150390/
Summary-report




                        The development community needs to redouble its commitment to support national
                        governments to raise taxes on tobacco products as a “win-win” policy measure for public
                        health and domestic resource mobilization. As we move into the third decade of the 21st
                        century, the achievement of smoke-free societies should be a critical marker of sustainable
                        development. Raising tobacco taxes to make these deadly products unaffordable is the
                        most cost-effective measure to reduce tobacco use or to prevent young people from
                        becoming tobacco addicts. The benefits of higher tobacco taxes and prices are obvious,
                        as better health outcomes for individuals and entire communities result from reduced
                        consumption of tobacco products. Higher tobacco taxes also help expand a country’s tax
                        base, generating resources to fund the progressive realization of programs that benefit
                        the entire population: universal health coverage; scaling up mental health services;
                        early childhood development initiatives; and education for all, to name only these few.
                        Data from different countries indicate that the annual tax revenue from excise taxes on
                        tobacco can be substantial.


                                                                                                                           47
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Over the short and medium terms, the World Bank Group is committed to support the
implementation of the global tobacco control effort outlined in the FCTC, with a focus
on tobacco taxation. In advancing this agenda, the World Bank Group, working together
with WHO and other partners in support of countries, will contribute to preventing the
human tragedy of tobacco-related illness and saving large numbers of lives each year.
By doing so, it will help honor the memory of loved ones who suffered and were lost to
tobacco-related diseases. This shared effort will contribute to more inclusive economic
and social development across the world.



REFERENCES
Akerloff, G.A. 2016. “Phishing for Phools: The Economics of Manipulation and Deception, Taxing to Pro-
mote Public Goods, and Tobacco Taxes.” Presentation at World Bank Conference: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global
Solutions for Developing Countries,” May 24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco

Akerlof, G.A., Shiller, R.J. 2015. Phishing for Phools: The Economics of Manipulation and Deception. New Jersey:
Princeton University Press.

Brumby, J. 2014. “The seven salvos of sin (taxes)”. The World Bank Blogs, March 25, 2014. Available at: http://blogs.
worldbank.org/health/seven-salvos-sin-taxes

Bouw, A. 2017. “Tobacco taxation in the European Union: an overview.” Washington, D.C.: The World Bank Group.

Carpenter, C., and Cook, P.J. 2008. “Cigarette Taxes and Youth Smoking: New Evidence from National, State, and
Local Youth Risk Behavior Surveys.” Journal of Health Economics 27 (2): 287–299.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2016. “Table 17. Age-Adjusted Death Rates for Selected Causes
of Death, by Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin: United States, Selected Years 1950–2014.” National Center for Health
Statistics.

Chaloupka, F.J., Hu, T-w., Warner, K.E., Jacobs, R., and Yurekli, A. 2000. “The Taxation of Tobacco Products.” In Jha, Prabhat
and Frank J. Chaloupa, eds., Tobacco Control in Developing Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Chaloupka, F.J., and Warner, K.E. 2000. “The Economics of Smoking.” Handbook of Health Economics 1B: 1539–1627.

Chetty, R., Stepner, M., Abraham, S., Lin, S., Scuderi, B., Turner, N., Bergeron, A. and Cutler, D. 2016. “The Asso-
ciation Between Income and Life Expectancy in the United States, 2001–2014.” Journal of the American
Medical Association 315 (16): 1750–1766.

Christiansen, V., Smith, S. 2012. “Externality-correcting taxes and regulation.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics
114(2):358–383.

Conference of the Parties to the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC). 2016. “Delhi
Declaration.” Seventh session Delhi, India, 7 12 November 2016. http://www.who.int/fctc/cop/cop7/FCTC_
COP7_29_EN.pdf?ua=1

Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 2012. “Raising the Excise Tax on Cigarettes: Effects on Health and the Fed-
eral Budget.” Report.

Cook., P. 2011. Paying the Tab: The Costs and Benefits of Alcohol Control. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
University Press.

Cook, P. 2016. “Paying the Tab: The Costs and Benefits of Tobacco and Alcohol Control.” Presentation at World
Bank Conference: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for Developing Countries,” May 24, 2016.
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco




48 // Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority
Council of Economic Advisers (CEA). 2016. “Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interven-
tions.” 2016 Economic Report of the President.

Currie, J. and Schwandt, H. 2016. “Mortality Inequality: The Good News from a County-Level Approach.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 30 (2): 29–52.

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). 2015. “Valuing Utility Offsets to Regulations Affecting Addic-
tive or Habitual Goods.” Report.

Fuchs, A., and Meneses, F. 2017. “Are Tobacco Taxes Really Regressive?: Evidence from Chile.” World Bank Report
Number 112072. 112072. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/389891484567069411/Are-tobacco-taxes-really-regressive-evidence-from-Chile

Furman, J. 2016. “Policy, Politics, and the Tripling of Federal Tobacco Taxes in the United States to Deter People
from Smoking, Save Lives, and Mobilize Revenue over the last 30 years. Six Lessons from the U.S. Experience with
Tobacco Taxes.” Presentation at World Bank Conference: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for Developing
Countries,” May 24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco

Gallet, C. and List, J.A.. 2003. “Cigarette Demand: A Meta- Analysis of Elasticities.” Health Economics 12 (10):
821–835.

Goodchild M., Nargis N., Tursan d’Espaignet, E. 2017. “Global economic cost of smoking-attributable diseases.”
Tob Control 2017;0:1–7. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2016-053305.

Goodchild, M., Perucic, A-M., Nargis, N. 2016. “Modelling the impact of raising tobacco taxes on public health
and finance.” Bull World Health Organ 94:250–257. Available at: http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/
94/4/15-164707.pdf

Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2012. “Tobacco Taxes: Large Disparities in Rates for Smoking Products
Trigger Significant Market Shifts to Avoid Higher Taxes.” Report No. GAO-12–475.

Gravely, S., Giovino, G.A., Craig, L., Commar, A., Tursan D’Espaignet, E., Schotte, K., Fong, G.T. 2017. “Implementa-
tion of key demand-reduction measures of the WHO Framework convention on Tobacco Control and change
in smoking prevalence in 126 countries: an association study.” Lancet Public Health 2017;2: e166–74. Published
Online March 21, 2017 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2468-2667(17)30045-2

Gruber, J., and B. Koszegi. 2001. “Is Addiction Rational? Theory and Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
116(4):1261–1303.

Gruber, J. 2008. “A Modern Economic View of Tobacco Taxation”. Paris: International Union Against Tuberculosis
and Lung Disease.

Hu, T-W. (Editor). 2016. Economics of Tobacco Control in China: From Policy Research to Practice. Hackensack, NJ:
World Scientific Publishing.

Huang, J. and Chaloupka, F.J. 2012. “The Impact of the 2009 Federal Tobacco Excise Tax Increase on Youth
Tobacco Use.” NBER Working Paper No. 18026.

International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). 2011. “Effectiveness of Tax and Price Policies for Tobacco
Control.” IARC Handbooks of Cancer Prevention: Tobacco Control, Vol. 14.

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). 2016. “ICSID’s Award of the Tribunal (July
8, 2016). Philip Morris Brand Sàrl (Switzerland), Philip Morris Products S.A. (Switzerland) and Abal Hermanos
S.A. (Uruguay) v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7).” English (Original); Spanish (Original).
Available at: http://www.italaw.com/sites/default/files/case-documents/italaw7417.pdf and https://www.iisd.org/
itn/2016/08/10/philip-morris-brands-sarl-philip-morris-products-s-a-and-abal-hermanos-s-a-v-oriental-republic-of-
uruguay-icsid-case-no-arb-10-7/ Philip Morris Brand Sàrl (Switzerland), Philip Morris Products S.A. (Switzerland)
and Abal Hermanos S.A. (Uruguay) v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7)

Jha, P. and Chaloupka, F.J. 1999. Curbing the Epidemic: Governments and the Economics of Tobacco Control.
Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                                   49
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Jha, P., Marquez, P.V., and Dutta, S. 2017. “Tripling Tobacco Taxes: Key for Achieving the UN Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals by 2030.” The World Bank Blogs, January 24, 2017. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/
role-excise-tax-meeting-sdg

Jha, P. and Peto. R. 2014. “Global Effects of Smoking, of Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco”. N Engl J Med 370:60–
68. Available at: http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMra1308383#t=article

Kaiser, K., Bredenkamp, C., Iglesias, R. 2016. “Sin Tax Reform in the Philippines: Transforming Public Finance,
Health, and Governance for More Inclusive Development. Directions in Development — Countries and Regions”.
Washington, DC: World Bank. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/24617

Khokhar, T. 2016. “The global state of smoking in 5 charts.” The World Bank Blogs, May 31, 2016. Available at:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/global-state-smoking-5-charts

Kremer, A. 2016. “Do the right thing: Tax tobacco!”The World Bank Blogs, December 13, 2016. Available at:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/europeandcentralasia/do-right-thing-tax-tobacco

Laxminarayan, R., and Deolalikar, A. 2004. “Tobacco Initiation, Cessation, and Change: Evidence from Vietnam.”
Health Economics 13 (12): 1191–1201.

Lancet Editorial. 2017. “Tobacco Elimination; Economic and Public Health Imperative.” The Lancet 389: 225.
January 21, 2017.

Marquez, P. V. 2012. “Tobacco Kills: So what to do in Africa?” The World Bank Blogs, May 15, 2012. Available at:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/nasikiliza/tobacco-kills-so-what-to-do-in-africa

Marquez, P.V. 2013a. “Back from the Cold: Russia Confronts Tobacco.” The World Bank Blogs, April 5, 2013. Avail-
able at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/back-from-the-cold-russia-confronts-tobacco

Marquez, P. V. 2014. “The Tobacco Dilemma: Corporate Profits or Customers’ Health?.” The World Bank Blogs,
March 26, 2014. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/tobacco-dilemma-corporate-­profits-or-customers-
health

Marquez, P.V. 2015a. “Good News from the Global War on Tobacco Use.” The World Bank Blogs, March 26, 2015.
Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/good-news-global-war-tobacco-use

Marquez, P.V. 2015b. “World No Tobacco Day 2015: On illicit trade and taxes.” The World Bank Blogs, May 29, 2015.
Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/world-no-tobacco-day-2015-illicit-trade-and-taxes

Marquez, P. V. 2015c. “Making the public health case for tobacco taxation.” The World Bank Blogs, July 7, 2015.
Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/making-public-health-case-tobacco-taxation

Marquez, P.V. 2015d. “Running away from “Tobacco Road.” The World Bank Blogs, December 15, 2015. Available
at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/running-away-tobacco-road

Marquez, PV. 2016a. “Time to put “health” into universal health coverage.” The World Bank Blogs, January 14,
2016. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/time-put-health-universal-health-coverage

Marquez, P.V. 2016c. “Economic slowdown and financial shocks: can tobacco tax increases help?” The World
Bank Blogs, Feb 8, 2016. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/economic-slowdown-and-financial-
shocks-can-tobacco-­tax-increases-help

Marquez, P.V. 2016d. “Taxing tobacco and the new vision for financing development.” The World Bank Blogs,
April 18, 2016. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/taxing-tobacco-and-new-vision-­financing-
development

Marquez, P.V. 2016e. “Plain packaging & tobacco taxes: an antidote for manipulation and deception.” The
World Bank Blogs, May 31, 2016. Available at: https://blogs.worldbank.org/health/plain-packaging-tobacco-taxes-
antidote-­manipulation-and-deception

Marquez, P.V. 2016h. “Expanding the Global Tax Base: Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes. Sum-
mary Report.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. Available at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/820951485943150390/Summary-report




50 // Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority
Marquez, P.V. 2017c. “Re-energizing tobacco control with evidence-based findings.” The World Bank Blogs,
March 30, 2017. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/re-energizing-tobacco-control-­evidence-based-
findings

Marquez, P.V. and Farrington, J.L. 2013b. “The challenge of non-communicable diseases and road traffic injuries
in Sub-Saharan Africa : an overview.” Washington D.C: World Bank Group.

Marquez, P. V., and Moreno-Dodson, B. 2016b. “Economic slowdown and financial shocks: Can tobacco tax
increases help?” The World Bank Blogs, February 8, 2016. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/­
economic-slowdown-and-financial-shocks-can-tobacco-tax-increases-help

Marquez, P.V., Moreno-Dodson, B., and Dutta, S. 2017b. “Recent Gains on Global Tobacco Taxation.” The World Bank
Blogs, March 20, 2017. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/recent-gains-global-tobacco-taxation

Marquez, P.V., and Walker, M. 2016f. “Uruguay: A giant leap to prevent tobacco-assisted suicide. The World Bank
Blogs, October 10, 2016. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/uruguay-giant-leap-prevent-tobacco-­
assisted-suicide

Marquez, P.V., and Walker, M. 2017a. “Healthy women are the cornerstone of healthy societies.” The World
Bank Blogs, January 12, 2017. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/healthy-women-are-corner-
stone-healthy-societies

Marquez, P.V., and Zheng, R. 2016g. “China’s 2015 tobacco tax adjustment: a step in the right direction.” The
World Bank Blogs, November 9, 2016. Available at: https://blogs.worldbank.org/health/china-s-2015-tobacco-
tax-adjustment-step-right-direction

Ministry of Health of Ukraine, Kiev International Institute of Sociology, World Health Organization Regional
Office for Europe, National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine, and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. 2017. “Global Adult Tobacco Survey Ukraine 2017.” Available at: http://www.euro.who.int/en/­
countries/ukraine/publications3/global-adult-tobacco-survey-ukraine-2017

Mishra S, Joseph R.A, Gupta P.C., et al. 2016. “Trends in bidi and cigarette smoking in India from 1998 to 2015, by
age, gender and education.” BMJ Global Health 1:e000005. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2015-000005.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2015. The Growing Gap in Life Expectancy by
Income: Implications for Federal Programs and Policy Responses. Washington: National Academies Press.

National Cancer Institute (NCI), in collaboration with World Health Organization (WHO). 2016. “Monograph
21: The Economics of Tobacco and Tobacco Control.” Bethesda, Md.: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, National Institutes of Health. Available at: https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/monographs/21/
docs/m21_exec_sum.pdf

Orzechowski and Walker. 2015. The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation, Volume 49, 2014. Arlington, VA.

Paul, J. 2016. “The Impact of the 2013 Sin Tax Reform in the Philippines.” Presentation at World Bank Confer-
ence: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for Developing Countries,” May 24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.org/
en/topic/health/brief/tobacco

Petit, P., and Nagy, J. 2016. “How to design and enforce tobacco excises?” How-to notes. Fiscal Affairs Depart-
ment, International Monetary Fund, October 2016.

Peto R et al. 1996. “Mortality from smoking worldwide.” British Medical Bulletin 52(1):12–21.

Postolovska, I., and Lavado, R. 2016. “Sector Specific Sources of Revenue: Tobacco Tax.” Power point presenta-
tion at World Bank Group Country Office, Yerevan, Armenia, May 2016.

Postolovska I., Lavado, R., Tarr, G., Verguet, S. 2017. “Estimating the distributional impact of increasing tobacco
taxes in Armenia: Results from an extended cost-effectiveness analysis.” Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Rosenberg, J. 2015. “The Distributional Burden of Federal Excise Taxes.” Tax Policy Center. Report.

Savedoff, W. and Alwang, A. 2015. “The Single Best Health Policy in the World: Tobacco Taxes.” CGD Policy Paper
062. Washington DC: Center for Global Development. http://www.cgdev.org/publication/single-best-health-­
policy-world-tobacco-taxes



                                                                                                                   51
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Sayginsoy, O., Yurekli, A.A., and de Beyer, J. 2002. “Cigarette Demand, Taxation, and the Poor: A Case Study of
Bulgaria.” Health, Nutrition, and Population Discussion Paper, Economics of Tobacco Control Paper No. 4.

Schelling, T.C. 1986. “Economics and Cigarettes.” Preventive Medicine 15:549-560.

Schelling, T.C. 1992. “Addictive drugs: the cigarette experience.” Science 255:5043: 430+. Science in Context, link.
galegroup.com/apps/doc/A11922197/SCIC?u=duke_ perkins&xid=c8222b07. Accessed 18 Dec. 2016.

Serra, F. 2016. “Tobacco Taxation and International Litigation: Uruguay’s Experience.” Presentation at World
Bank Conference: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for Developing Countries,” May 24, 2016.
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco

Sunley, E. 2009. “Taxation of cigarettes in the Bloomberg Initiative Countries: overview of policy issues
and proposals for reform.” http://www.tobaccofreeunion.org/images/stories/economic-report/Sunley_White_
paper_12_09_09.pdf

The Economist. 2017. “Cough up. How to cut smoking in poor countries.” Leaders, June 1, 2017. Available at:
http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21722828-recipe-get-people-quit-well-known-why-are-so-many-
governments-­ignoring-it-how?frsc=dg%7Cc. Accessed on June 1, 2017.

United Nations. 2015. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. New York:
United Nations. http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/

U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. 1964. Smoking and Health: Report of the Advisory Commit-
tee to the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service. Washington: U.S. Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare, Public Health Service, Center for Disease Control, 1964. PHS Publication No. 1103.U.S. Department of
Health, Education, and Available at: https://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/NN/B/C/F/T/_/nnbcft.pdf

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2014. “The Health Consequences of Smoking: 50 Years of
Progress. A Report of the Surgeon General.” Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, 2014. Printed with corrections, January 2014. Available at:
https://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-of-progress/full-report.pdf

U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization. 2016. “The Economics of Tobacco and Tobacco
Control.” National Cancer Institute Tobacco Control Monograph 21. NIH Publication No. 16-CA-8029A. Bethesda,
MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute;
and Geneva, CH: World Health Organization; 2016. This monograph and its supplemental materials may be
found electronically at http://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/monographs/21/index.html

van Hasselt, M., Kruger, J., Han, B., Caraballo, R.S., Penne, M.A., Loomis, B. and Gfroerer, J.C. 2015. “The Relation
Between Tobacco Taxes and Youth and Young Adult Smoking: What Happened Following the 2009 U.S. Federal
Tax Increase on Cigarettes?” Addictive Behaviors 45: 104–109.

van Walbeek, C. P. 2002. “The Distributional Impact of Tobacco Excise Increases” South African Journal of Economics
70 (3):258–267.

Verguet, S., Gauvreau, C.L., Mishra, M., et al, 2015. “The consequences of tobacco tax on household health
and finances in rich and poor smokers in China: an extended cost-effectiveness analysis.” Lancet Glob Health 3:
e206–16.

Wan, W. 2017. “America’s new tobacco crisis: The rich stopped smoking, the poor didn’t.” The Washington
Post, June 13, 2017. Available at: https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/americas-new-tobacco-crisis-the-
rich-stopped-smoking-the-poor-didnt/2017/06/13/a63b42ba-4c8c-11e7-9669-250d0b15f83b_story.html?tid=ss_
tw&utm_term=.7be1f38a972c. Accessed on June 16, 2017.

Wang, S., Marquez, P.V., and Langenbrunner, J. 2011. “Toward a Healthy and Harmonious Life in China: Stem-
ming the Rising Tide of Non-Communicable Diseases”. World Bank Report Number 62318-CN. Washington,
D.C.: World Bank Group.




52 // Global Tobacco Control: A Development Priority
Webber, L., Andreeva, T.I., Sotomayor, R., Marquez, P.V., et al. 2017. “Modeling the Long-Term Health and Cost
Impacts of Reducing Smoking Prevalence through Tobacco Taxation in Ukraine.” Washington, D.C.: The World
Bank Group.

World Bank Group. Global Tobacco Control Program website: http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/
tobacco

World Bank Group. 2016. Tobacco Tax Modelling in Armenia, Colombia, Moldova, and Ukraine. Internal Working
Documents.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2003. “WHO framework convention on tobacco control.” http://www.who.int/
fctc/text_download/en/ (accessed May 2, 2017).

World Health Organization (WHO). 2008. “WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2008: the MPOWER
package.” Geneva:WHO.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2009. “WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2009: Implement-
ing Smoke-Free Environments”. Geneva: WHO.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2010. “WHO Technical Manual on Tobacco Tax Administration.” Geneva: WHO.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2013. Global action plan for the prevention and control of noncommunicable
diseases 2013–2020. Geneva: WHO. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/94384/1/9789241506236_eng.pdf

World Health Organization (WHO). 2015. “WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2015: Raising Taxes on
Tobacco.” Geneva: WHO.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2017. World No Tobacco Day, 31 May 2017. http://www.who.int/campaigns/
no-tobacco-day/2017/event/en/

Xu, X., Bishop, E.E., Kennedy, S.M., Simpson, S.A., Pechacek, T.F., 2015. “Annual Healthcare Spending Attributable
to Cigarette Smoking. An Update. Am J Prev Med 48(3):326–333.

Yach, D., and H. Wipfli. 2006. “A Century of Smoke.” Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 100(5–6):465–79.

Zheng, R. 2016. “2015 Tobacco Taxation Reform in China: Results and Challenges.” Presentation at World Bank
Conference: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for Developing Countries,” May 24, 2016.
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco

Zheng, R., Yang, W., Xiaoxia, E., Hu, X., Marquez, P.V. 2017. “Cigarette affordability in China: 2001–2016.”
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank Group.




                                                                                                                     53
ABSTRACT
This chapter establishes the epidemiological foundation of the
book’s arguments. It shows that, worldwide, a reduction of smoking
prevalence by about a third could be achieved by doubling the real
price of cigarettes, which in many low- and middle-income countries
could be achieved by tripling the real excise tax on tobacco.

Other non-price interventions recommended by the Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control could also help reduce consumption
and could help make substantial increases in excise tax politically
acceptable. Without large price increases, a one-third reduction in
smoking would be difficult to achieve.

To underscore the urgency of political action, this chapter provides
governments and opinion leaders with a brief summary of the full
eventual hazards of smoking cigarettes from early adult life, the
benefits of stopping at various ages, the eventual magnitude of the
epidemic, if current smoking patterns persist, and the effectiveness
of tax increases and other interventions to reduce cigarette
consumption.




54 // Executive Summary
2
        Death and Taxes

  GLOBAL EFFECTS OF
 SMOKING, OF QUITTING,
AND OF TAXING TOBACCO
    Prabhat Jha and Richard Peto




    BACKGROUND
    On current smoking patterns, with about 50 percent of young men and 10 percent of
    young women becoming smokers in early adult life and relatively few stopping, annual
    tobacco deaths will rise from about 5 million in 2010 to more than 10 million a few
    decades hence (Jha 2009; Peto and Lopez 2001; Peto et al. 2015), as the young smokers
    of today reach middle and old age.5 This is due partly to population growth and partly
    to generations where few smoked substantial numbers of cigarettes throughout adult
    life being succeeded by generations where many did so. There were about 100 million
    deaths from tobacco in the 20th century, most in developed countries (Jha 2009; Peto and
    Lopez 2001). If current smoking patterns persist, tobacco will kill about 1 billion people this
    century, most in low- or middle-income countries (LMICs). About half of these deaths will
    be before age 70 years (Jha 2009; Peto and Lopez 2001; Peto et al. 2015; WHO 2015).

    The 2013 World Health Assembly called on governments to decrease the prevalence of
    smoking by about a third by 2025 (WHO 2013a), which would avoid more than 200 million
    deaths from tobacco during the remainder of the century (Jha 2009; Peto and Lopez
    2001). Price is the key determinant of smoking uptake and cessation (IARC 2011; Jha and
    Chaloupka 1999; Jha et al. 2015; WHO 2010). Worldwide, a reduction of about a third in
    smoking prevalence could be achieved by doubling the real price of cigarettes, which in
    many LMICs could be achieved by tripling the real excise tax on tobacco. Other non-price
    interventions recommended by the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
    (FCTC) and the WHO “MPOWER” package (WHO 2015) comprise information and regulations.
    These also help reduce consumption (Jha and Chaloupka 1999; Jha et al. 2015) and could




    5 This chapter is an edited and updated version of a paper published in the New England Journal of Medicine on January 4, 2014.
    The journal’s editors have kindly granted permission for its adaptation here.
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




help make substantial increases in real excise tax politically acceptable. Without large
price increases, a one-third reduction in smoking would be difficult to achieve.

The United Nations has endorsed the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including
a call for countries to achieve a 30 percent reduction in the age-standardized death rates
from non-communicable disease (NCD) between ages 30 and 70 years (Norheim et al.
2015; WHO 2013b). Widespread cessation of smoking is the most important way to help
achieve both the SDG and WHO goals, as continuing to smoke throughout adult life
substantially increases mortality from several major non-communicable diseases (and
from tuberculosis) (Doll et al. 2004; Gajalakshmi et al. 2003; Gupta et al. 2005; Jha 2009;
Jha et al. 2008; Jha et al. 2010; Jha et al. 2013; Peto and Lopez 2001; Peto et al. 2015; Pirie
et al. 2103; Sakata et al. 2012; Thun et al. 2013).

To help achieve a large reduction in smoking in the 2010s or 2020s, governments,
economists, health professionals, journalists and other opinion leaders should appreciate
the full eventual hazards of smoking cigarettes from early adult life, the benefits of
stopping at various ages, the eventual magnitude of the epidemic if current smoking
patterns persist, and the effectiveness of tax increases and other interventions to
reduce cigarette consumption.



THREE KEY MESSAGES FOR THE INDIVIDUAL
CIGARETTE SMOKER IN THE 21ST CENTURY
First, the risk is big. Large recent studies in the United Kingdom, United States, Japan,
and India have examined the eventual effects on mortality in populations of men and of
women where many began to smoke in early adult life and did not quit (Doll et al. 2004;
Jha et al. 2008; Jha et al. 2013; Pirie et al. 2103; Sakata et al. 2012; Thun et al. 2013). All
found that in middle age (about 30–69 years) cigarette smokers had two or three times
the mortality rate of otherwise similar never-smokers, leading to a reduction in lifespan
by an average of about 10 years (Figure 1). This average reduction combines zero loss for
those not killed by tobacco with an average loss of two decades or more for those who
are killed by it.

Second, many of those killed are still in middle age, losing many years of life. Some
of those killed in middle age might have died soon anyway, but others might have lived
on for decades. On average, those killed by smoking in middle age lose about 20 years of
never-smoker life expectancy.

Third, stopping smoking works. Those who have smoked cigarettes since early adult
life but stop at 30, 40, or 50 years of age gain, respectively, about ten, nine, and six years of
life expectancy, compared with those who continue smoking (Figure 2).



56 // Death and Taxes: Global Effects of Smoking, of Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco
 Figure 1: 
           Loss of a Decade of Life Expectancy from Smoking Cigarettes Throughout Adulthood

                                                    UK MEN                                                                           UK WOMEN
                            100                                                                                      100


                            80                                                                                       80




                                                                                         % of survival from age 35
% of survival from age 35




                                                                                                                                                                      10 78
                                                                                                                                                                     Years
                            60                                                                                       60
                                                                            10      60
                                                                                                                                                                              56
                                                                           Years
                            40                     Never Smokers                                                     40               Never Smokers
                                                   Current Smokers                                                                    Current Smokers
                            20                                                      26                               20


                             0                                                                                        0
                                       40         50         60      70        80                                          30   40      50      60        70             80
                                                       Age (Years)                                                                      Age (Years)


                                                  US WOMEN                                                                             US MEN
                            100                                                                                      100


                            80                                                                                       80
                                                                                         % of survival from age 25
% of survival from age 25




                                                                            11   70
                            60                                             Years                                     60
                                                                                                                                                                  12          61
                                                                                                                                                                 Years
                            40                     Never Smokers                                                     40               Never Smokers
                                                                                    38
                                                   Current Smokers                                                                    Current Smokers
                                                                                                                                                                              26
                            20                                                                                       20


                             0                                                                                        0
                                  30        40         50      60     70       80                                          30   40      50      60        70             80
                                                       Age (Years)                                                                      Age (Years)


                                                 JAPANESE MEN                                                                        INDIAN MEN
                            100                                                                                      100


                            80                                                                                       80
% of survival from age 35




                                                                                         % of survival from age 35




                                                                                    67
                                                                              9                                                                                 62
                            60                                              Years                                    60                                   9
                                                                                                                                                        Years

                            40                     Never Smokers                                                     40              Never Smokers
                                                                                    41                                                                          37
                                                   Current Smokers                                                                   Current Smokers
                            20                                                                                       20


                             0                                                                                        0
                                  30        40         50      60     70       80                                          30   40      50      60        70             80
                                                    Age (Years)                                                                         Age (Years)
 Cigarette smoker versus never-smoker probabilities of survival from age 35 among U.K. men (Doll et al. 2004) and women (Pirie et al. 2013),
 U.S. men and women (Jha et al. 2013), Japanese men (Sakata et al. 2012), and Indian men (Jha et al. 2008).


                                                                                                                                                                         57
               Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




               Figure 2: The Benefits of Stopping Smoking at about 30, 40 or 50 Years of Age in Women

                         30              CANCER OF THE LUNG                                                            4.0               ALL-CAUSE MORTALITY

                         25                                                    Current
                                                                                                                                                                            Current
                                                                               Smokers                                 3.0
                                                                                                                                                                            Smokers




                                                                                              Relative Risk (95% CI)
Relative Risk (95% CI)




                         20


                         15                                                                                            2.0
                                                                                                                                                                              1.56

                                                                                                                                                             1.20
                         10                                                                                                       1.01      1.05
                                                                                                                                                                              Never
                                                                                  5.9                                  1.0
                                                                                                                                                                            Smokers
                          5                                   3.3
                                             1.8                                 Never
                                   1.6
                                                                               Smokers
                         0                                                                                              0
                              20             30                 40                      50                                   20               30               40               50
                                          Ex-smokers, by age at stopping                                                                   Ex-smokers, by age at stopping
               Left, all-cause mortality, right: lung cancer mortality. Multivariate-adjusted relative risks (1.0 for never-smokers) in ex-smokers by age at stopping, and
               in current smokers. Ex-smokers and smokers had both on average begun to smoke at age 19 years, and consumed similar numbers of cigarettes per day.
               Source: UK Million Women Study of women born around 1940 (Jha et al. 2013)



               SLOW EMERGENCE OF THE FULL EVENTUAL
               HAZARDS OF SMOKING
               Tobacco is the biggest external cause of non-communicable disease, responsible for even
               more deaths than obesity both in countries such as the United States (Peto, Whitlock, and
               Jha 2010) and globally (Finucane et al. 2011). Though the main hazards are not seen until
               middle age, the risks in middle age are far greater for smokers who started in early adult
               life than for those who started somewhat later. This means that the smoker versus never-
               smoker mortality rate ratio is much more extreme now (Figures 1 and 2) than it was half
               a century earlier, when the epidemic was at an earlier stage (Doll et al. 2004; Jha et al. 2013;
               Pirie et al. 2103; Sakata et al. 2012; Thun et al. 2013).

               Cigarette smoking was uncommon throughout the world in 1900, but increased
               substantially in many high-income countries during the first half of the 20th century, first
               among men and then, in some countries, among women (Forey et al. 2016). By 1950, in
               the United States and United Kingdom, substantial numbers not only of men but also of
               women smoked, and lung cancer rates were increasing steeply, particularly among men
               (Peto et al. 2015). In 1950, major studies in both countries (Doll and Hill 1950; Wynder
               and Graham 1950) showed that smoking was a cause of most lung cancer deaths, and
               subsequent reports soon showed smoking caused even more deaths from other diseases



               58 // Death and Taxes: Global Effects of Smoking, of Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco
than from lung cancer (Royal College of Physicians 1962; U.S. Department of Health,
Education and Welfare 1964).

After 1950, cigarette consumption continued to rise for some decades in high-income
countries, and has risen among men (though generally not among women) in LMICs.
Although there has been widespread cessation in many high-income countries (in some
of which consumption per adult has halved since the 1970s) (Forey et al. 2016), worldwide
about 1.3 billion people now smoke, most in LMICs, where cessation remains uncommon
(WHO 2015). About half of all smokers live (in descending order of numbers smoking) in
China, India, the European Union (EU, where central tobacco legislation can influence 28
countries), Indonesia, the United States, Russia, Brazil, and Bangladesh, and an additional
200 million live in 12 other countries (Table 1) (GBD 2015 Tobacco Collaborators 2017;
Giovino et al. 2012; Zatoński and Mańczuk 2010). In India, manufactured cigarettes are
now displacing bidis (locally manufactured small cigarettes) (Jha et al. 2011; Mishra et al.
2016). In China, cigarette consumption continues to rise steeply, and is now more than
2 trillion out of a world total of about 6 trillion cigarettes per year (Euromonitor International
2012). A useful approximation suggested by studies in high-income countries is that 1 ton
of tobacco makes about 1 million cigarettes and causes about 1 death, so each trillion
cigarettes consumed a year should in the long run cause about a million deaths a year.

One reason why the mid-century evidence of hazard was not at first taken with appropriate
seriousness, even in countries where it was generated, is the delay of about half a century
between widespread adoption of smoking by young adults and the main effect on
mortality in later life (Jha 2009; Peto and Lopez 2001; Peto et al. 2015). In U.S. adults, for
example, cigarette consumption averaged one, four, and ten per day in 1910, 1930 and
1950, after which it stabilized. The long-delayed result of this increase in consumption
during the first half of the century was seen in the second half of the century; in 1950 and
1990 tobacco caused, respectively, about 12 percent and then about 33 percent of all U.S.
deaths in middle age (Peto et al. 2015). A similar pattern was seen about 40 years later in
Chinese men, who consumed about one, four, and ten cigarettes per day in 1952, 1972, and
1992. In 1990, tobacco caused about 12 percent of Chinese male deaths in middle age, and
it could well cause about 33 percent in 2030 (Gu et al. 2009; Liu et al. 1998). Smoking causes
few deaths in women, as fewer than 1 percent of Chinese women born since 1950 smoke
(Giovino et al. 2012; Liu et al. 1998). (The claim that smoking causes about 8 percent of
deaths in Chinese women [GBD 2015 Tobacco Collaborators 2017] is thus misleading).

Because men started smoking before women, the effects of men’s smoking throughout
adult life are now apparent in several high-income countries. The full eventual effects of
persistent smoking among women can, however, be assessed directly in only a few countries
(e.g., the United States or United Kingdom), and only in the present (21st) century. The U.S.
female lung cancer death rate ratio (current versus never smoker) has increased greatly



                                                                                                 59
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Table 1: Prevalence and Number of Current and Future Smokers, 2008–12 Selected Countries

 COUNTRY                                CURRENT SMOKING                     CURRENT                CURRENT AND
 (YEAR)                                 PREVALENCE,                         SMOKERS,               FUTURE SMOKERS,
                                        AGES 15+ (PERCENT)                  AGES 15+               AGES 0-34
                                                                            (MILLIONS)             (MILLIONS)

                                        Male        Female        Total
 China (2010)                             52.9         2.4         28.1             317                       193

 India (2009)                             24.3          2.9        14.0             122                        95

 EU-28 (2012)                             32.4         21.5        26.8             115                        54

 Indonesia (2011)                         67.0          2.7       34.8              61                         58

 United States (2011)                     21.9         17.4        19.6             50                         26

 Russian Federation (2008)                60.2         21.7        39.1             47                         32

 Brazil (2008)                            21.6         13.1        17.2             26                         19

 Bangladesh (2009)                        44.7          1.5       23.0              25                         25

 Philippines (2008)                       47.6         9.0         28.2             18                         22

 Turkey (2008)                            47.9         15.2        31.2             17                         18

 Vietnam (2010)                           47.4          1.4        23.8             17                         14

 Mexico (2009)                            24.8          7.8        15.9             14                         14

 Thailand (2009)                          45.6          3.1        23.7             13                         8

 Ukraine (2010)                           50.0         11.3        28.9              11                        8

 Egypt, Arab Rep. of (2009)               37.6         0.5         19.4              11                        12

 Argentina (2012)                         29.4         24.4        22.1              7                         7

 Canada (2011)                            19.7         15.6        17.3              5                         2

 Malaysia (2011)                          43.9          15         23.1              5                         5

 Nigeria (2012)                            7.3          1.0        3.9               4                         6

 Australia (2012)                         17.4         16.7        15.3              3                          1

 Uruguay (2009)                           30.7         0.4        25.0              0.7                       0.6

 Subtotal (HICs)                                                                    173                       107

 Subtotal (LMICS)                                                                   714                       537

 Total (countries above)                                                           887                        644

Note: For future smokers in low- and middle-income countries, we apply the smoking prevalence at ages 25–34 from GATS
the United Nations 2012 population under age 25 years, plus current smokers at ages 25–34. For future smokers in high-income
countries, we apply the smoking prevalence at ages 18–24 or 20–24 to the under-25 population (Blecher 2010).
Source: Global Adult Tobacco Surveys (Zatoński and Mańczuk 2010), EU smoking prevalences (GBD 2015 Tobacco Collaborators
2017), and Canadian Tobacco Use Monitoring Survey (ages 15+); Australian Health Survey (ages 15+), US National Health Interview
Survey (Forey et al. 2016), adjusted to the United Nations population estimates for 2012.




60 // Death and Taxes: Global Effects of Smoking, of Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco
over the last half-century (Thun et al. 2013): it was only 3-fold in the 1960s, but it was
13-fold in the 1980s and 26-fold (similar to that among men) in the 2000s. This is because
in the 2000s many U.S. women in their 60s who were smokers had smoked ever since
early adult life, whereas back in the 1960s few women in their 60s who were smokers
had done so.

Even though U.S. female lung cancer death rates were still low in the 1960s, U.S. women
who were then in their 20s and who continued to smoke without quitting faced substantial
hazards 40 years later (Jha et al. 2013; Thun et al. 2013). Male mortality from tobacco is
already substantial in LMICs such as China (Gu et al. 2009; Liu et al. 1998), India (Gajalakshmi
et al. 2003; Gupta et al. 2005; Jha et al. 2008), Bangladesh (Alam et al. 2013), and South
Africa (Sitas et al. 2013), and on current smoking patterns the hazards in LMICs are likely to
increase. Indeed, among men in LMICs where many smoke but the death rates in middle
age from smoking are not yet substantial, a full decade of life expectancy will eventually
be lost by young adults who continue to smoke. Worldwide, about half a billion of the
children and young adults below age 35 already smoke (Table 1), or will do so if current
uptake rates persist, and at current cessation patterns relatively few will quit (Giovino et
al. 2012). In all countries, young adults who smoke face about a decade of life lost if they
continue, and have much to gain by stopping. Among these half a billion younger smokers,
at least half (and perhaps as many as two-thirds) of continuing smokers will be killed by
their smoking. Conversely, if this group did not start or quit by age 40 (and preferably
earlier), they would avoid nearly all of these 250 million deaths.



RELATIVELY RAPID EMERGENCE OF
SUBSTANTIAL BENEFITS OF STOPPING
In comparison with the slow increase in tobacco-attributable mortality following the
uptake of smoking, the effects of cessation emerge more rapidly (Doll et al. 2004; Jha et
al. 2013; Pirie et al. 2103; Sakata et al. 2012; Thun et al. 2013). Those who began smoking
in early adult life but stopped before age 40 avoid more than 90 percent of the excess risk
over their next few decades of life compared to those who continue to smoke, and even
those who stop at age 50 avoid more than half of the risk, although some hazards do persist
(Figure 2) (Doll et al. 2004; Jha et al. 2013; Pirie et al. 2103; Sakata et al. 2012; Thun et al.
2013). Cessation is the only practicable way to avoid a substantial proportion of tobacco
deaths before 2050, as a substantial reduction by 2025 in uptake by adolescents will have
its main effect on mortality rates after 2050 (Jha 2009; Peto and Lopez 2001). The preva-
lence of ex-smoking in middle age is a useful measure of the success of tobacco control.
At ages 45–64 there are now, in the EU and the United States, about as many former as
current smokers (Jha 2013; Zatoński and Mańczuk 2010); by contrast, in most LMICs (with
the notable exception of Brazil) there are far fewer former than current smokers (Table 2).



                                                                                                    61
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Table 2: Numbers (Millions) of Former Smokers at Ages 45–64, 2008–12: Selected Areas

                                              AGE 45–64 YEARS
 REGION OR COUNTRY                            CURRENT            FORMER           STOPPED SMOKING
                                                                                  (FORMER AS % OF
                                                                                  CURRENT + FORMER)

 European Union                                      37               36                        49%

 United States                                       18               22                        55%

 Japan                                               9                 5                        36%

 LOW AND MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES
 China                                              115                21                       15%

 India                                              46                 7                        13%

 Indonesia                                           17                2                         11%

 Russia                                              15                4                        19%

 Brazil                                              9                10                        53%

 Bangladesh                                          7                 2                        22%

 Bangladesh                                          7                 2                        22%


Data are from Giovino et al (2012) and Zatoński and Mańczuk (2010), combined with United Nations population
estimates for 2012. † The percentage of persons who have stopped smoking is calculated as former smokers divided
by the sum of current smokers and former smokers.
‡ There are approximately 25 million current smokers in Pakistan but no standardized surveys (Blecher 2010)




TRIPLE PRICE, HALVE SMOKING,
DOUBLE REVENUE
Comprehensive tobacco control programs using several price and non-price interventions
can substantially raise smoking cessation rates and decrease youth initiation (WHO 2015).
Uruguay implemented most of the FCTC provisions and reduced consumption more
rapidly than otherwise similar Argentina, which implemented only a few (Abascal et al.
2012). Large increases in tobacco excise tax are, however, particularly important, as they
can have a substantial and rapid effect on consumption (IARC 2011; Jha and Chaloupka
1999; Jha et al. 2015; WHO 2010). Reviews of comprehensive control programs in various
states of the United States (CDC 1999; Levy et al. 2006) and other high-income areas
(Chaloupka et al. 2000) concur about the central role of higher prices in much, but not
all, of the decline in smoking.

Likewise, an International Agency for Research on Cancer review of over 100 econometric
studies confirmed that tobacco taxes and consumption are strongly inversely related
(IARC 2011). It concluded that a 100 percent increase in real tobacco prices decreases


62 // Death and Taxes: Global Effects of Smoking, of Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco
            consumption by about 40 percent in both high-income countries and LMICs (IARC 2011;
            Jha and Chaloupka 1999; Jha et al. 2015; WHO 2010), suggesting a price elasticity of about
            -0.4. Hence, doubling the real prices should reduce consumption by at least one-third (in
            which case it would increase revenue, as the effect of reduced demand would be out-
            weighed by the extra revenue per pack). About half of the effect among adults is due to
            quitting (or not starting), and about half due to reduced consumption per smoker (IARC
            2011). Higher taxes are particularly effective in poorer or less educated groups (IARC 2011;
            Jha and Chaloupka 1999; Jha et al. 2015; WHO 2010), and help prevent young smokers
            moving from experimentation into regular smoking (Kostova et al. 2011).

            The two major types of tobacco tax are specific excise taxes (which, being based on
            quantity or weight, are difficult for the industry to manipulate) and ad valorem taxes
            (which are based on notional value, and can be manipulated more easily). In high-income
            countries about 50–60 percent of the retail price of the most-sold brand is excise tax, but
            in LMICs this proportion is typically only about 35–40 percent (Figure 3) (Jha et al. 2017;
                                 WHO 2010; WHO 2015). Low excise taxes contribute to cigarettes’

        In contrast, high        being about 70 percent cheaper (even after adjustment for purchasing
                                 power) in low-income than in high-income countries. Moreover,
   specific excise taxes
                                 rapid income growth in many LMICs is making the lower-priced
on all brands encourage          tobacco products more affordable (Blecher 2010) and helping
  cessation rather than          cigarettes to displace bidis (a smaller, locally manufactured smoked
   switching, are easier         product) in India (Mishra et al 2016).
      to administer than         A low reliance on excise taxes by China (Hu et al. 2008), India (Jha
  ad valorem taxes, and          et al. 2011), Indonesia (Barber et al. 2008), and other LMICs (Jha et al.
      produce a steadier         2017; WHO 2010; WHO 2015) means that the prices of commonly-

        revenue stream.          sold cigarette brands vary greatly (more than ten-fold in China, as
                                 against only about two-fold in the United Kingdom or United States),
            and this continued availability of low-cost brands discourages cessation. In contrast,
            high excise taxes on all brands encourage cessation rather than switching, are easier
            to administer than ad valorem taxes, and produce a steadier revenue stream (IARC
            2011). In many LMICs, although excise tax accounts for under half the total retail price
            of cigarettes, tripling it approximately doubles the retail price, partly by triggering small
            increases in other taxes (e.g., sales tax) and mark-up. In high-income countries excise
            tax already accounts for over half the retail price, so even just doubling them would
            approximately double prices.

            The United States and United Kingdom took more than 30 years to halve adult cigarette
            consumption per adult, in part because of limited use of large tax hikes in both countries
            (which occurred only in 1999 and 1981 in the United States and United Kingdom,
            respectively) (Forey et al. 2016). Using large tax increases, however, France and South



                                                                                                            63
     Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




     Figure 3: Contributions of Excise Tax and Other Taxes to the Total Cost per Pack
     of the Most-Sold Brand of Cigarettes in High, Middle and Low-Income Countries.
                                           6.0
                                                     $5.8




                                           5.0
                                                                                             Excise Tax Per Pack
                                                               Excise Tax                    Other Taxes
                                                                 54%
                                                                                             Base Price
Price and Taxation Per Pack (PPP Dollar)




                                           4.0




                                           3.0



                                                                                 $2.3
                                                                                            Excise Tax
                                           2.0                                                39%

                                                                                                            $1.7
                                                                                                                      Excise Tax
                                                                                                                        37%

                                           1.0




                                            0
                                                 High Income                Middle Income                Low Income

     Prices are expressed in purchasing-power-parity-adjusted dollars (PPP dollars). In low- or in middle-income countries,
     tripling excise tax would approximately double street prices, as non-excise taxes (e.g., sales tax) and retailer mark-up
     would also rise.
     Source: WHO data for 48 high-income, 95 middle-income and 30 low-income countries (WHO 2015).


     Africa halved consumption in only 15 years (Figure 4) (Hill, Jougla, and Beck 2010; Jha
     2009; Van Walbeek 2006). From 1990 to 2005, France tripled inflation-adjusted cigarette
     prices by raising taxes 5 percent or more every year in excess of inflation, halved cigarette
     consumption and doubled real tobacco revenues. Today, the French ex-smoking prevalence
     at ages 45–64 years comfortably exceeds the European average (Jha 2013; Zatoński and
     Mańczuk 2010). Over a similar time period, South Africa also tripled the real price of cigarettes,
     halved cigarette consumption, and doubled real tobacco revenues (Van Walbeek 2006).




     64 // Death and Taxes: Global Effects of Smoking, of Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco
   Figure 4: Changes in the Real Price of Cigarettes and in Cigarette Consumption
   per Adult in France and South Africa

                                                                                 FRANCE
                                 6                                                                                                   300



                                 5             CONSUMPTION


                                 4                                                                                                   200
          Sales of Cigarettes




                                                                                                                                           Price
                                 3


                                 2                                                                                                   100
                                              PRICE

                                  1


                                 0                                                                                                   0
                                      1950          1960           1970           1980            1990          2000          2010
                                                                                   Year



                                                                          SOUTH AFRICA
                           2.5                                                                                                       700


                                                                                                                                     600
                          2.0
                                                    CONSUMPTION
                                                                                                                                     500
Sales of Cigarettes




                                1.5
                                                                                                                                     400
                                                                                                                                           Real Price


                                                                                                                                     300
                            1.0
                                                    PRICE
                                                                                                                                     200
                          0.5
                                                                                                                                     100


                         0.0                                                                                                         0
                                      1961   1970   1980    1982   1984   1986    1988     1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000
                                                                                    Year
   Prices in both countries are scaled to be 100 in the baseline year of 1990 (Hill, Jougla, and Beck 2010; Van Walbeek 2006).




                                                                                                                                           65
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




OTHER EFFECTIVE INTERVENTIONS:
INFORMATION, REGULATIONS, AND
SUPPORT FOR QUITTING
Though tobacco advertising is banned throughout the EU, China, and some other countries,
cigarettes are still among the most heavily advertised and promoted products in the
world, with spending on tobacco marketing reaching nearly $9 billion annually in the
United States alone (U.S. Federal Trade Commission 2015). In 2011, Australia, which had
already banned advertising, introduced plain packaging for tobacco products, removing
all brand imagery. The brand is printed only in small standard lettering below a pictorial
warning. Recent evidence suggests plain packaging increases cessation attempts (Cancer
Research UK n.d.; Wakefield et al. 2013). Canada, Norway, and New Zealand will introduce
plain packaging, and many other countries are considering do so. Plain packaging goes
beyond the prominent, rotating pictorial warning labels on tobacco products that have
helped increase cessation attempts in Canada, Thailand, and elsewhere (Hammond
2010). Pictorial warnings can reach even illiterate individuals — and half the deaths from
tobacco in India occur among the illiterate (Jha et al. 2008).

In the United States and United Kingdom, bans on television tobacco advertising coincided
with the start of the long-term downturn in sales (Kenkel and Chen 2000), although
partial bans on advertising allowed the industry to shift to other forms of advertising or pro-
motion. In contrast, comprehensive bans on all direct or indirect advertising or promotion
of any tobacco goods or trademarks do help reduce consumption (Blecher 2008; Saffer
2000), and have the advantage of severing any dependence of the media on the tobacco
industry. Bans on smoking in public places reduce non-smoker exposure to tobacco smoke
and can also help decrease overall consumption (Callinan et al. 2010; Fichtenberg and Glantz
2002). Well-designed mass media campaigns can reduce uptake and raise cessation (Bala
et al. 2013; Brennan et al. 2008; Durkin, Brennan, and Wakefield 2012; Sims et al. 2014).

The most effective are those which communicate serious health harms of tobacco use
and target both current smokers and younger age cohorts that have not yet initiated
smoking behavior (Sims et al. 2014). Low-cost epidemiological studies of various types
that monitor convincingly the changing extent to which tobacco is causing premature
death in populations with many long-term smokers help to raise political awareness of
tobacco control and information for the individual smoker (Alam et al. 2013; Gu et al.
2009; Jha 2013; Jha et al. 2008; Liu et al. 1998; Peto et al. 2015; Sitas et al. 2013).

Throughout the world, most former smokers managed to quit unaided, but physician
support or telephone-based or internet-based counseling and support can increase
the likelihood of success. In motivated individuals, pharmacological treatments can also
increase quit rates (Hartmann-Boyce et al. 2013).



66 // Death and Taxes: Global Effects of Smoking, of Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco
DEATH AND TAXES
WHO (2015) reports that many countries now use non-price interventions, and that 106
raised excise taxes between 2012 and 2014. However, only a few (including Mauritius,
Mexico, Poland, the Philippines, Thailand, and Turkey) are recently using large excise tax
increases to reduce smoking (WHO 2010). Notably, the Philippines tripled excise taxes
once, narrowing the gap between cheaper and more expensive cigarettes, and has
committed to continuing increases (Kaiser, Bredenkamp, and Iglesias 2016). Similarly large
increases need to be a key component of any realistic strategy to reduce smoking
substantially during the 2010s or 2020s (Jha et al. 2012). The manufacturers’ worldwide
profits of about $50 billion in 2012 (Eriksen, Mackay, and Ross 2012) (approximately
$10,000 per tobacco death) yield enormous political influence that is used, among other
things, against large tax increases.

Tripling real excise taxes would, in many LMICs, approximately double the average price
of cigarettes (and more than double prices of cheaper brands), decrease consumption by
about a third and increase tobacco revenues by about a third. Where government owns
most of the industry, as in China, distinction between taxes and profit is fairly arbitrary, but
still doubling the average prices would substantially reduce consumption and increase
revenue. Worldwide, raising excise taxes to double prices would raise about another
US$ 100 billion a year in tobacco tax revenues, in addition to the approximately US$ 300
billion that governments already collect on tobacco (WHO 2010; WHO 2015).

The main argument for reducing smoking is, however, the hundreds of millions of tobacco
deaths if current smoking patterns persist. Tobacco revenue losses or gains are of secondary
importance, as tobacco taxes are a relatively small proportion of overall revenue in most
countries (except China). In addition, money not spent on tobacco is spent on other
taxable goods or services (Jha and Chaloupka 1999), although generally at lower tax rates.
Attainment of the UN SDG for adult mortality depends strongly on reducing tobacco use
(Norheim et al. 2015). A one-third decrease in smoking prevalence by 2025, involving
major decreases not only in high-income countries but also in populous LMICs, would
avoid several tens of millions of tobacco deaths during the next few decades (Jha 2009;
Peto and Lopez 2001), and about 200 million tobacco deaths over the century as a whole,
mostly among people who are already alive, both by helping smokers to quit and by
helping adolescents not to start.




                                                                                               67
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Catherine Hill for French data and Corne van Walbeek for South African data
on cigarette price and consumption. Sources of support: Disease Control Priorities 3,
U.S. National Institutes of Health.



REFERENCES
Abascal W, Esteves E, Goja B, et al. 2012. “Tobacco control campaign in Uruguay: a population-based
trend analysis.” Lancet 380: 1575–82.

Alam DS, Jha P, Ramasundarahettige C, et al. 2013. “Smoking-attributable mortality in Bangladesh:
proportional mortality study.” Bull WHO 2013; (epub ahead of print).

Bala MM, Strzeszynski L, Topor-Madry R, Cahill K. 2013. “Mass media interventions for smoking cessation
in adults.” Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;6:CD004704. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004704.pub3.

Barber S, Adioetomo SM, Ahsan A, Setyonaluri D. 2008. Tobacco economics in Indonesia. Paris: IUATLD.

Blecher E. 2010. “Targeting the affordability of cigarettes: a new benchmark for taxation policy in
low-income and middle-income countries.” Tob Control 19: 325–30.

Blecher E. 2008. “The impact of tobacco advertising bans on consumption in developing countries.”
J Health Econ 27: 930–42.

Brennan E, Jeong M, Momjian-Kybert A, Hornik R. 2016. “Preventing and Reducing Tobacco Use among
Youth and Young Adults: A Systematic Review of the Effectiveness of Mass Media Interventions, 2008–
2013.” (Accessed May 8, 2017 at http://repository.upenn.edu/asc_papers/471)

Callinan JE, Clarke A, Doherty K, Kelleher C. 2010. “Legislative smoking bans for reducing second-
hand smoke exposure, smoking prevalence and tobacco consumption.” Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2010;(4):CD005992.

Cancer Research UK. No date. Plain Packaging Campaign. (Accessed May 8, 2017, at
http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=c_z-4S8iicc)

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1999. “Decline in cigarette consumption following
implementation of a comprehensive tobacco prevention and education program — Oregon, 1996–1998.”
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 26:140-3.

Chaloupka FJ, Hu T-W, Warner KE, Jacobs R, Yurekli A. 2000. “The taxation of tobacco products.” In: Tobacco
control in developing countries, edited by P Jha and FJ Chaloupka, 237–272. Oxford, United Kingdom:
Oxford University Press.

Doll R, Hill AB. 1950. “Smoking and carcinoma of the lung.” BMJ 221: 739-48.

Doll R, Peto R, Boreham J, Sutherland I. 2004. “Mortality in relation to smoking: 50 years’ observations on
male British doctors.” BMJ 328: 1519-33.

Durkin S, Brennan E, Wakefield M. 2012. “Mass media campaigns to promote smoking cessation among
adults: an integrative review.” Tobacco Control 21:127-138.

Eriksen M, Mackay J, Ross H. 2012. The Tobacco Atlas. Fourth Ed. Atlanta, GA: American Cancer Society;
New York, NY: World Lung Foundation. (Accessed May 8, 2017 at www.TobaccoAtlas.org)



68 // Death and Taxes: Global Effects of Smoking, of Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco
Euromonitor International, London. 2012. Euromonitor International [database on the Internet]. Cigarettes:
Global. Euromonitor International. (Accessed May 8, 2017 at http://www.euromonitor.com/tobacco)

Federal Trade Commission. 2015. Cigarette report for 2013. Washington, DC: FTC. (Accessed May 8, 2015 at
https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/federal-trade-commission-cigarette-report-2013/2013cig-
aretterpt.pdf

Fichtenberg CM, Glantz SA. 2002. “Effect of smoke-free workplaces on smoking behaviour: systematic
review.” BMJ 325: 188–199.

Finucane MM, Stevens GA, Cowan MJ, et al. 2011. “National, regional, and global trends in body-mass
index since 1980: systematic analysis of health examination surveys and epidemiological studies with
960 country-years and 9·1 million participants.” Lancet 377: 557-67.

Forey B, Hamling J, Hamling J, Thornton A, Lee PN. 2016. International smoking statistics: web edition.
2006–16 Sutton, UK: PN Lee Statistics & Computing. (Accessed May 8, 2017 at http://www.pnlee.co.uk/ISS3.htm).

Gajalakshmi V, Peto R, Kanaka TS, Jha P. 2003. “Smoking and mortality from tuberculosis and other dis-
eases in India: retrospective study of 43 000 adult male deaths and 35 000 controls.” Lancet 362:507–515.

GBD 2015 Tobacco Collaborators. 2017. “Smoking prevalence and attributable disease burden in 195 coun-
tries and territories, 1990–2015: a systematic analysis from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015.” Lancet.
2017 Apr 5. pii: S0140-6736(17)30819-X. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30819-X. [Epub ahead of print]

Giovino GA, Mirza SA, Samet JM, et al. 2012. “Tobacco use in 3 billion individuals from 16 countries: an
analysis of nationally representative cross-sectional household surveys.” Lancet 380: 668-79.

Gu D, Kelly TN, Wu X, et al. 2009. “Mortality attributable to smoking in China.” New Engl J Med 360: 150–59.

Gupta PC, Pednekar MS, Parkin DM, Sankaranarayanan R. 2005. “Tobacco-associated mortality in Mumbai
(Bombay), India: results of the Bombay cohort study.” Int J Epidem 34: 1395–1402.

Hammond D. 2010. “Plain packaging regulations for tobacco products: the impact of standardizing the
color and design of cigarette packs.” Salud Publica Mex 52: S226-32.

Hartmann-Boyce J, Stead LF, Cahill K, Lancaster T. 2013. “Efficacy of interventions to combat tobacco
addiction: Cochrane update of 2012 reviews.” Addiction. 2013 Jul 9. [Epub ahead of print]

Hill C, Jougla E, Beck F. 2010. “Le point sur l’épidémie de cancer du poumon dû au tabagisme.” Bull Épidém
Hebdom 19–20: 210–13 (Accessed May 8, 2017 at http://invs.santepubliquefrance.fr/beh/2016/7-8/2016_7-
8_4.html)

Hu TW, Mao Z, Shi J, Chen W. 2008. Tobacco taxation and its potential impact in China. Paris: IUATLD.

International Agency for Research on Cancer. 2011. Effectiveness of tax and price policies for tobacco control.
IARC handbooks of cancer prevention, Vol. 14. Lyon: IARC.

Jha P. 2009. “Avoidable global cancer deaths and total deaths from smoking.” Nat Rev Cancer 9: 655-64.

Jha P. 2013. “The 21st century benefits of smoking cessation in Europe.” Euro J Epidemiol 28:617–619

Jha P, Chaloupka FJ. 1999. Curbing the epidemic: governments and the economics of tobacco control.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Jha P, Guindon E, Joseph RA, et al. 2011. “A rational taxation system of bidis and cigarettes to reduce
smoking deaths in India.” Econ Polit Weekly 46: 44–51.

Jha P, Jacob B, Gajalakshmi V, et al. 2008. “A nationally representative case-control study of smoking and
death in India.” New Engl J Med 358: 1137–47.



                                                                                                              69
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Jha P, Joseph RC, Moser P et al, for the Asia Development Bank. 2012. Tobacco Taxes: A Win-Win Measure
for Fiscal Space and Health. Manila: Asian Development Bank (Accessed May 8, 2017 at http://www.adb.org/
publications/tobacco-taxes-win-win-measure-fiscal-space-and-health)

Jha P, Khan J, Mishra S, Gupta P. 2017. “Raising taxes key to accelerate tobacco control in South Asia.” BMJ.
2017 Apr 11;357:j1176 (Accessed May 8, 2017 at http://www.bmj.com/content/357/bmj.j1176)

Jha P, MacLennan M, Chaloupka FJ, Yurekli A, Ramasundarahettige C, Palipudi K, et al. 2015. “Global hazards
of tobacco and the benefits of smoking cessation and tobacco taxes.” In Cancer: Disease Control Priorities,
Third Edition (Volume 3), edited by Gelband H, Jha P, Sankaranarayanan R, Horton S. Washington, DC.

Jha P, Mony P, Moore JA, Zatonski W. 2010. “Avoidance of worldwide vascular deaths and total deaths
from smoking.” In Evidence-based Cardiology, edited by Yusuf S, Cairns JA, Camm AJ, Gallen EL, Gersh BJ,
111–124. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Jha P, Peto R. 2014. “Global effects of smoking, of quitting, and of taxing tobacco.” N Engl J Med 370(1):60–8.

Jha P, Ramasundarahettige C, Landsman V, Rostron B, Thun P, Peto R. 2013. “The hazards of smoking and
benefits of stopping in the US during the 21st century: nationally representative prospective cohort
study.” New Engl J Med 368: 341–50.

Kaiser K, Bredenkamp C, Iglesias R. 2016. “Sin tax reform in the Philippines: transforming public finance,
health, and governance for more inclusive development.” Washington, DC: World Bank.

Kenkel D, Chen L. 2000. “Consumer information and tobacco use.” In Tobacco control in developing countries,
edited by Jha P, Chaloupka FJ, 177–214. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.

Kostova D, Ross H, Blecher E, Markowitz S. 2011. “Is youth smoking responsive to cigarette prices? Evidence
from low- and middle-income countries.” Tob Control 20: 419–24.

Levy DT, Hyland A, Higbee C, Remer L, Compton C. 2006. “The role of public policies in reducing smoking
prevalence in California: results from the California tobacco policy simulation model.” Health Policy 82:167–85.
Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Liu BQ, Peto R, Chen ZM, et al. 1998. “Emerging tobacco hazards in China: 1. Retrospective proportional
mortality study of one million deaths.” BMJ 317: 1411–22.

Mishra S, Joseph RA, Gupta PC, Pezzack B, Ram F, Sinha DN, et al. 2016. “Trends in bidi and cigarette smok-
ing in India from 1998 to 2015, by age, gender and education.” BMJ Global Health 1(1).

Norheim OF, Jha P, Admasu K, Godal T, Hum RJ, Kruk ME, et al. 2015. “Avoiding 40% of the premature
deaths in each country, 2010–30: review of national mortality trends to help quantify the UN sustainable
development goal for health.” Lancet 385(9964): 239–52.

Peto R, Lopez AD. 2001. “The future worldwide health effects of current smoking patterns.” In Critical
issues in global health, edited by Koop E, Pearson CE, Schwarz MR, 154–161. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Peto R, Lopez AD, Boreham J, Thun M. 2015. Mortality from smoking in developed countries, 1950–2010.
(Accessed May 8, 2017 at http://www.ctsu.ox.ac.uk/~tobacco)

Peto R, Whitlock G, Jha P. 2010. “Effects of obesity and smoking on US life expectancy.” New Engl J Med 362;
855–56.

Pirie K, Peto R, Reeves GK, Green J, Beral V. 2013.” The 21st century hazards of smoking and benefits of
stopping: a prospective study of one million women in the UK.” Lancet 381: 133–41.

Royal College of Physicians of London. 1962. Smoking and health: summary and report of the Royal College
of Physicians of London on smoking in relation to cancer of the lung and other diseases. London: Pitman
publishing.


70 // Death and Taxes: Global Effects of Smoking, of Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco
Saffer H. 2000. “Tobacco advertising and promotion.” In Tobacco Control in Developing Countries, edited by
Jha P, Chaloupka FJ, 215–36. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sakata R, McGale P, Grant EJ, Ozasa K, Peto R, Darby SC. 2012. “Impact of smoking on mortality and life
expectancy in Japanese smokers: a prospective cohort study.” BMJ 345: e7903.

Sims M, Salway R, Langley T, Lewis S, McNeill A, Szatkowski L, Gilmore AB. 2014. “Effectiveness of tobacco
control television advertising in changing tobacco use in England: a population-based cross-sectional
study.” Addiction 109: 986–994.

Sitas F, Egger S, Bradshaw D, et al. 2013. “Differences among the coloured, white, black and other South
African populations in smoking-attributed mortality at ages 35–74 years: case-control study of 481,640
deaths.” Lancet 382: 685–93.

Thun MJ, Carter BD, Feskanich D, et al. 2013. “50-year trends in smoking-related mortality in the United
States.” New Engl J Med 368: 351–64.

U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare. 1964. Smoking and health: report of the Advisory
Committee to the Surgeon-General of the Public Health Service. Washington, DC: Department of Health,
Education and Welfare.

Van Walbeek CP. 2006. “Industry responses to the tobacco excise tax increases in South Africa.” S African J
Econ 74: 110–22.

Wakefield MA, Hayes L, Durkin S, Borland R. 2013. “Introduction effects of the Australian plain packaging
policy on adult smokers: a cross-sectional study.” BMJ Open 3: e003175.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2010. WHO technical manual on tobacco tax administration. Geneva:
WHO.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2013a. Draft action plan for the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases 2013–2020. Geneva: World Health Assembly WHO A66/9.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2013b. Draft comprehensive global monitoring framework and
targets for the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases. Geneva: WHO A66/8.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2015. WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic, 2015: raising taxes on
tobacco. Geneva: WHO.

Wynder EL, Graham EA. 1950. “Tobacco smoking as a possible etiologic factor in bronchogenic carci-
noma: a study of 684 proved cases.” JAMA 143: 329–36.

Zatoński WA, Mańczuk M. 2010. “Tobacco smoking and tobacco-related harm in the European Union,
with special attention to the new EU member states.” In Tobacco: science, policy, and public health, edited
by Boyle P, Gray N, Henningfield J, Seffrin J, Zatoński WA, 134–155. Oxford: Oxford University Press.




                                                                                                           71
On the “Why?” question, we argue
that the rationale for tobacco
taxation must first be explained
in terms of public health benefits
and health cost savings. More
specifically, reducing smoking
consumption is associated with
major social gains through
avoiding premature mortality and
impoverishment, while reducing
catastrophic health expenses.




72 // Executive Summary
3
        Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How

   HERE PUBLIC HEALTH AND
 W
ECONOMICS CONVERGE
    Blanca Moreno-Dodson




    ABSTRACT
    This chapter further clarifies the rationale for raising tobacco taxes (the “Why?”); discusses
    specific tax policy options (the “What?”); and explores successful approaches to
    implementing tobacco tax increases in real-world contexts (the “How?”). It also explains
    what employment and social equity effects policy makers can anticipate when they
    raise tobacco taxes.

    The literature on tobacco taxation generally distinguishes among analyses based on public
    health, economic, and political-economy perspectives. Our work harnesses all three.
    On the “Why?” question, we argue that the rationale for tobacco taxation must first be
    explained in terms of public health benefits and health cost savings. More specifically,
    reducing smoking consumption is associated with major social gains through avoiding
    premature mortality and impoverishment, while reducing catastrophic health expenses.
    Pursuing the “Why?” discussion, this chapter explores the less frequently considered topic
    of tobacco taxes’ positive impact on labor productivity and human capital formation. It
    then reviews evidence on how tobacco taxes boost fiscal revenue generation in countries
    and shows, as well, why higher tobacco taxes can be expected to have long-term positive
    impacts on the natural environment.

    On the “What?” and “How?” issues, excise taxes on tobacco are most effective in achieving
    public health objectives. Among excise taxes, both specific (quantity-based) and
    ad valorem models (based on product value) have advantages. Many countries have
    adopted mixed models. However, specific excise tax systems are generally considered
    a better practice, as long as their rates are updated over time in order to incorporate
    affordability factors.

    In terms of equity, the experience of several countries (including Chile and the United
    States) demonstrates that, in the longer term, tobacco tax hikes promote net gains in
    both disposable income and welfare for socioeconomically disadvantaged groups. Poorer
    people face short-term potential reductions in disposable income when tobacco taxes
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




are raised. However, given poor households’ high opportunity cost in terms of food
consumption and other basic needs, they tend to cut smoking in the short run, and even
more in the longer run, in comparison with higher income groups.
Thus, poorer people’s share of health benefits greatly outweighs their
share of increased tobacco taxes. A range of other benefits discussed in                                              Tobacco tax reforms
this and other chapters make tobacco taxes overall highly pro-poor.                                                   often require a prior
Regarding employment effects, evidence suggests that tobacco tax                                                      analysis of potential
hikes are unlikely to provoke large changes in employment patterns.                                                   effects on local
Rather, reductions in tobacco employment occur mainly because                                                         employment, especially
the labor intensity of the sector is declining worldwide. Nevertheless,                                               in tobacco-growing
tobacco tax reforms often require a prior analysis of potential effects
                                                                                                                      countries, in order
on local employment, especially in tobacco-growing countries, in order
to address social and political-economy concerns.
                                                                                                                      to address social and
                                                                                                                      political-economy
                                                                                                                      concerns.
BACKGROUND
Despite the implementation of diverse tobacco control measures worldwide, which
have led to modest reductions in prevalence, the absolute numbers of smokers and
total tobacco production at global levels continue to increase slightly, with a worrisome
upward trend in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs).6 Regional disparities in the
consumption of cigarettes explain these patterns, with China’s consumption rising most,
Europe’s showing a mild decline, and Africa’s seeing a slight increase over recent decades.
In general, these trends reflect world population growth, aggressive promotion efforts by
the tobacco industry in many lower middle-income countries, and still insufficiently large
tobacco tax increases, especially in LMICs (Mendez, Alshangeety, and Warner 2013; Ng,
Freeman, and Fleming 2014).

As argued in Chapters 1 and 2, tobacco tax reform offers policy makers a powerful instrument
to address this challenge. The present chapter spells out additional “Why?,”“What?,” and “How?”
questions associated with tobacco taxation. In so doing, it provides an overview of key ideas
developed throughout the rest of this book. To start, extending the analysis in Chapter 1,
we further investigate the rationale for raising tobacco taxes (the “Why?”). Then we
discuss specific tax policy options countries can consider (the “What?”). Next, we explore
successful approaches to implementing tobacco tax increases (the “How?”). We also




6 Global cigarette consumption increased mildly, from 5.7 trillion cigarettes in 2000 to 5.8 trillion cigarettes in 2014 (The Tobacco Atlas
2016). Eleven countries raised cigarette taxes to more than 75 percent of retail prices between 2012 and 2014, while 106 of 183 countries
raised cigarette taxes by smaller percentages. In addition, since 2005, many countries have implemented at least one non-price
tobacco control measure, such as smoke-free legislation, a ban on tobacco advertisements, or enforcement of a health warning on
tobacco packages. See more detailed discussions in Chapters 1, 2, 4, and 8.



74 // Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How: Where Public Health and Economics Converge
explain what employment and social equity effects policy makers can anticipate when
they raise tobacco taxes, a key consideration for fair and inclusive policy.



ANALYTICAL APPROACH
The extensive literature on tobacco taxation distinguishes among three approaches: public
health, economic, and political economy. In our analysis, we harness all three, examining
tobacco taxation through the lens of integrated development.

When looking at the potential benefits associated with taxing tobacco, we first consider
the positive effects on health, as the public health approach suggests. By triggering a
drop in consumption, higher tobacco taxes will bring both direct health benefits (for
users) and indirect benefits (for the public health system). Next, using an economic
approach, we explore: (a) fiscal revenue generation (as we would with any other tax);
(b) technical efficiency effects, reflected in the economic choices made by actors who
participate in the global tobacco market, both at the production and consumption levels;
and (c) equity effects on the disposable income and welfare of households in different
socioeconomic groups. We also consider the reduction of negative spillover effects
(externalities) imposed by smoking on individuals and their families, as well as on society
as a whole, for example through labor productivity, family welfare, life expectancy,
quality-adjusted life years, and environmental effects. Finally, we consider tax administration
issues from the viewpoint of efficiency, as well as implementation feasibility from a
political-economy perspective.



THE “WHY?”:
ARGUMENTS FOR TOBACCO TAXATION

Public Health
Given the huge impact that tobacco taxes have been proven to have on rates of death
and disease, the rationale for tobacco taxation must be explained first and foremost in
terms of public health benefits (reduction in mortality and morbidity) and health care
cost savings. It is important to recall at the outset that, while the focus of our analysis is
specifically on taxation, tobacco taxes are most effective when they are part of a national
package of health regulations and policy actions aimed at reducing tobacco consumption,
such as tobacco-free laws, communications campaigns, and targeted medical advice.7

The price elasticity of demand for cigarettes is generally found to be highest in low-income
countries (-0.5), compared with -0.4 and -0.3 in middle- and high-income countries,



                                                                                                 75
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




respectively. This means the public-health and other benefits of tobacco tax hikes are
expected to be greatest in countries where larger shares of people earn low incomes
(see Chapters 1 and 6 in this volume).

It has been demonstrated analytically and empirically that increasing tobacco taxation is a
powerful means to reduce smoking prevalence and improve overall population health. At
the country level, with the help of tools such as microsimulation models, it is now possible
to forecast changes in the consumption of tobacco and thus the prevalence of smoking
in a particular country when tobacco taxes rise (Webber and Takano forthcoming). This,
in turn, allows us to determine the probable economic and health effects of these tax
measures for the society.

The UK Health Forum microsimulation model, for example (Webber and Takano forth-
coming), has shown that resetting Britain’s tobacco duty escalator from the current
rate of 2 percent to 5 percent above consumer price index (CPI) inflation could generate
“direct” healthcare cost avoidances in the United Kingdom of £10 million/year (almost
US$ 13 million/year) for stroke, £9 million/year (US$ 11.6 million/year) for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and £8 million/year (about US$ 10 million/year) for
lung cancer by 2035. The model suggests the tax increase would also generate an
additional £0.2 billion (nearly US$ 0.26 billion) in indirect savings on public health costs.8
In addition, the tremendous social benefit associated with avoiding premature deaths,
not measured in this model, would need to be taken into consideration.

This microsimulation tool has also been applied to Botswana, a country with very different
socioeconomic and health parameters, where the exercise also showed that raising tobacco
taxes would yield substantial public health benefits. Assuming a price elasticity of demand
of -0.6, researchers found that a 4 Botswana pula (BWP) (US$ 0.39) per pack tax increase in
the tobacco levy would result in a 10 percent reduction in Botswana’s smoking rate. This in
turn would impact the incidence of coronary heart disease, COPD, lung cancer, and stroke,
resulting in an estimated 129 million BWP (about US$ 12.5 million) in health care costs
avoided in 2030 alone, relative to baseline. An 8 BWP per pack tax increase would avoid
some 202 million BWP (about US$ 19.5 million) in health care costs annually by 2030.9 As in
the case of the United Kingdom, these estimates do not include a quantification of the
benefits associated with the number of lives that would be saved.

Since quitting smoking not only affects individual smokers but also those around them,
passive smoking — that is, exposure to secondhand smoke — would also be reduced as


7 Much more progress has been made in the other areas of the MPOWER framework worldwide.
8 The exact amounts, in terms of health benefits and fiscal revenues, would depend on the price elasticity used for the simulations,
which varies per country and income group.
9 No healthcare cost data by disease were available for Botswana at the time of analysis, so proxy cost data from South Africa were
used (Webber and Takano forthcoming).



76 // Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How: Where Public Health and Economics Converge
a result of higher tobacco taxes. More importantly, parents who smoke increase the
chances that their children will smoke.10 Microsimulation models can also measure the
additional health benefits likely to be achieved by reducing cardiovascular disease, lung
cancer, and COPD deaths linked to second-hand smoke.


Labor Productivity and Human Capital
Compared to the public health implications, the negative links between tobacco and labor
market outcomes have been much less studied. They include primary, secondary, and
tertiary effects on both producers (farmers) and users (smokers) of tobacco. As documented
in Chapter 7 in this volume, the overall impact of reducing tobacco consumption on
workers’ productivity and human capital accumulation can be substantially positive,
providing additional arguments for aggressive tobacco taxation.

It is easy to grasp some of the primary pathways by which tobacco use reduces labor
productivity. For example, nicotine addiction can reduce the actual length of time workers
spend effectively focused on their tasks in the course of the workday, due to smoking
breaks and “presenteesim.” Emerging research has clarified the remarkable magnitude of
economic losses involved in some contexts.

Secondary effects occur as a result of deteriorating health, which can lead to lower
educational attainments for students (early smokers) and negative professional development
and career progression in the case of workers. Both of these factors negatively affect the
productivity of the labor force and human capital formation in a country.

Tertiary effects result from premature deaths among both tobacco farmers and smokers,
causing lower overall labor productivity and negatively impacting countries’ GDP (Ross
et al. 2009a; Ross et al. 2009b).

The negative link between tobacco production and the health of farmers, which also
affects labor markets, has attracted little attention, despite its severity. This important
topic is explored by Hu and colleagues in this volume (see Chapter 8). Tobacco growing
affects farmers’ health primarily through the absorption of nicotine. During cultivation and
harvesting periods, tobacco farmers’ blood nicotine levels can reach those found in active
smokers (Schmitt et al. 2007). Switching to other crops would reduce the incidence of
so-called “green tobacco sickness” (GTS) — a health problem exclusively related to tobacco
growing and occurring as a consequence of nicotine absorption through skin exposure
to tobacco leaves.

Tobacco farmers also face substantial toxic exposures through the intensive application of
the pesticides, fertilizers, and chemical sprays that are required to improve the yield of the


10 See e.g. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2632764/



                                                                                              77
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




tobacco leaf crop and its nicotine concentration. Farmers are often unaware of the health
risks associated with these substances and use them without protection (Lecours et al.
2012). Given the demonstrated negative health effects of tobacco farming, under the
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC), the 180 Parties are
obligated to find alternate livelihoods for tobacco farmers. However, many farmers,
including children and adolescents, continue to work in tobacco fields without any
protection, both in developed and developing countries.11


Fiscal Revenue Generation
Although the primary reason to increase tobacco taxes is to improve health at the indi-
vidual, family, and society levels, increased revenue from tobacco taxes is often cited as
an additional argument to engage policy makers in the reforms. In the short run, higher
tobacco tax revenues are expected to stem directly from increased excise tax rates, which
are generally accepted as the best instrument to tax tobacco. In the medium to long
term, additional tax revenues may be associated with increased productivity and income,
as well as higher life expectancy, even if tobacco tax revenues per se will in the longer
run gradually decline as lower consumption shrinks the tobacco tax base.

In an example from a high-income country, the United States significantly raised its fed-
eral excise taxes on cigarettes in 2009, from $0.39 to $1.01 per pack, which increased retail
prices by 22 percent within a couple of months and reduced consumption of cigarettes
by 11.1 percent. Despite reduced consumption, federal tobacco tax revenues surged by
129 percent in the year following the reform (from $6.8 billion in FY 2009 to $15.5 billion
in FY 2010).

In 2014, WHO estimated that cigarette excise taxes in developing countries generated a
total of US$ 136 billion in annual excise tax revenue. Other taxes on cigarettes — such as
value added taxes (VAT), as well as applicable import duties and surcharges — bring the
total amount of tax revenue from cigarettes to US$ 187 billion, representing 2.88 percent
of general government revenue (GGR), on average, in developing countries.

Raising cigarette excise by US$ 0.25 per pack in all developing countries, as per the WHO
global estimate, would generate an extra US$ 41 billion in excise revenue from cigarettes in
LMICs, representing an increase of 30 percent from the 2014 baseline.12 Total tax revenues
in these countries would increase by US$ 45 billion, or 24 percent, from 2014 levels.
Low-income countries could experience the greatest relative tax revenue increases, with
total tax revenues expanding by 38 percent.


11 Global Center for Good Governance in Tobacco Control (GGTC) — http://seatca.org/dmdocuments/Pull%20Out%20Delhi%20Day%204.pdf
and http://ggtc.world/index.php/2016/11/02/news/
12 See Chapter 4 in this volume, and compare Furman (2016), where a high elasticity of about -.5 was found, indicating that relatively
big increases would have a disproportionately high effect on consumption.



78 // Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How: Where Public Health and Economics Converge
Experience from multiple developing countries shows that, even though tobacco
consumption decreases as a reaction to the higher price triggered by the tax, the percentage
increase in excise tax revenue per unit is greater than the percentage decrease in tobacco
consumption. This is because the negative effect of shrinking the tax base is largely com-
pensated by the tax rate increase. However, these revenue effects will be determined
by the specific percentage increase in the tobacco tax, as well as by income and price
elasticities and overall consumption levels in the countries under consideration.

The trend in revenues generated over time will further depend on the rates and schedule
of the tax increases (gradual and marginal versus a combination of gradual and sharp
increases), as well as the medium- and long-term price elasticities of smokers. It is
expected that, in the medium to long run, as people reduce smoking and levels of
addiction decrease, the elasticities would go upwards. And as the tax base gradually
erodes, fiscal revenues are expected to decline, unless additional tax rate increases
continue to be introduced.

A declining percentage of smokers, solely due to the full range of tobacco control programs,
together with rising long-run price elasticities, could lead to declines in revenues in the
long run.13 Country experience indicating at what point and how this occurs, and to what
extent further raising of tax rates can alter the effects, does not exist yet.

Higher income countries have been waging, if to varying extents, major anti-tobacco pro-
grams, including being effective in banning smoking in public places and active public
educational efforts to change norms on smoking. As a consequence, we may observe
declines in consumption which cannot be attributed to changes in either income or price
elasticities.

Regarding income elasticities, although tobacco control measures may also translate into
a drop in consumption unrelated to income variation, it has been demonstrated that
income increases do have a direct and measurable offsetting effect on key longer run
determinants of smoking, particularly education. This effect is so strong that the correlation
of smoking prevalence with per capita income levels (but not changes) is negative and
highly significant. So, long-run income elasticities are expected to be higher than short-run
elasticities, even though both will vary by country.

The countries of the European Union provide an interesting illustration of these effects. In
fifteen higher-income EU countries, tobacco excise tax revenue collection decreased by
0.07 percentage points, on average, between 2002 and 2012, while over the same period,
across all 28 EU member countries, the average tobacco tax-to-GDP ratio increased by
0.16 percentage points (Schratzenstaller 2015). These results are likely the consequence


13 While good data on short-term price elasticities are available, not enough information exists on either the long-run effect of other
key determinants or the long-run price elasticity (holding other determinants constant or not).



                                                                                                                                     79
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




of several effects associated with the tobacco control policies applied in the region, and
not just a response to tax increases. They can only be explained on a country-by-country
basis. In the higher-income core EU countries, consumption has been significantly
discouraged, preventing further gains in tobacco tax revenues. However, in newer EU
member states with lower per capita income (the countries which were part of the
EU’s Eastern enlargement in 2004 and 2007), this crossover threshold has not yet been
reached. In these countries, tobacco tax increases, as part of tax harmonization with the
EU, are still triggering gains in tax revenues. The differences between the two country
groups reflect income-level gaps, as well as different stages of the epidemic and the
implementation of tobacco control policies, likely affecting prices and elasticities.

In terms of excise tax revenue volatility over time, different types of taxes respond
differently to economic up- and downturns. While capital gains taxes can be very vola-
tile due to the fluctuations of the stock market, consumption taxes can be fairly stable,
depending on the type of good. The volatility of tobacco excise revenue collection tends
to be lower than for other taxes, primarily because of the addictive nature of cigarette
consumption, as well as the relatively low price elasticity in the short term.

However, volatility also depends on the income elasticity of cigarette consumption, which
can vary significantly across countries, even of similar income (for example, 0.3 in the
United Kingdom, and 1.3 in Canada) and across income groups,14 as discussed in detail
in Chapter 5.

The income elasticity of tobacco consumption should be reviewed carefully (and not
simply taken as a given) when estimating the effect on revenues of a tobacco excise tax
rate increase at a particular moment in time. This is because income elasticity itself can
be affected by other contextual variables. Even in countries where tobacco consumption
has traditionally been income inelastic, consumption may drop under the impact of other
factors. An example is Spain, where excise tax revenues declined by 5.7 percent during
the recent financial crisis, as the levels of disposable incomes dropped, while tobacco
control regulations were also being more strictly enforced, contributing to reductions in
tobacco consumption.

Income elasticities are usually downward when there is full information on the hazards
of smoking and strong tobacco policies are in place. For example, in the United States,
smoking prevalence is much higher in lower-income groups which tend to be less well
informed about the health risks of smoking. In many LMICs, such as Mexico, income
elasticity remains high due to the lack of response to these information signals to drive


14 It is expected to be higher in low-income countries and socioeconomic groups.




80 // Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How: Where Public Health and Economics Converge
consumption down. Since rising incomes have a direct effect on education, over time
they reduce smoking by changing individual decisions directly and, as in the United
States and United Kingdom, by changing group norms.

In addition to excise tax revenues, policy makers should also consider the possible impact
of higher tobacco taxes on overall revenue collection through other, non-tobacco taxes
in the system. As higher tobacco taxes may reduce smoking, the consumption of other
goods is likely to increase, since former smokers will now have more disposable income
which they may allocate to other goods. As a result, revenues from VAT, corporate income
taxes (CIT), and personal income taxes (PIT) may rise in the medium to long term.15

Although VAT revenue collection is likely to be reduced as a result of lower tobacco
consumption, it will increase when consumers’ spending is reallocated to a basket of
other types of goods. The net effect on overall VAT collection will depend on the degree
of substitution between tobacco and that basket, as well as the VAT rates applied to them,
although tobacco tax rates tend to be higher than those for other products in countries
with variable VAT rates. Further, as higher consumption of other goods triggers a supply
response, higher collection of CIT may also follow as a result of additional profits in
those sectors.16 In addition, these effects should result in increased employment in other
industries offering better salaries than tobacco and, consequently, in higher PIT collection.
This effect would also be enhanced in the medium term by productivity gains among
workers who themselves quit smoking and enjoy better health and career prospects as
a result, and by reducing catastrophic declines in income when primary income earners
become incapacitated or die prematurely.

In terms of indirect revenue impacts, policy makers may wish to consider that tobacco
tax increases worldwide could also bring about greater harmonization in tobacco control
policies and help reduce illicit trade motivated by tobacco tax rate differentials regionally
and globally (See Chapter 9). This would also help from the point of view of political
economy, as countries see what their neighbors and countries in other regions are doing,
all the more so given the existing commitments agreed under the Framework Convention
on Tobacco Control.


Environmental Effects
Higher tobacco taxes are predicted to have a positive long-term impact on the environment.
This is because these taxes will cut tobacco consumption and ultimately contribute to



15 Although no estimates exist yet to quantify these effects at a country level, it is expected that VAT revenues would rise as the con-
sumption of other good increases. CIT revenue would also rise as business and profits expand in companies supplying those goods.
PIT revenue increases would be associated with higher labor productivity.
16 These effects will be of course specific to each country and will be determined by the taxation regimes and rates applied to those
goods.



                                                                                                                                      81
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




scaling back tobacco production (although this effect will not be observable for some
time). Several environmentally destructive practices are prevalent in the tobacco industry,
though not unique to it. For example, tobacco farming involves intensive fuel consumption
to dry tobacco on the farm. In addition, the heavy nutrients required
for tobacco cultivation, including fertilizers to develop plants’ nicotine
                                                                                                            Any reduction in global
content, alter the quality of the soil and prevent usage of the land
for other crops for several years. Switching to other crops will
                                                                                                            tobacco trade would be
be beneficial for soil quality and overall agricultural diversity. The                                      gradual and accompanied
transition away from tobacco will also reduce forest depletion in                                           by a shift in consumers’
some settings, as tobacco farmers often cut down trees to use as                                            spending to other goods.
fuel for curing tobacco leaf.

Lecours et al. (2012) summarize 45 reports from low- and medium-income countries
discussing agricultural practices, including tobacco production, and their two major
environmental consequences: ecosystem disruptions and soil degradation. The researchers
find, for example, that the use of chemical fertilizers in tobacco farming decreases soil
fertility more rapidly than with other crops, since tobacco absorbs relatively more
nutrients. The authors also summarize evidence on the effects of tobacco farming on
deforestation, global ecosystem disruptions, and food insecurity.



THE “WHAT?”: NUTS AND BOLTS
OF TOBACCO TAXATION
Most countries tax tobacco products by levying consumption taxes (general sales taxes or
VAT), duties on imports, excises, and/or other special taxes. Some also tax the value of the
tobacco leaf crop produced or imported. 	

Although all these taxes aim at increasing tobacco product prices to trigger a reduction in
consumption,17 excise taxes are considered most effective in achieving the desired public
health objectives and other related benefits. This is because excise taxes apply uniquely to
tobacco products, therefore raising their relative prices vis-à-vis other goods and services.
Such measures are fully justified based on the negative effects of tobacco consumption
on public health, as opposed, for example, to basic consumption goods. Tobacco is
the only mass-market consumer product that kills when used as directed, let alone the
fact that it kills about half of its long-term consumers, and those affected lose on average
about 20 years of life. This explains why excise taxes are used in 90 percent of the countries
that tax tobacco and, in most of them, account for a larger share of tobacco product
prices than any other taxes.


17 In addition to the revenue generation and efficiency effects associated with these taxes, as mentioned before.



82 // Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How: Where Public Health and Economics Converge
There are two types of excise tobacco taxes:

   1.	 Specific excise taxes that can be applied either per cigarette (stick or pack) or by
       cigarette weight
   2.	 Ad valorem excise taxes that are based on value and can be applied either at the
      producer or at the consumer level and, in the latter case, either on wholesale or
      on retail sales.

Most countries also apply a general sales tax or VAT on consumption at the retail level. In
addition, importer countries apply an import duty either per cigarette, by weight, or on
the declared CIF value. While import duties on cigarettes vary by country, those imposing
high rates do so either to protect their domestic production (e.g., Egypt, Guyana, Jordan,
Mexico), or to collect more revenues (especially if the domestic production is very small,
as is the case in the Gulf Council Countries).

In addition, some countries impose additional taxes on the consumption of tobacco
products, whose proceeds are often earmarked to finance specific programs. Examples
include Thailand (2 percent surcharge tax on tobacco) and Indonesia (10 percent of the
value of the excise tax on tobacco products).



THE “HOW?”: OPTIONS FOR POLICY MAKING
AND IMPLEMENTATION
As with any other policy instruments aimed at taxing “bads” and creating “goods,” the
basic idea of taxing tobacco seems simple and appealing. However, designing and
implementing effective tobacco taxes can turn out to be surprisingly complex. The chal-
lenge is to determine the best total tax burden and tax instruments to levy on tobacco
products for a particular country at a particular moment, as well as the strategy to maintain
or increase this tax burden in line with per capita GDP growth rates, thus reducing
cigarette affordability over time.

Tobacco excise tax structures can be simple or complex, when different taxes and tax
rates are applied based on product differences. Large price gaps between brands create
opportunities for consumers to switch to cheaper brands, so reducing health and fiscal
benefits, while also opening the door to tax avoidance and evasion.

As discussed, there are two major types of tobacco excise tax regimes, namely specific
and ad valorem, but countries also employ different combinations of these two types.
Internationally, there has been a movement toward the specific system, as pure ad
valorem systems are losing favor among many countries. Between 2008 and 2012, the
proportion of countries using pure specific tax remained steady at around 30 percent,



                                                                                              83
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




while the proportion of those using pure ad valorem tax diminished from 33 to 27 percent
(WHO 2009; WHO 2013). As specific and ad valorem systems have complementary
advantages, the proportion of countries using a mixture of both systems has also grown,
from 26 in 2008 to 32 percent in 2012.

Both specific and ad valorem systems have strengths and flaws. Based on international
experience and the empirical literature (WHO 2011), one can generally say that:

    •	 Specific tax systems impose lower risk of non-compliance and lower administrative
        burdens, since they require only the quantity of tobacco products to be determined.
        On the other hand, an ad valorem system is more difficult to administer and enforce,
        requiring more sophisticated tax administration.
    •	 Specific systems require regular adjustments of tariffs to avoid erosion of the value
        of excise revenues by inflation.
    •	 Ad valorem taxes reduce the incentive to raise consumer prices, because the tax due
        is calculated based on that price (i.e., multiplier effect). On the contrary, specific
        taxes are applied to quantity volumes, so they do not influence price setting.
    •	 Ad valorem excise taxes create disincentives to quality improvements that would
        increase the value of the product and therefore the tax amount due. On the other
        hand, specific excise taxes systems do not affect the “quality” of tobacco products.

With these factors in mind, in terms of their contribution to public health and revenue
mobilization objectives, specific excise tax systems are preferable to ad valorem taxes
overall. It is vital, however, that specific excise taxes be applied using a uniform tax rate
per cigarette, rather than having “tiers” according to cigarette price or other differences.
Differential excises would encourage “downward substitution” in favor of cheaper cigarettes,
which diminishes the potential health and revenue effects of tobacco tax increases. Countries
that currently have several tax tiers should eliminate them as rapidly as possible.18

Despite that fact that specific taxes are demonstrated to be technically superior, many
countries have chosen to maintain a combination of specific and ad valorem taxes, and/
or replace ad valorem taxes by specific ones gradually over time. This is due mainly to
political-economy factors and the perception (often unjustified) that tax revenues will
drop when ad valorem taxes are totally replaced. Given the need to continuously adjust
specific tax rates as the levels of affordability increase (expected in developing countries),
any strategy for adopting them should be accompanied by a framework/instrument to
allow for annual increases over time (such as the United Kingdom’s tobacco duty escalator).

Internationally, tobacco tax systems differ significantly in terms of their tax structures.
They range from the simplest models, which apply a single tariff (e.g., Norway and the


18  A specific tax with a unified rate eliminates the difference between shorter/cheaper cigarettes versus longer/expensive ones.



84 // Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How: Where Public Health and Economics Converge
United States), to very complex systems, such as that in Indonesia, which includes 12 tax
tiers, or India, with 11 tax tiers. The Philippines reformed its tobacco tax regime in 2013 by
moving from a four-tiered ad valorem system to a two-tiered specific system, which will
be further reduced to a single tier in 2017. Multi-tiered, specific systems are almost exclu-
sively found in Asian and Pacific countries, where the traditional local tobacco production
is usually protected.

As observed in a recent IMF report (Petit and Nagy 2016), from a revenue-raising perspective,
the level of excises needs to be determined within the overall revenue policy of a country,
taking into account all costs associated with economic distortions, administration, and
redistribution. Excise levels must also be gauged in comparison with other taxes (such as
the VAT). The revenue potential of the excise is determined by the current size of the
market (price and quantity) and the affordability of tobacco products.

WHO recommends that the tobacco tax be set at a rate to account for “at least” 75 percent of
the retail price in order for the tax to have a significant public health impact (WHO 2011).
This recommendation is based on the notion that such rates would lead to increases in
the retail price large enough to trigger significant reductions in cigarette consumption.
This recommendation reflects the experience of countries that have already undertaken
tobacco tax reforms, and it is meant to prevent the spread of the tobacco epidemic in
developing countries where the associated health risks and costs are highest.

This recommended rate, however, represents only a threshold at which the tax policy
is likely going to exert a significant enough impact on public health outcomes. The
exact magnitude of excise tax rate increases, as well as their sequence, should be
determined on a country-by-country basis, taking into account each country’s health
and tobacco-market profile, the composition of the smoking population, and the
income and price elasticities. Under any scenario, the fiscal revenues generated with such
increases should always be considered as a positive externality and not the main objective
leading the sequence of the reform.

This WHO recommendation does not mean that, in countries where tobacco excise tax
rates have already reached the 75 percent level, no further tax rate increases or policy
actions will be needed. In fact, some governments may well decide to continue increasing
the tax rates beyond 75 percent of the retail price in order to trigger further reductions in
smoking, keep up with affordability levels, and/or to align their policies with those of
neighboring countries.

Over time, tax rates should be increased as needed in order to progressively reduce the
affordability of tobacco as per capita income gradually increases in a particular country.
Taxes on tobacco should be sufficiently high to increase real prices of tobacco faster than
real income growth. Or, from a different perspective, in order to reduce the affordability



                                                                                                85
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




of cigarettes in a country, tobacco prices will need to increase by more than the real per
capita GDP growth rate (adjusted for inflation). The pace at which such increases are
introduced depends on the market structure and political-economy considerations but
should be significant, in order to affect both current affordability and expectations of
future affordability. Country evidence indicates that big increases have disproportionately
big positive effects on public health, due to price shock and impact on expectations
                                                                                     -
(Chaloupka and Jha 1999). Large increases may also be more desirable from a political­
economy standpoint, as long as future affordability is also taken into consideration.



TOBACCO TAXATION EFFECTS:
WHAT TO EXPECT

Employment Effects
Based on current price and production trends worldwide, the global supply of tobacco is
not expected to decrease sharply in the immediate term as a result of higher tobacco taxes
(see Chapters 7 and 8).19 However, it is expected that higher taxation in many countries will
eventually affect the global tobacco leaf market by increasing consumption prices and
lowering worldwide demand, which could ultimately affect tobacco leaf production
and tobacco-related jobs at the farming, manufacturing, and distribution stages of the
supply chain.

At the individual country level, as tobacco consumption declines, consumers’ resources
previously allocated to smoking would result in some combination of increase in savings
and purchases of other goods/services, therefore stimulating other markets (Barber et al.
2008). Falling employment in the tobacco sector would then be offset by jobs created
in other sectors. The net effect on jobs in any particular country would depend on: the
magnitude of the change in the total demand for tobacco products; the production and
supply response; substitute products’ labor intensiveness relative to tobacco; and the
flexibility of workers to transition to non-tobacco sectors.

Tobacco accounts for a very small share of employment in most countries. And it is
increasingly low in labor intensity, due primarily to automation and technological
improvements rather than to increases in taxation. Nevertheless, any potential loss of
tobacco-related employment should be carefully analyzed as part of tobacco tax reforms.
A plan should be prepared to address issues of transition throughout the tobacco value
chain. Sound analysis and transition arrangements are all the more important politically,



19 Global supply of tobacco leaf is slightly increasing, a trend led by China, followed by Brazil, India, and lower-income countries.
Taking a longer chronological perspective, however, we note that global supply now stands at a level similar to that of the 1980s.



86 // Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How: Where Public Health and Economics Converge
since the tobacco industry exaggerates the threat of employment losses in order to argue
against raising tobacco taxes.

Regarding the agricultural production stage of the supply chain, a country’s specific role
in the global tobacco trade must be considered in order to assess the likely impacts of a
tax hike. For a tobacco exporter, changes in local consumption as a result of taxes will be
less important, if external demand remains stable or increases. The worldwide demand for
tobacco products would need to decline in order to trigger noticeable changes at the country
supply level for an exporting country. In addition, in exporting countries, governments may
continue to support the tobacco market, as they still see it as a source of foreign exchange.
(See for example Poland, South Korea, and Turkey. This is not a major issue in Africa and
Latin America.) 20

On the other hand, a tobacco tax increase is expected to negatively impact farmers’
livelihoods in countries like China and Indonesia, where a large majority of the tobacco
leaf produced is used for the domestic manufacture and consumption of cigarettes. In
those countries, given the many other crops that can offer farmers higher yields and no
risk of “green tobacco sickness,” a smooth transition to alternative crops could be facilitated
by the government, for example through agricultural extension, irrigation, and diver-
sification plans aimed at ensuring adequate income to farmers during their transition out
of tobacco production.

In reality, few farms grow only tobacco, and case studies (for example, in China, Indonesia,
Kenya, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe) have shown that many other crops, crop combinations,
farming systems, and livelihood strategies offer better opportunities and higher yields
for farmers than tobacco (see Chapter 8). However, a number of institutional, economic,
financial, and technical barriers may prevent farmers from giving up tobacco production.
Particular obstacles arise from the oligopolistic global market structure and the close
relationship that exists in many settings between the tobacco industry and political
institutions. Large tobacco companies discourage farmers from pursuing non-tobacco
crop options by providing farmers with multiple forms of “support” for tobacco production,
including: free tobacco inputs, guaranteed product purchase, and loans. As farmers come to
depend on these arrangements, many effectively become trapped in tobacco production.

Finally, the ability of the tobacco industry (with just four companies dominating the world
market) to shift tobacco production around globally contributes to keeping the industry’s
operations profitable, especially in lower-income countries with undiversified economies,
which have become its preferred target. Here well-designed diversification plans placed
within broader rural development programs could yield the desired results and help
reduce transition costs for poor farmers seeking to move out of tobacco.


20 Note, however, that Indonesia and China count respectively for 3.5 percent and 3 percent of total tobacco cigarette exports.



                                                                                                                                  87
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




At the global level, in light of recent changes in the global tobacco market, the potential
effects of tobacco taxation on net employment should not be overestimated. Improve-
ments in farming techniques have made tobacco farming much less labor-intensive than
previously, so that already many fewer farmers are engaged in tobacco cultivation than
in earlier times (Capehart 2004). The industry’s preference for certain types of tobacco
leaves has also resulted in the increasing concentration of tobacco leaf production in a few
countries (among them Brazil, China, India, and Zimbabwe), while causing a sharp decline
or elimination of tobacco farming jobs elsewhere. In addition,
global tobacco leaf export prices are volatile and in a long-term
downward trend,21 discouraging tobacco farmers, many of                                                 At the global level, in light
whom are already switching to other crops (Chapters 7 and 8).22                                         of recent changes in the
With respect to manufacturing jobs, tobacco leaf drying and                                             global tobacco market,
warehousing are in general not very labor intensive, thus adding                                        the potential effects of
only an insignificant number of jobs to any economy (IARC 2011).                                        tobacco taxation on net
The share of tobacco manufacturing in employment worldwide
                                                                                                        employment should not
has declined over time due to mechanization, automation, and
                                                                                                        be overestimated.
concentration of the production process (Allen 1993; van Liemt
2001). Paradoxically, factories have been closing in countries
with relatively low tobacco taxes (Kyrgyzstan) and manufacturing has been concentrating
in countries with higher tobacco taxes and higher prices, like the Russian Federation,
South Africa, Nigeria, and Kenya. This suggests that factors like the size of markets and
national industrial policies, rather than tax levels, drive decisions on location of tobacco
manufacturing jobs., although corporate income, import duties and sales taxes may
also play a secondary role as an additional incentive or disincentive.

Finally, regarding the third stage of the supply chain, employment at the distribution
level, research has demonstrated that higher cigarette taxes do not significantly affect
convenience stores or employment in the retail sector, because these products typically
represent a small share of their turnover (Huang and Chaloupka 2013). Nevertheless,
possible consequences of higher tobacco taxes for retail stores should be analyzed
ex-ante in order to assess employment and other impacts, such as on street sellers of
individual cigarettes, and find solutions. Otherwise, political-economy obstacles using
employment loss arguments could block the way to reforms.

In sum, a constellation of factors augur against large, abrupt changes in employment
patterns due to tobacco tax hikes. The global tobacco market is driven by an oligopolistic
structure with four big companies determining tobacco leaf farming prices and production


21 They dropped by more than half in real terms between 1980 and 2006 (Yurekli 2012).
22 It is worth highlighting that these three factors that are causing a drop in tobacco farming worldwide are totally unrelated to
taxation.



88 // Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How: Where Public Health and Economics Converge
locations, and facilitating inputs to farmers. Meanwhile, the whole tobacco supply chain is
becoming less labor intensive due to technological improvements. And money not spent
on tobacco will be spent, and create employment, elsewhere. Against this background,
employment in the tobacco market worldwide can be expected to show only a modest
response as countries raise tobacco taxes.

In countries where production is currently concentrated, employment losses in the
tobacco sector as a reaction to lower demand could be accompanied by rural develop-
ment programs aimed at agricultural diversification and a reduction of transition costs
to farmers.23 The net employment in any given economy will depend on the pace of
reduction in domestic demand, how quickly and fully the country’s consumers switch
their spending to non-tobacco products, and on the labor market’s flexibility to add
jobs in alternative sectors.


Equity Effects
Several studies support an association between higher socio-economic status (measured
in terms of individual/household income or expenditure levels, or educational attainment)
and lower probability of smoking (see Chapter 6).

Based on the results of the Demographic and Health Surveys from 52 countries, there is
a smoking prevalence wealth gradient. The gradient appears to be more pronounced in
low- and lower-middle income countries, where the smoking prevalence among the
poorest quintile is 1.8 and 1.4 times, respectively, higher than the prevalence among
the wealthiest quintile.

The likely explanation is that as incomes increase, cigarettes become more affordable to
the poor, while those in higher income groups have higher education and so are more aware
of, and more likely to act on, the potential risks associated with smoking, and therefore quit.

Not only do people with low incomes generally smoke more than wealthier people
(Bobak et al. 2000), the price elasticity is also higher for the poor (Barkat et al. 2012).
Therefore, poor smokers are likely to garner more health benefits than rich smokers
when tobacco taxes increase.

Evidence from high-income countries such as France, the United Kingdom, and the United
States shows us that substantially increasing tobacco taxes leads to a reduction in smoking
prevalence and smoking-related diseases and deaths. These countries have had increasingly
strong tobacco control programs for a longer period and have shown the strongest results.
But there is increasing evidence from LMICs. Evidence in countries at all income levels shows




23 For example, such a gradual transition was implemented in North Carolina, USA, with government support.



                                                                                                             89
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




that the poor are more susceptible to tobacco price changes, therefore, they ultimately
benefit most from mortality and morbidity reductions associated with reduced smoking.

The existing literature suggests that, in response to an increase in prices for tobacco
items, demand decreases relatively more in developing countries (with higher price
elasticity of consumption response), although this varies by country. Relatively poorer
households adjust their consumption relatively more than richer households, with an
estimated elasticity generally in the range of 0.8 versus 0.4, respectively. This higher
elasticity reflects the fact that poor people have a stronger motivation to reduce their
addiction because of their straightened financial circumstances. This argument also
applies to the young — the next generation of addicts who would fall sick and die
prematurely from tobacco — who also have limited disposable income, even if they
may have good future earnings prospects.

The demographics of the smoking population across income groups and income levels,
as well as the difference in elasticities, must be taken into consideration when analyzing
who will ultimately bear the burden of higher tobacco tax rates. In any given country,
the equity effects will be determined by the consumption pattern across different
socioeconomic groups before the reform, the proposed changes in the tax base and
the tax rate, and the elasticity of behavior change as a consequence of the reform.

The standard fiscal incidence analysis, which defines regressivity and progressivity in terms
of changes in the disposable income of different socioeconomic groups as a consequence
of any fiscal reform, is not adequate to analyze the equity effects of tobacco taxes. This is
because such taxes affect not only disposable income but also the ability to earn income,
as well as individual and household welfare. The analysis must incorporate behavioral
adjustments, as well as economic gains and dynamic considerations that affect welfare in
the medium term. Higher productivity of workers and better health are expected to affect
households most strongly at the bottom of the welfare distribution, where labor and
health are critical assets for survival (as opposed to savings or wealth).

Since the poor have less disposable income to waste (Mullainathan and Shafir 2009), by
encouraging individuals to quit smoking, or preventing them from starting in the first
place, higher taxes can actually raise welfare among the poor, who are at higher risk of
smoking (based on the link between socioeconomic status and probability of smoking),
relative to the rich. In other words, the poor are likely to get a disproportionately high
share of the benefit associated with higher tobacco tax rates (Chapter 6).

Moreover, smoking cessation would decrease expenditures on treatment for tobacco-­
related diseases. By encouraging smokers to quit or averting the initiation of tobacco
use, taxes can bring financial risk protection to households by reducing such medical
expenditures, as well as reducing the related risk of catastrophic effects on family finances



90 // Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How: Where Public Health and Economics Converge
from increased health expenditures and reduced earnings (Verguet et al. 2015). Again, these
gains are expected to be relatively higher for poor households and are likely to trigger
additional positive family benefits, especially when the smoker is the main breadwinner.

In sum, a dynamic approach is needed to analyze the equity effects of tobacco taxes.
Described in detail in Chapter 6, such an approach must balance short-term reductions
in disposable income (when paying a higher tax before reducing smoking consumption)
against medium- and long-term gains in both disposable income and welfare as a result
of: (a) averted preventable illness and premature deaths ; (b) averted out-of-pocket
expenditures linked to tobacco-related diseases; and (c) averted impoverishment that
would have come as a result of high health care expenditures and potentially lower
salary earnings due to tobacco use.




                                                                                         91
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




REFERENCES
Allen RC.1993. “The false dilemma: the impact of tobacco control policies on employment in Canada.”
Ottawa, Ontario: National Campaign for Action on Tobacco.

Barber S, Adioetomo SM, Ahsan A, Setyonaluri D. 2008. Tobacco Economics in Indonesia. Paris: International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

Barkat A, Chowdhury AU, Nargis N, Rahman M, Khan MS, Kumar A. 2012. The economics of tobacco and
tobacco taxation in Bangladesh. Paris: International Union against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

Bobak M, Jha P, Nguyen S, Jarvis M, and Mundial B. 2000. “Poverty and smoking.” In Tobacco control in
developing countries, edited by P. Jha and F.J. Chaloupka, 41–61. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Capehart T. 2004. Trends in U.S. Tobacco Farming. Economic Outlook Report. United States Department of
Agriculture. https://www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/publications/39463/48597_tbs25702.pdf?v=42087

Huang J and Chaloupka FJ. 2013. “The economic impact of state cigarette taxes and smoke-free air policies
on convenience stores.” Tobacco Control 22: 91–96.

IARC. 2011. Effectiveness of Tax and Price Policies for Tobacco Control. Volume 14, IARC Handbooks.

Lecours N, Almeida GE, Abdallah JM, Novotny TE. 2012. “Environmental health impacts of tobacco farming:
a review of the literature.” Tobacco Control 21(2): 191–6.

Mendez D, Alshangeety O, Warner KE. 2013. “The Potential Impact of Smoking Control Policies on Future
Global Smoking Trends.” Tobacco Control 22 (1): 46–51.

Mullainathan S, Shafir E. 2009. “Savings policy and decision-making in low-income households.” In Insufficient
funds: Savings, assets, credit, and banking among low-income households, edited by Barr Michael and Blank
Rebecca, 121–145. Russell Sage Foundation Press.

Ng M, Freeman M, Fleming T, et al. 2014. “Smoking Preference and Cigarette Consumption in 187 Countries.”
JAMA 711 (2): 183–212.

Petit P, Nagy J. 2016. “How to design and enforce tobacco excises?” How-to notes. Fiscal Affairs Department,
International Monetary Fund, October 2016.

Ross H, Shariff S, and Gilmore A. 2009a. Economics of Tobacco Taxation in Russia. Paris: International Union
Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

Ross H, Shariff S, and Gilmore A. 2009b. Economics of Tobacco Taxation in Ukraine. Paris: International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

Schmitt NM, Schmitt J, Kouimintzis DJ, et al. 2007. “Health Risks in Tobacco Farm Workers: A Review of the
Literature.” J Public Health 15: 255. doi:10.1007/s10389-007-0122-4

Schratzenstaller M. 2015. “Contribution of the Public Sector to Sustainability.” Presentation at the 12th
Euroframe Conference “Challenges for Europe 2050.” Vienna, June 12, 2015. http://www.foreurope.eu/
fileadmin/activities/WfE_at_Conferences/Euroframe_2015/Euroframe_Policy_Panel_Schratzenstaller.pdf

The Tobacco Atlas (www.tobaccoatlas.org/cigarette.use)

Verguet S, Gauvreau CL, Mishra S, MacLennan M, Murphy SM, Brouwer ED, et al. 2015. “The consequences
of tobacco tax on household health and finances in rich and poor smokers in China: an extended
cost-effectiveness analysis.” The Lancet Global Health 3(4): e206-e216.




92 // Raising Tobacco Taxes: Why, What, and How: Where Public Health and Economics Converge
Webber L and Takano AK. Forthcoming. “Medium- and Long-Term Effects of Tobacco Taxation on
Non-Communicable Diseases and Health Expenditures: Results from Microsimulation Modeling.” World
Bank Tobacco Policy Research Paper. Washington, DC: World Bank.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2009. WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2009: Implementing
Smoke-Free Environments. Geneva: WHO.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2011. Technical Manual for Tobacco Tax Administration. Geneva: WHO.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2013. WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2013. Geneva: WHO.

Yurekli AA. 2012. Tobacco Supply & Trade. Presentation at the World Conference on Tobacco or Health,
Singapore, March 23, 2012.




                                                                                                       93
ABSTRACT
This chapter highlights the positive impact that raising tobacco taxes
can have on the health and fiscal position of developing countries. As
a “win-win” for health and finance, tobacco taxation should be one
of the first interventions that countries turn to in their efforts to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

A simple economic model of the global cigarette market was
developed using data from 181 countries. We use this model
to demonstrate the impact of raising cigarette excise by the
equivalent of US$ 0.25 per pack in all developing countries —
an average increase of 40 percent. This measure is forecast to
reduce cigarette consumption in developing countries by
8 percent and to generate an extra US$ 41 billion in revenue — an
increase of 29 percent on the US$ 144 billion in total excise
revenues generated by these countries from cigarettes in 2014.

Countries are already taking action on tobacco taxation, with
106 countries having raised excise rates between 2012 and 2014.
The Philippines tax reforms are a prime example. Excise revenue
from tobacco increased by 114 percent in the first year of reform,
representing US$ 1.5 billion in extra revenue. The majority of
this extra revenue was allocated to the health sector, enabling
the number of poor families enrolled in the Philippines National
Health Insurance Program to increase from 5.2 to 15.3 million
between 2013 and 2015.

Our modeling confirms that higher tobacco taxes could have a
significant impact on public health and finance in many developing
countries. Higher excise taxes on cigarettes can encourage tens
of millions of current smokers to quit, eventually averting millions
of smoking-attributable deaths. Tobacco taxes can simultaneously
create the fiscal space governments need to achieve their devel-
opment priorities.


94 // Executive Summary
4
   THE HEALTH IMPACT OF
  
 RAISING TOBACCO TAXES
IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
    Mark Goodchild, Anne-Marie Perucic, Rose Zheng, Evan Blecher, and Jeremias Paul




    INTRODUCTION
    The aim of this chapter is to highlight the positive impact that raising tobacco taxes can
    have on the health and fiscal position of developing countries. A simple economic model
    of the global cigarette market is used to demonstrate the potential for tobacco taxation
    to generate these positive impacts, with the findings being supplemented by real-world
    country experiences.



    TOBACCO TAXATION AND THE GLOBAL
    DEVELOPMENT AGENDA
    Tobacco taxation has been a cornerstone of global tobacco control efforts for over a
    decade, with Article 6 of the World Health Organization Framework Convention on
    Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) recognizing tax as an important and effective means of
    demand reduction for tobacco (WHO 2003). The FCTC is the first international treaty
    negotiated under the auspices of WHO and has become one of the most widely
    embraced treaties in UN history, with 180 Parties to the Convention. The sixth session of
    the Conference of Parties (COP) to the FCTC in Moscow in 2014 subsequently adopted
    the guidelines for implementation of Article 6 and highlighted the need for taxation in
    comprehensive tobacco control strategies (WHO 2014).

    The 2013 Global Action Plan for Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) further emphasized
    the importance of tobacco taxation as one of the most cost-effective interventions
    Member States can implement to address the growing burden of NCDs (WHO 2011b;
    WHO 2013). The UN General Assembly’s endorsement of the Sustainable Development
    Goals (SDGs) in September 2015 has further raised the links between tobacco control and
    taxation in the global development agenda. This is because tobacco taxation will be a key
    policy instrument to achieve SDG target 3.4 — to reduce premature mortality from NCDs
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




by one third — and SDG target 3.a — to strengthen country-level implementation of the
FCTC (United Nations 2015b).

There has also been a general recognition that developing countries will need to mobilize
more of their own domestic resources to achieve the SDGs (WHO 2015a). The Addis
Ababa Action Agenda — the outcome from the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development — recognized that “price and tax measures on tobacco can
be an effective and important means to reduce tobacco consumption and health-care
costs, and represent a revenue stream for financing development in many countries”
(United Nations 2015a).

The distinctive feature of tobacco taxation as a “win-win” policy has been emphasized
elsewhere, including by Bill Gates’ report to the G20 leaders on innovation with impact
(Gates 2011). Similarly, tobacco taxation has consistently been highlighted by the UN
and WHO as an important tool for generating more financial resources for the health
sector (United Nations 2011; WHO 2010). The Taskforce for Innovative Financing for Health
Systems (2009), for example, emphasized domestic sources of financing for sustainable
health systems, as opposed to external aid.

Now — following the endorsement of the SDGs — many UN Member States will be
looking to turn their commitments into action. As a “win-win” for both health and finance,
tobacco taxation should be one of the very first interventions that Member States turn to.
This is especially the case for many developing countries, where tobacco taxes and retail
prices are still too low, and cigarette affordability levels continue to increase, and hence
the scope for raising tobacco taxes remains significant.



MODELING THE IMPACT OF
HIGHER TOBACCO TAXES
A simple economic model of the global cigarette market was recently developed using
data for 181 countries that together represent 98 percent of the world’s adult cigarette
smokers. We use this model to demonstrate the potential impact of raising cigarette
excise by the equivalent of US$ 0.25 per pack in all developing countries. Most countries
can and should raise their excise by significantly more, particularly those well below the
WHO target of taxation as at least 75 percent of the retail price. However, we adopted this
increase for illustrative purposes, because it raised cigarette retail prices on average by
about 20 percent across all developing countries.

The data and behavioral assumptions that underpin this model are explained in a recent
WHO Bulletin article by Goodchild et al. (2016). In brief, country data on taxes and prices
per 20-cigarette pack of the most popular brand of cigarette in 2014 were sourced from



96 // The Health Impact of Raising Tobacco Taxes in Developing Countries
WHO’s Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic (WHO 2015b). The main supply-side
assumption is that any increase in excise will be fully passed through to the retail price
of cigarettes. This assumption can be relaxed in country-level models to reflect other
industry practices (for instance, over-shifting, absorption, or cross-subsidization), but full
pass-through is generally a default setting for these types of exercises.

The main demand-side assumption is that the “price elasticity of demand” for cigarettes
will determine the extent to which smokers reduce their consumption in response to
the higher prices. The price elasticity of demand is the change in cigarette consumption
resulting from a 1 percent increase in cigarette prices. Based on global evidence, the
model uses price elasticities of -0.3, -0.4 and -0.5 for high-, middle-, and low-income
countries, respectively (IARC 2011; Levy et al. 2013). The price elasticity of demand reflects
both conditional demand (i.e., sticks per day) and smoking prevalence (i.e., percent of the
population who smoke) (Ranson et al. 2000). Global evidence suggests half the impact of
higher prices on consumption comes from reductions in prevalence (CDC 1998; Levy et
al. 2013; Ranson et al. 2000). Consequently, the model uses prevalence elasticities of -0.15,
-0.2 and -0.25 for high-, middle-, and low-income countries. For example, a 10 percent
increase in the retail price of cigarettes in low-income countries will reduce total cigarette
consumption by 5 percent and the prevalence rate of smoking by 2.5 percent.

Table 1 summarizes the impact of raising cigarette excise by US$ 0.25 per pack in all
developing countries, with Member States categorized as low-income, lower-middle
income, and upper-middle income countries. All monetary units are presented in US$
terms based on bilateral exchange rates against the U.S. dollar for 2014. The tax intervention,
as described, would increase the amount of excise per pack by 40 percent on average
across all developing countries. The tax increase affects the retail price of cigarettes in
low-income countries the most, because these countries have the lowest retail prices to
begin with. There, the imposition of an extra US$ 0.25 per pack would increase average
excise by around 86 percent on average.

These tax increases would lead the retail price of cigarettes to increase on average by
18 percent. Cigarette retail prices in low-income countries would increase by 38 percent,
compared to 28 percent and 15 percent in the lower-middle and upper-middle income
countries, respectively.

Based on the behavioral response of smokers (i.e., the price elasticity of demand for
cigarettes), total cigarette consumption in developing countries would decrease by 8 percent
or about 18 billion fewer packs of 20 cigarette sticks. The bulk of this decrease in
consumption occurs in upper middle-income countries, including China, where current
cigarette consumption levels are highest — reflecting both high rates of smoking
prevalence, as well as greater intensity of smoking (i.e., average sticks smoked per day).




                                                                                                 97
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Table 1: Impact of Raising Cigarette Excise by US$ 0.25/Pack
                                             LOW           LOWER           UPPER      ALL DEVELOPING
                                             INCOME        MIDDLE          MIDDLE
 Excise (US$/Pack)
  Baseline — 2014                               0.29           0.51          0.72          0.65
  Simulation                                    0.54           0.77          0.97          0.92
   % change                                      86%           51%           36%           40%

 Retail price (US$/Pack)
  Baseline — 2014                               0.82           1.21          2.03          1.80
  Simulation                                     1.13          1.54          2.33           2.13
   % change                                      38%           28%           15%            18%

 Cigarettes (million Packs)
  Baseline — 2014                               7,752         48,816        163,438       220,006
  Simulation                                    6,211         42,763        153,198       202,172
   Change                                       -1,541        -6,053        -10,241       -17,835
   % change                                     -20%           -12%          -6%            -8%

 Excise revenue (US$ Million)
  Baseline — 2014                               2,263         24,821        116,960       144,044
  Simulation                                    3,376         32,857        149,028       185,261
   Change                                        1,112        8,036         32,068         41,217
   % change	                                     49%           32%           27%           29%

 Total tax revenue (US$ Million)
  Baseline — 2014                               3,109         33,728        178,900       215,737
  Simulation                                    4,298         42,320        213,711       260,328
   Change                                       1,189         8,592         34,811        44,591
   % change                                      38%           25%           19%            21%

 Daily smoking rate (%)
  Baseline — 2014                                9.1               9.3       17.5           13.1
  Simulation                                     8.3           8.8           17.0           12.5
   % change                                      -9%           -6%           -3%            -4%

 Daily smokers (000 Adults)
  Baseline — 2014                              44,584        165,037        337,715       547,335
  Simulation                                   40,622        155,380        327,596       523,599
   Change                                       -3,961        -9,656        -10,119       -23,736
   % change                                      -9%           -6%           -3%            -4%




98 // The Health Impact of Raising Tobacco Taxes in Developing Countries
                    However, the rate of decrease in consumption is greatest in low-income countries, consis-
                    tent with the higher price elasticity of demand observed in these countries.

                    Based on the available data, it is estimated that cigarette excise taxes in developing countries
                    generated a total of US$ 144 billion in annual excise revenue for 2014 (Goodchild, Perucic,
                    and Nargis 2016). Other taxes — such as Value Added Taxes (VAT), as well as applicable
                    import duties and surcharges — bring the total amount of tax revenue from cigarettes
                    to US$ 216 billion, representing 3.3 percent of General Government Revenue (GGR) as of
                    end 2014 (Goodchild, Perucic, and Nargis 2016; IMF 2015).

                    Raising cigarette excise by US$ 0.25 per pack in all developing countries would generate
                    an extra US$ 41 billion in excise revenue from cigarettes in the following year — a 29
                    percent increase on the 2014 baseline. Total tax revenues would increase by US$ 45
                    billion or by 21 percent on 2014. Low-income countries show the greatest relative
                    increases, with excise and total tax revenues from cigarettes expanding by 49 percent
                    and 38 percent respectively.

                    Figure 1 shows the potential impact of this increase on the fiscal space of developing
                    countries. Fiscal space is measured here as the increase in General Government Revenue
                    (GGR) as a result of the extra total tax revenue from cigarettes. Low-income countries
                    record the strongest expansion in fiscal space (1.14 percent), as do developing countries
                    in the Western Pacific region (1.05 percent). About 25 percent of all developing countries




 Figure 1: Fiscal Space Created by Raising Cigarette Excise by US$ 0.25/Pack
                      1.25%
                               1.14%
                                                                                                              1.05%
                     1.00%
                                       0.89%

                                                                                      0.76%           0.77%
% Increase in GGR




                     0.75%                               0.69%
                                                0.64%

                                                                                              0.51%
                     0.50%
                                                                      0.37%


                     0.25%
                                                                              0.13%


                     0.00%
                                LIC



                                        LMIC



                                                 UMIC



                                                          All LMICs



                                                                      AFR



                                                                              AMR



                                                                                      EMR



                                                                                              EUR



                                                                                                       SEAR


                                                                                                              WPR




                                                                                                                      99
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




could increase GGR by more than 1.0 percent, including “high tobacco-burden” countries
such as Bangladesh (3.0 percent), China (1.1 percent), and Indonesia (2.0 percent).

This analysis highlights the potential for tobacco taxation to mobilize domestic revenue
and to create additional fiscal space needed by different countries to finance their
development programs, including in the health sector. In particular, low-income countries
would be able to generate significant fiscal space from raising tobacco taxes. Table 1 also
highlights the potential impact of higher tobacco taxation on smoking rates in developing
countries. Raising cigarette excise by US$ 0.25 would decrease the rate of daily cigarette
smoking by 4 percent — or from 13.1 percent to 12.5 percent of the developing world’s
adult population. This translates into 23.7 million fewer daily cigarette smokers in
developing countries, compared to the 2014 total of 547.3 million daily cigarette smokers.

Such public health outcomes would contribute directly to the 2013 Global Action Plan
for NCDs, but also to SDG target 3.4 — to reduce the premature mortality from NCDs by
one third. As a benchmark, epidemiological studies have shown that tobacco ultimately
kills a third to half of all people who use it (Peto et al. 2003). Thus — without further action —
between 182 and 274 million adults from among the 2014 cohort of 547.3 million
daily cigarette smokers will die early from a smoking-attributable disease. However, the
expected number of smoking-attributable deaths among this cohort would decrease by
between 5 and 8 million under the scenario in which 23.7 million of these smokers quit.

Table 2 shows the impact of raising cigarette excise by US$ 0.25 per pack in four “high
tobacco-burden” countries. Domestic cigarette manufacturers have a strong market
presence in all four high-burden countries, with China’s cigarette monopoly in particular
accounting for more than 40 percent of the global cigarette market on a volume basis.
Indonesia is characterized by a high rate of smoking prevalence, while smoking prevalence
in India is “artificially” low due to extensive use among the population of smokeless
tobacco products such as chewing tobacco.

Bangladesh, which became a lower middle-income country in 2015, was in 2014 the
only low-income country to be reflected in this group of high-burden countries. It is
notable for the fact that the cigarette market accounts for a large share of the gov-
ernment’s existing revenue base — at approximately 9.9 percent of GGR. Nonetheless,
cigarette excise taxes and retail prices are low in Bangladesh, even when compared to
other developing countries (Table 1).

Despite these differences, it is evident that all four high-burden countries can generate
significant benefits from raising excise on cigarettes. Total tax revenue expands by more
than 20 percent in all four high-burden countries, while the number of cigarette smokers
can be reduced significantly — even from a global public health perspective.




100 // The Health Impact of Raising Tobacco Taxes in Developing Countries
Table 2: Country Impact of Raising Cigarette Excise by US$ 0.25/Pack

                                   BANGLADESH      CHINA       INDIA         INDONESIA
                                   (77.5)          (6.2)       (60.2)        (11591)
(LCU = 1 US$)
Excise (US$/Pack)
  Baseline — 2014                       0.33          0.58         0.62         0.55
  Simulation                            0.58          0.83         0.87         0.80
   % change                              76%          43%          40%           46%
Retail price (US$/Pack)
  Baseline — 2014                       0.63          1.90         2.06          1.28
  Simulation                            0.93          2.20         2.37          1.63
   % change                             46%           15%           15%          28%
Cigarettes (Million Packs)
  Baseline — 2014                       4,049        130,493       4,771        17,232
  Simulation                            3,109        122,475       4,482        15,331
   Change                               -939         -8,018        -288         -1,901
   % change                             -23%          -6%           -6%          -11%
Excise revenue (US$ Million)
  Baseline — 2014                       1,340        75,177        2,963        9,447
  Simulation                            1,806        101,177       3,904        12,238
   Change                                467         25,999         942         2,791
   % change	                             35%          35%          32%           30%
Total tax revenue (US$ Million)
  Baseline — 2014                       1,725        124,634       4,894        13,502
  Simulation                            2,239        152,800       5,993        16,299
   Change                                514         28,166        1,099        2,797
   % change                             30%           23%          22%           21%
Daily smoking rate (%)
  Baseline — 2014                        12.0         20.9             2.9       31.1
  Simulation                             10.6         20.2             2.8      29.4
   % change                             -12%          -3%           -3%          -6%
Daily smokers (000 Adults)
  Baseline — 2014                       13,421       238,326      26,064        56,241
  Simulation                            11,864       231,004      25,276        53,139
   Change                               -1,557       -7,322        -788         -3,102
   % change                             -12%          -3%           -3%          -6%




                                                                                         101
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




However, raising tobacco taxes in developing countries is not without certain challenges.
There can be strong industry interference in tax policy decision making, and there is a
need to firewall tax and other policies from this influence. Many developing countries
need to reform the structure of their tobacco tax systems to make them more effective
and efficient from both a public health and revenue-generation perspective.

For example, all four of the high-burden countries still operate tiered excise systems.
These tiered systems are inefficient, because they enable consumers to “switch down” to
brands or products in lower tiers, thereby acting against the intended public health impact
of raising tobacco taxes. The tiered structure also means that government tax revenues
would be lower after a given tax increase than would be the case under a uniform system
without tiers. For such reasons, the guidelines for Article 6 of the FCTC warn countries
against using tiered excise systems (WHO 2014). Instead, global evidence shows that
uniform excise systems such as single specific or mixed (i.e., specific with ad valorem)
lead to better outcomes in terms of cigarette prices and tax revenues (WHO 2015b), as
well as to far better health outcomes.

Illicit trade in tobacco can also be a concern in developing countries, including in both
high- and low-tax jurisdictions. This highlights that the issue is more than just smuggling,
but covers a host of tax avoidance and evasion activities. Nonetheless, many developing
countries, including Brazil, Kenya, Turkey, and others, have protected and enhanced
tobacco tax revenue collection by strengthening tax administration, including through
the introduction of “track-and-trace” systems that allow for digital monitoring and control
the tobacco supply chain (see Chapter 9 in this volume). Brazil’s experience is informative,
as studies have found that sustained reforms in the country have both increased tax
revenue and decreased smoking prevalence, despite an increase in the illicit market
(Iglesias 2016; Iglesias et al. 2017). Indeed, cigarette excise tax revenues more than
doubled between 2006 and 2013, while tobacco use decreased from 34.4 percent to
14.7 percent of the adult population between 1989 and 2013 (Iglesias et al. 2017).



TAX POLICY AND PRACTICE
IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Countries are already taking action on tobacco taxation, with WHO’s 2015 Report on the
Global Tobacco Epidemic recording 106 countries that have raised their excise rates on
cigarettes between 2012 and 2014 (WHO 2015b). Furthermore, excise per pack increased
by more than 50 percent in about one-fifth of those cases. These larger increases typically
occurred in developing countries — like Chad, Kazakhstan, and Mongolia — where excise
rates on cigarettes were low to begin with, and thus the scope for large increases was greatest.




102 // The Health Impact of Raising Tobacco Taxes in Developing Countries
         Since 2014, the Seychelles merged its two-tier excise on cigarettes into a uniform system
         by raising excise on cigarette imports by 50 percent. from the equivalent of US$ 3.30
         to US$ 4.90 per pack. Similarly, the Cook Islands raised its cigarette excise by 33 percent
         in 2015, from US$ 8.40 to US$ 11.20 per pack, after having introduced a uniform excise
         system in the previous year. In May 2016, Peru announced an increase of 157 percent in
         cigarette excise, from 1.4 to 3.6 sol per pack (or from the equivalent US$ 0.40 to US$ 1.10)
         (Diario oficial 2016). This announcement could see cigarettes prices in Peru increase by as
         much as 50 percent.

         In 2015, China implemented a major tax reform on the cigarette market. This reform was
         significant because — unlike the earlier tax announcement in 2009 — cigarette retail
         prices increased, thus re-establishing the policy linkage between tobacco taxation and
         public health in China. Cigarette retail prices increased on average by 10 percent, with
                               cigarette sales volumes declining by about 2 percent (representing
                               the first decrease in China since 2001) (Zheng and Goodchild 2017).
The tax reforms in the         Yet the central government generated an extra RMB 70 billion (or
Philippines are one of         about US$ 11 billion) in tax revenue, representing an increase of
  the most successful          9 percent on the previous year.
   recent examples of          Gambia is an example of a low-income country that has successfully
 tobacco taxation as a         raised tobacco taxes significantly over a short period of time. Overall,
       win-win policy.         Gambia raised cigarette excise from the equivalent of US$ 0.12 to
                               US$ 0.36 per pack between 2013 and 2016 (Nargis et al. 2016). This
         led to dramatic increases in cigarette prices, with import volumes approximately halving.
         Yet despite this sharp decrease in imports, excise revenues more than tripled, from US$
         2 million to US$ 7 million at current exchange rates.

         The tax reforms in the Philippines are one of the most successful recent examples of
         tobacco taxation as a win-win policy. The reforms included a five-year plan to merge
         the four-tier excise system for cigarettes into a uniform system by 2017. The first year
         of implementation saw excise per pack roughly double, with the lowest tier of excise
         increasing by 341 percent, from the equivalent of US$ 0.06 to US$ 0.28 per pack (Kaiser,
         Bredenkamp, and Iglesias 2016). By 2017, this lowest tier of cigarette excise will have
         increased by more than 1,000 percent to about US$ 0.70 per pack at current exchange
         rates. The fiscal impact of these reforms has been dramatic, with excise revenue from
         tobacco increasing by 114 percent in just the first year of implementation — an extra
         US$ 1.5 billion in revenue (WHO 2015b).

         These gains have been sustained, with the first three years of implementation generating
         US$ 3.9 billion in incremental revenues. Importantly, about 85 percent of the extra
         revenue generated from the reform was allocated to the health sector. This enabled
         the Philippines to scale up its health care financing, nearly doubling the Department of


                                                                                                    103
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Health’s budget in the first year of implementation and financing the extension of a fully
subsidized health insurance to the poorest 40 percent of the population. From 2013 to
2015, the number of poor and near-poor families enrolled in the National Health Insurance
Program increased from 5.2 to 15.3 million (Kaiser, Bredenkamp, and Iglesias 2016).

The Philippines’ success demonstrates how linking tobacco tax increases to a major
flagship initiative with high-level support can generate significant resources for countries
to finance their development priorities. Indeed, it is increasingly common for countries
to allocate some tobacco tax revenues to social programs through either “hard” or
“soft” earmarking practices. In 2014, WHO found at least 36 countries that allocated some
tobacco tax revenues to the social sector — 28 of whom allocated to health programs
(WHO 2016). This includes Indonesia, which imposes a 10 percent surcharge on excise
revenue from tobacco, with at least half of the amount collected being allocated to
regional health programs. China applies a small educational surcharge to cigarettes, with
the revenue earmarked for public schools. In 2015, Bangladesh introduced a new Health
Cess of 1 percent on the retail price of cigarettes.

India has introduced a number of additional excise taxes on tobacco products to help
fund new initiatives, including the introduction of a Health Cess in 2005. The revenue
from this cess goes into the Consolidated Fund, and is used to help meet expenditures
of the National Rural Health Mission (established to improve health infrastructure and
strengthen health systems in India’s rural areas). In 2001, India had also introduced a
National Calamity Contingent Duty following an earthquake in the state of Gujarat
(WHO 2011a). The revenue from this duty is transferred into a fund maintained by the
central government, with transfers made to help meet the disaster relief expenditures
of state governments.

These examples highlight a wide range of health prioritization practices in developing
countries, starting from small allocations to help support social-sector programs up to
financing the scale-up of major initiatives such as health insurance in the Philippines.
Although such allocations are not always feasible, there is clearly a wider need for
developing countries to mobilize more domestic resources to finance their development
priorities. In this respect, it has been found that earmarking health or other social purposes
can increase the public’s acceptance of tobacco tax increases — an important consider-
ation for countries needing to mobilize extra resources (WHO 2009). For demonstration
purposes, Figure 2 shows the potential increase in Government Health Expenditure (GHE),
if the extra revenue generated from raising cigarette excise by US$ 0.25 per pack in devel-
oping countries was allocated to public health budgets.

This highlights the enormous potential for tobacco taxation to benefit the public health
sector through the channel of health financing. For example, if the extra US$ 41 billion
in excise revenue from cigarettes (Table 1) was allocated to government health budgets,


104 // The Health Impact of Raising Tobacco Taxes in Developing Countries
  Figure 2: Potential Increase in Government Health Expenditure

                    10.0%
                            9.3%
                                   8.6%                                                    8.5%

                    8.0%
                                                                            7.3%
                                                                                                   6.9%
% Increase in GHE




                    6.0%
                                                  4.7%
                                          4.2%
                    4.0%                                                           3.6%

                                                              2.4%
                    2.0%

                                                                     0.8%

                    0.0%
                            LIC



                                   LMIC



                                          UMIC



                                                  All LMICs



                                                              AFR



                                                                     AMR



                                                                            EMR



                                                                                   EUR



                                                                                           SEAR



                                                                                                    WPR
              then public spending on health could potentially increase by as much as 4.7 percent in
              all developing countries. The largest increases in health spending could occur in low- and
              lower middle-income countries and the South-East Asia region.

              It is important to note that such allocations of tax revenue to the social sector should be
              consistent with medium-term budget plans and sector strategies to ensure the efficient
              and effective use of these resources, without triggering fragmentation of the budget or
              putting additional pressure on the limited absorption capacity of these sectors.



              CONCLUSION
              Tobacco taxation has been a cornerstone of global tobacco control for over a decade.
              The UN General Assembly’s endorsement of the SDGs has heightened interest in tobacco
              control and taxation in the development agenda. There has also been a recognition
              that developing countries will need to mobilize more of their own domestic resources
              to achieve the SDGs. As a “win-win” policy for both health and finance, tobacco taxation
              should be one for the very first interventions that Member States turn to.

              The modeling work undertaken in this chapter shows that higher tobacco taxes could
              have a significant impact on public health and finance in developing countries. Higher
              excise taxes on cigarettes could encourage tens of millions of current smokers to quit,
              averting millions of smoking-attributable deaths in developing countries. There is also


                                                                                                          105
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




enormous potential for higher tobacco taxes to create additional fiscal space that
governments need to finance the attainment of their development priorities.

Countries throughout the world are taking action on tobacco taxation, with many
successful examples of tax policy reform among developing countries. Increasingly, these
countries are also strengthening tax administration to protect and enhance tax revenue
collection. Others are choosing to allocate some of the revenue from tobacco taxes to
finance health and social programs. These examples highlight that tobacco taxation as
an important tool for reducing tobacco consumption, while also generating extra tax
revenue for financing development.



REFERENCES
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 1998. Response to increases in cigarette prices by
race/ethnicity, income, and age groups — United States, 1976–1993. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
1998 Jul 31;47(29):605–9. PMID: 9699809

Diario oficial. 2016. http://diariooficial.elperuano.pe/Normas

Gates W. 2011. Innovation with impact: financing 21st century development. Report by Bill Gates to G20
leaders.

Goodchild M, Perucic AM & Nargis N. 2016. Modelling the impact of raising tobacco taxes on public
health and finance. Bull World Health Organ 94: 250–257.

IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2011. Effectiveness of tax and price policies for tobacco
control. IARC handbooks of cancer prevention: tobacco control. Volume 14. Lyon: International Agency
for Research on Cancer.

Iglesias RM, Szklo AS, Souza MC de, et al. 2017. “Estimating the size of illicit tobacco consumption in Brazil:
findings from the global adult tobacco survey.” Tob Control 26:53–59.

Iglesias RM. 2016. “Increasing excise taxes in the presence of an illicit cigarette market: the 2011 Brazil
tobacco tax reform.” Rev Panam Salud Publica 40(4).

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2015. General Government Revenue (GGR) sourced from the World
Economic Outlook — April 2015. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

Kaiser, Kai, Caryn Bredenkamp & Roberto Iglesias. 2016. “Sin tax reform in the Philippines: transforming
public finance, health and governance for more inclusive development.” Washington, DC: World Bank.

Levy DT, Ellis JA, Mays D, Huang AT. 2013. “Smoking-related deaths averted due to three years of policy
progress.” Bull World Health Organ. 2013 Jul 1;91(7):509–18.

Nargis N, Manneh Y, Krubally B, Jobe B, Ouma AE, Tcha-kondor N & Blecher EH. 2016. “How effective has
tobacco tax increase been in the Gambia: A case study of tobacco control.” BMJ Open 6(8):e010413. doi:
10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010413

Peto R, Lopez AD, Boreham J, Thun M. 2003. Mortality from smoking in developed countries. 2nd ed. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.




106 // The Health Impact of Raising Tobacco Taxes in Developing Countries
Ranson K, Jha P, Chaloupka FJ, Nguyen SN. 2000. “The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of price and
other tobacco control policies.” In: Jha P, Chaloupka FJ, editors. Tobacco control in developing countries.
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2000. pp. 427–447.

Taskforce on innovative international financing for health systems. 2009. More money for health, and more
health for the money. Taskforce on innovative international financing for health systems.

United Nations. 2011. Political declaration of the High-Level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable Diseases. New York: United Nations.

United Nations. 2015a. Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development. New York: United Nations.

United Nations. 2015b. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. New
York: United Nations.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2003. WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. Geneva:
World Health Organization.

WHO. 2009. WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic — 2008. Geneva: World Health Organization.

WHO. 2010. Health systems financing: the path to universal coverage. World Health Report 2010. Geneva,
World Health Organization.

WHO. 2011a. Innovative financing from tobacco taxation for health promotion. Report of the expert
group meeting. New Delhi: World Health Organization SEARO.

WHO. 2011b. Scaling up action against NCDs: How much will it cost? Geneva: World Health Organization.

WHO. 2013. Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of NCDs 2013–2020. Geneva: World Health
Organization.

WHO. 2014. Guidelines for implementation of Article 6 of the WHO FCTC. Geneva, World Health Organization.

WHO. 2015a. Health in 2015: from MDGs to SDGs. Geneva, World Health Organization.

WHO. 2015b. WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic, 2015: raising taxes on tobacco. Geneva: World
Health Organization.

WHO. 2016. Earmarked tobacco taxes: lessons learnt from nine countries. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Zheng R & Goodchild M. 2017. Understanding tobacco industry pricing strategy: evidence from China’s
2015 tax reform. Work in progress.




                                                                                                          107
ABSTRACT
The European Union has a long experience in tobacco tax harmo-
nization, which provides useful lessons learned.

In the European Union, tobacco tax harmonization took place in
stages, and currently all Member States have agreed upon definitions,
tax base, and minimum excise duty rates for all product categories
of manufactured tobacco.

Tobacco tax harmonization pursues several different objectives,
among which some might appear contradictory at first sight.
This is the case in the European Union, where ensuring collection
of revenues and ensuring a high level of health protection are,
among others, objectives of tobacco tax harmonization. Reaching
the objective to ensure a high level of health protection implies
a declining consumption and thus declining revenues. It therefore
seems impossible to reach both objectives with the same legal
provisions. However, experience in the European Union proves
otherwise. Lower tobacco consumption and the decrease in
revenue this would otherwise generate have been compensated
by increased rates, thereby reaching both objectives




108 // Executive Summary
5
    Harmonizing Tobacco Taxation at the Regional Level

    THE EUROPEAN UNION
    EXPERIENCE
    Annerie Bouw




     INTRODUCTION
     The first efforts to harmonize tobacco taxation among European Member States started
     as early as in the 1970s.24 With over 40 years of experience, the European Union has the
     longest experience in tobacco tax harmonization in the world. Over four decades, these
     harmonization provisions have been enhanced, expanded, and improved. This chapter
     first describes the beginning and objectives of tobacco tax harmonization in the
     European Union (hereafter: EU). The focus will thereafter be on the current provisions
     applicable to manufactured tobacco products in the EU and its Member States.



     BEGINNING OF THE EUROPEAN UNION
     In 2017 the EU celebrates its 60th birthday. In 1957 six countries signed a treaty and
     created the European Economic Community, launching a process that has given rise to
     the EU as we know it today.25 During the following years, the foundation of the EU was
     established and strengthened. The freedom of movement of goods, people, services,
     and money within the borders of the EU is considered as the concrete outcome of
     this cooperation. To achieve a properly functioning single market, new treaties were
     signed, and legislation was adopted and improved. Among others, the Schengen
     agreement was signed to allow people to travel freely in the Schengen area, regardless
     of their nationality.26 With the treaty of Maastricht, the idea to develop a single currency
     was formalized, and the name “European Union” replaced European Community.27


     24 The information and views set out in this chapter are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official opinion of the
     European Union. Neither the European Union institutions and bodies nor any person acting on their behalf may be held responsible
     for the use which may be made of the information contained therein. Responsibility for the information and views expressed in this
     paper lies entirely with the author.
     25 Treaty Establishing the European Economic Community, Rome Treaty, 25 March 1957
     Parties: Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxemburg and the Netherlands
     26 Convention Implementing the Schengen Agreement of 14 June 1985 between the Governments of the States of the Benelux
     Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic, on the Gradual Abolition of Checks at their Common
     Borders (Schengen Implementation Agreement), 19 June 1990
     27 Treaty on European Union (Consolidated Version), Treaty of Maastricht , 7 February 1992, Official Journal of the European Communities
     C 325/5; 24 December 2002
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




More countries joined; on 1 July 2013, with the accession of Croatia, the EU encompassed
a total of 28 Member States with a population of 510 million people. Becoming an EU
Member State is a lengthy process. First the conditions for membership need to be fulfilled,
and all EU legislation must be implemented. There are currently five candidate countries:
Albania, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and Turkey. In
addition, the EU has association agreements with countries that are in the process of
bringing their legislation in line with the EU acquis.



WHY HARMONIZE EXCISE DUTIES
ON TOBACCO PRODUCTS?
In order to ensure the functioning of the internal market, a certain degree of harmonization
of tax policies was considered necessary, including excise duties applied on manufactured
tobacco.28 National legislation discriminating against foreign products was not compatible
with the freedom of movement of goods, one of the requirements for the functioning
of the internal market. Only excise duties on energy products, alcoholic beverages, and
manufactured tobacco products are harmonized in the EU. The first legal act in the area
of tobacco taxation was adopted in 1972.29 At the time, the establishment of an economic
union was the main priority. The objective of tax harmonization was therefore to create a
framework which would not distort competition or hinder the free movement of goods
within the internal market.

The legislation harmonizing the taxes on consumption of manufactured tobacco has
been amended several times since. The damaging effects of smoking were acknowledged
by including the objective to protect the health of the citizens of the EU in the recitals of
the legal act.30 Member States also agreed that the harmonized taxation should assure
them of the collection of revenue from excise duties. Although some of these objectives
may seem to be contradictory, the paragraphs below describe the objectives and the
effects of many years of tobacco tax harmonization in the EU, including the current trends.


Functioning of the Internal Market and Competition
A proper functioning internal market implies the presence of competition, requiring the
free setting of prices. Therefore it was agreed that importers or manufacturers of tobacco
products should not be restricted in setting a maximum retail selling price.31 This has




28 Article 99 of the Treaty Establishing the European Community (Consolidated Version), Rome Treaty, 25 March 1957
29 Directive 72/464/EEC, 19 December 1972 on taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of manufactured tobacco
30 Recital 7 of Council Directive 2002/10/EC of 12 February 2002 amending Directive 92/79/EEC and 95/59/EC as regards the structure
and rates of excise duty applies on manufactured tobacco



110 // Harmonizing Tobacco Taxation at the Regional Level: The European Union Experience
Figure 1: Tax Burden on Cigarettes, in % of the Weighted Average Price

100
 90
 80
  70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
  10
   0
        AT BE BG CY CZ DE DK EE ES EL FI FR HR HU IE IT LT LU LV MT NL PL PT RO SE SI SK UK

Source: European Commission 2017



resulted in different price levels across the EU. However, one should not forget that the
geographical locations and economic situations of Member States also vary, as therefore
does the affordability of products. The current legislation does not interfere in the prices
of manufactured tobacco directly. However, depending on its level, taxation can have a
major indirect influence on price. In particular in the EU, where tax burdens on cigarettes
range from 70 to 87 percent, taxation has a major indirect effect on prices. In line with
the objectives of avoiding distortion of competition and ensuring a high level of health
protection, it was decided that the tax burden on manufactured tobacco should be similar
in each Member State. As shown in Figure 1 above, despite varying prices, a degree of
convergence of tax burdens on cigarettes has been achieved across the EU.


Contributing to a High Level of Health Protection
The consumption of cigarettes has been declining over the years. However, smoking
and its consequences remain a major burden on the health of citizens and health care
systems in the EU. The decline is also reflected in the quantity of cigarettes released for
consumption between 2002 and 2016, as shown in Figure 2 below. Consumption has
declined from almost 800 billion pieces in 2002 to below 500 billion pieces in 2016.

It is worth noting that concerns have been expressed about consumers’ switching to
other tobacco products, such as fine-cut tobacco for the rolling of cigarettes, which
have remained cheaper than manufactured cigarettes due to a lower taxation level.
This phenomenon is also called “tax-induced” substitution and is monitored at EU level.



31 Article 15 of Council Directive 2011/64/EU of 21 June 2011 on the structure and rates of excise duty applied to manufactured
tobacco, PbEU 176/24



                                                                                                                                  111
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Figure 2: Releases for Consumption of Cigarettes 2002–2016, in 1000 Pieces
900,000,000

800,000,000

700,000,000

600,000,000

500,000,000

400,000,000

300,000,000

200,000,000

100,000,000

              0
                      2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010                                       2011     2012     2013     2014   2015   2016
Source: European Commission 2017



In 2010 the EU stated its desire to bring the minimum tax requirements for fine-cut
tobacco closer to the minimum levels applied to cigarettes, to take better account of
the degree of competition between the products, which are seen as equally harmful to
health.32 Gradual increases in the minimum tax requirements for fine-cut tobacco took
place in 2013 and 2015, and further increases are foreseen for 2018 and 2020. Despite
these efforts, an increase in the consumption of fine-cut tobacco was indeed observed
from 2002 to 2012, although the market seems to have stabilized between 2012 and 2015.
Moreover, fine-cut tobacco still represents a comparatively small portion of the market (about
20 percent last year). In preparation for a future review of the legislation, the European Com-
mission has included tax-induced substitution on the list of subjects to look into as part of a
possible next revision.33


Ensuring Revenue for Member States
The objective of ensuring revenue from excise duties applied to manufactured tobacco
may seem to be contradictory to the objective mentioned above of protecting the health
of citizens. This is partly true. However, it does seem possible to reach both objectives. As
shown in Figure 3, the total revenue of excise duties on cigarettes was more or less stable
between 2008 and 2015.



32 Council Directive 2011/64/EU of 21 June 2011 on the structure and rates of excise duty applied to manufactured tobacco, PbEU 176/24
33 Inception Impact Assessment on the possible revision of Directive 2011/64/EU on the rates and structure of excise duty applied on
manufactured tobacco, 16 June 2016



112 // Harmonizing Tobacco Taxation at the Regional Level: The European Union Experience
Figure 3: Total Revenue from Excise Duties on Cigarettes, in Millions of Euros
80,000

70,000

60,000

50,000

40,000

30,000

20,000

10,000

       0
             2008         2009         2010        2011        2012          2013            2014            2015
Source: European Commission 2017




Figure 4: Average Revenue from Excise Duties on Cigarettes, in Euros per 1000 Cigarettes
€160                                                                                150.49          152.44
                                                                      142.49
                                                          135.75
€140                                          126.71
                                   119.61
€120                   111.33
           101.42
€100
 €80
 €60
€40
 €20

  €0
           2008        2009        2010       2011        2012        2013          2014            2015
Source: European Commission 2017




    Stable revenues with declining consumption can only be explained in one way: an
    increase in rates must have taken place, in order to maintain the same level of revenue.
    This has indeed been the case, as shown in Figure 4 above. The average tax revenue per
    1000 cigarettes has been increasing over the years. In other words, the lower consumption
    and the decrease in revenue this would otherwise generate have been compensated by
    increased rates.




                                                                                                                    113
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




CURRENT EXCISE DUTIES ON TOBACCO
PRODUCTS IN THE EU

Tobacco Market in the EU
According to the latest available figures, during 2016, around 485 billion cigarette sticks were
released for consumption, equivalent to almost 25 billion packs a year.34 Moreover, although
it represents a much smaller market share, an estimated 87,000 tons of smoking tobacco
were also released for consumption during 2016. Smoking tobacco mainly includes fine-cut
tobacco used for hand rolling of cigarettes. The revenue generated from excise duties on
cigarettes and smoking tobacco was €75 billion and €9 billion, respectively, in 2015. This
revenue is collected by Member States and goes entirely to their national budgets.


Tobacco Taxation Policy in the EU and Decision Procedure
Legal acts in the EU, also called Directives, are adopted by the Council of the EU. The
Council is composed of Government ministers from each EU Member State. The
decision-making procedure in the Council begins once a proposal from the European
Commission is tabled. The Commission has the right of initiative and may table a proposal
to amend existing legislation or to adopt new legislation. Most legal acts are adopted if
a qualified majority of Member States in the Council agrees. However, Member States
consider that some matters are too sensitive, and for legislative acts in these areas the
Council must make decisions by unanimity.35 Harmonization of indirect taxation, such as
tobacco taxation, is an example of this. One advantage of this decision-making procedure
is that any adopted or amended act will have the full support of all Member States, as no
member can be overruled. The disadvantage is that, in practice, it can be very difficult
to find a compromise agreement with so many diverging views and differences between
the Member States.


How are Excise Duties Harmonized in the EU?
At the time the first act affecting the taxes on the consumption of tobacco products was
adopted, it was considered too ambitious to immediately seek the same tax base, structure,
and rate in all countries. The European Economic Community, as the predecessor of
the EU was called at that time, decided that harmonization should take place in stages.36
During the first stage, only the structure and tax base were harmonized. During the



34 Assuming a pack of cigarettes contains 20 pieces.
35 Article 113 of Consolidated version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, 13 December 2007, 2008/C 115/01
36 Directive 72/464/EEC, 19 December 1972 on taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of manufactured
tobacco



114 // Harmonizing Tobacco Taxation at the Regional Level: The European Union Experience
second phase, Member States agreed upon the different categories of manufactured
tobacco products and the tax structure for each category. The adoption of minimum
excise duty levels for each category of tobacco products took place during the third
stage, in order to achieve a greater convergence between the tax levels applied in the
Member States.

General rules for excise duties
Without legislation governing the collection of tax and the enforcement activities of the
competent authorities in the Member States, it would be impossible to put an effective
tax system in place. The general rules applicable to all excise goods such as energy products,
alcoholic beverages, and manufactured tobacco, are also harmonized in the EU and laid
down in a separate legal act.37 This general excise duty directive contains provisions about
the production, storage, and movement of excise goods. Until the excise duty is paid, a
system called the Excise Movement and Control System (EMCS) monitors the movement
of alcohol, tobacco, and energy products in the EU. In addition, the time and place where
excise duties are due and who is liable to pay the excise duty are included in this directive.

Tax structure
As mentioned above, Member States agreed in the early 1970s that the tax structure
should be harmonized to eliminate factors that are likely to hinder free movement and
distort competition. Already in the first legal act affecting the taxes on consumption of
tobacco products, it was required that the excise duty for cigarettes should consist of two
components, also known as the “mixed structure.” This mixed structure was at the time a
compromise between southern Member States (themselves producers of raw tobacco),
which favored an ad valorem system, and northern Member States (not producers of raw
tobacco), which preferred a specific excise duty. The current legal act, Council Directive
2011/64/EU (hereafter: tobacco excise duty directive), requires that the excise duty on
cigarettes must consist of:

    •	 A specific component of between 7.5 percent and 76.5 percent of the total tax
        burden (TTB) — expressed as a fixed amount per 1000 cigarettes;
    •	 An ad valorem component — expressed as a percentage of the maximum retail
        selling price.

As shown in Figure 5, the percentage of each component varies from country to country.
However, in each Member State, a specific component, ad valorem component, and
value added tax are applied to cigarettes.




37 Council Directive 2008/118/EC of 16 December 2008 concerning the general arrangements for excise duty and repealing Directive
92/12/EEC



                                                                                                                            115
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Figure 5: Structures of Excise Duties on Cigarettes, in % of the Retail Selling Price
100

 90

 80

 70

 60
                                                                                                 Share of VAT
 50

 40                                                                                              Share of ad valorem
                                                                                                 excise
 30
                                                                                                 Share of speciﬁc
 20                                                                                              excise

 10

  0
       AT BE BG CY CZ DE DK EE EL ES FI FR HR HU IE IT LT LU LV MT NL PL PT RO SE SI SK UK

Source: European Commission 2017




Minimum rates
To achieve a greater approximation of rates, the EU Member States decided to introduce
minimum rates in 1992, in order assist in establishing the internal market. The tobacco excise
duty directive requires Member States to levy a minimum overall excise duty on cigarettes.
Member States that apply an excise duty of €115 or more, however, do not need to
comply with the 60 percent criterion above.


 PRODUCT CATEGORY               MINIMUM RATE

 Cigarettes                     At least EUR 90 per 1000 cigarettes and At least 60% of the
                                weighted average retail selling price



Figure 6 shows how a Member State could comply with these minimum requirements.
The fact that the minimum tax consists of an ad valorem component, which is related to
the price, could be an incentive to market products at a low(er) price since it would lead to
a lower ad valorem tax. This could in turn undermine tobacco control policies and cause
erosion of the tax base. This weakness could be compensated by a higher specific component
of the tax. However, the tobacco excise duty directive foresees yet another mechanism to
overcome this problem. The Member States also have the possibility to set a tax floor which
applies regardless of the price of a product. Figure 7 shows the effect of such a tax floor.




116 // Harmonizing Tobacco Taxation at the Regional Level: The European Union Experience
Figure 6: Example of a Tax Structure                                   Figure 7: Example of the Tax Floor on
for a Package of Cigarettes of 3 Euros                                 a Package of Cigarettes of 3 Euros


     0.5                     0.5                           0.5             0.5

                          VAT                        VAT                 VAT             VAT
     0.8                     0.8
                          Ad valorem                 Ad valorem          Minimum excise Minimum excise
                                                           1.8              1.8
                          Speciﬁc                    Speciﬁc             Net Price       Net Price
       1                       1
                          Net Price                  Net Price



     0.7                     0.7                           0.7             0.7




Unlike in the example in Figure 6, there is no possibility to reduce the ad valorem
component of the tax. If a product had a lower price, the tax burden would increase,
because the tax floor is expressed in a fixed amount per unit, while with the mixed
system a lower amount of ad valorem tax would be due.

The tobacco excise duty directive also lays down minimum excise duty rates for manufac-
tured tobacco products other than cigarettes. The structure for taxing these products is
slightly different (and simpler) than that used for cigarettes. Member States can choose
between applying a specific component or an ad valorem component, or if they wish, they
may apply a mixture of the two. Minimum rates are set out for three separate categories.

The minimum rates for fine-cut smoking tobacco will gradually be increased up to 50 percent
and €60 per kilogram in 2020.38

  PRODUCT CATEGORY                                     MINIMUM RATE

  Fine-cut smoking tobacco                             46% of the weighted average retail selling price
                                                       Or
                                                       €54 per kilogram

  Cigars and cigarillos                                5% of the retail selling price
                                                       Or 
                                                       €12 per 1000 or per kilogram

  Other smoking tobacco                                20% of the retail selling price
                                                       Or 
                                                       €22 per kilogram



38 According to Article 14 of Directive 2011/64/EU




                                                                                                           117
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




ASSOCIATION AGREEMENTS
The European Union has Association Agreements with many countries, including
neighboring countries such as Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Moldova, Montenegro,
Serbia, and Ukraine. An Association Agreement is a bilateral agreement between the
European Union and its members on one side and a country outside the European Union
(non-EU country) on the other side. The agreements are adapted to the specific situation
of each non-EU country. The aim of the agreements is to further develop, strengthen,
and extend the relations between the parties to the agreement. Sometimes setting up a
Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA) is part of an Association Agreement.
This results in an opening of the markets by removing the custom duties on import and
export and involves harmonization of legislation in the relevant sectors. By ratifying such an
agreement, the non-EU country commits, among other things, to implement EU law in
the national legislation. This also involves approximation of excise duty rates. Implementation
of DCFTA often takes several years. Therefore, also some non-EU countries are in the
process of aligning their excise duty rates and legislation applied to manufactured tobacco
to the EU requirements.



LESSONS LEARNED
One of the lessons learned relates to the decision-making procedure in the EU and reaching
agreement on the level of minimum rates. Experience in the EU in the area of excise
duties has shown that agreeing on relatively high minimum rates with transitional periods
for some Member States gives better results than agreeing on lower minimum rates
with the aim of constantly revising them over short periods of time. Although in the first
situation not all members reach the minimum at the beginning of the process, having a
deadline in a legal act obliging them to do so has proven to be a strong incentive to start
with increases even before the transitional period ends. In contrast, in the second situa-
tion, negotiations to increase minima could well prove difficult, with the result that the
“old” legislation and rates would remain in place. For example, in both the areas of energy
taxation and alcohol taxation, no agreement on new minima has been reached despite
several attempts to amend the legislation.39 Obviously, Member States in such a situation
are still free to decide individually to increase rates above the minimum. However, greater
divergence between the highest and lowest rates is more likely to occur, and an agreement
on new minima would be preferable.


39 COM (2006) 486, Proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 92/84/EEC on the approximation of the rates of excise duty on
alcohol and alcoholic beverages
COM (2011) 169, Proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 2003/96/EC restructuring the Community framework for the
taxation of energy products and electricity
Both withdrawn by: Withdrawal of Commission proposals, 7 March 2015, (2015/C 80/08), OJ C 80, p. 17–23



118 // Harmonizing Tobacco Taxation at the Regional Level: The European Union Experience
Figure 8: Romania, Excise Duty per                                       Figure 9: Revenue from Excise Duties
1000 Cigarettes, Euros                                                   on Cigarettes, € Million
€120.00                                                                  2500
€100.00                                                                  2000
 €80.00
                                                                         1500
 €60.00
                                                                         1000
 €40.00
€120.00                                                                 2500
 €20.00                                                                  500
€100.00                                                                 2000
   0.00                                                                    0
 €80.00       8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                              1
           00 00 20 20 20 20 20 20 20
                                                            1500     08 09 10 01 012 013 014 015 016
 €60.00 2 2                                                        20 20 20 2 2          2 2         2 2
Source: European Commission 2017                           1000
€40.00
Note: Romania successfully doubled its rates and revenues and has reached the minimum rates already.
                                                             500
 €20.00
€90.00                                                       700
   0.00                                                        0
              8 09 10 011 12 13 14 15 16                    600                    1
            0
€85.00 20 20 20 2 2 2 20 2 200   0           0                       08 09 10 01 012 013 014 015 016
                                                                   20 20 20 2 2          2 2       2   2
Figure 10: Croatia, Excise Duty per                         Figure 11: Revenue from Excise Duties
                                                            500
€80.00Cigarettes, Euros
1000                                                                     on Cigarettes,
                                                                         400                 € Million
€90.00
€75.00                                                                   300
                                                                         700
                                                                         200
                                                                         600
€85.00
€70.00
                                                                          100
                                                                         500
€80.00
€65.00                                                                     0
                                                                         400
                 2013       2014        2015        2016                              2013   2014    2015   2016
€75.00                                                                   300
                                                                         200
€70.00
                                                                         100

€65.00                                                                      0
                2013        2014        2015        2016                              2013   2014   2015    2016

Source: European Commission 2017



In the tobacco excise duty directive, an increase in the minimum rates for cigarettes from
€64 to €90 per 1000 pieces was foreseen on 1 January 2014. Of the 28 Member States,
nine were granted a transitional period until 31 December 2017.40 However, even though
this period has not ended, six out of nine Member States have already reached the minima.
The remaining three are very close and seem to be up to speed to comply before the end
of this year. A long-term tobacco tax policy, including gradual increases, seems to be the
success factor to align rates to the EU minima in new Member States. Figures 8–11 show
the developments of rates and revenues in Romania and Croatia, two of the nine Member
States with a transitional period.




40 Bulgaria, Estonia, Greece, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Croatia.



                                                                                                                   119
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Although Croatia’s experience began much more recently, the situation appears similar;
both rates and revenues have increased.

These experiences are in line with the overall developments in the EU, namely: increased
or stable revenues from excise duties on cigarettes, and declines in consumption which
are achieved by increasing rates resulting in a higher average excise duty collected per
1000 cigarettes.



CONCLUSION
The experience of the EU shows that both the establishment of economic and political
cooperation and the harmonization of tobacco taxation are lengthy processes that
require improvements and updates over time. Both processes took place in stages in
the EU. Finding agreements among members of a cooperative group is sometimes
challenging, and it has proven worthwhile to think ahead and aim to agree upon legislation
that is as “future proof” as possible. Currently, the definitions, the tax base, and the
structure of tobacco taxes on consumption are harmonized within the EU. Member
States have to respect minimum overall excise duty rates for all product categories of
manufactured tobacco.

The experience of the EU also confirms that different — and perhaps at first glance con-
tradictory — objectives can be reached with harmonization of tobacco taxation. During
the first stage of harmonization of tobacco taxation in the EU, the objective was to create
a framework which ensured the proper functioning of the internal market. Distortion of
competition and hindering the free movement of goods had therefore to be avoided.
To achieve this, it was decided that the tax burden on manufactured tobacco should be
similar in each Member State, which also supports the objective of ensuring a high level
of health protection. Another objective of the harmonized tobacco tax was to ensure the
collection of revenues for the Member States. Experiences in the EU have proven that it
is possible to achieve these different objectives: a properly functioning internal market, a
declining tobacco consumption trend, and stable revenues. The lower consumption has
been compensated by increased rates. Achieving these objectives is also within reach of new
Member States, where establishing a long-term tax policy with gradual increases to reach the
EU requirements has been a success factor in aligning their rates to the EU minima.




120 // Harmonizing Tobacco Taxation at the Regional Level: The European Union Experience
ABSTRACT
Some observers have used the potential regressivity of tobacco excise taxes
as an argument against raising these taxes. Since in many countries the poor
spend a larger proportion of their income on smoking than the better off,
higher tobacco tax rates appear to hurt poor households disproportionately.
This chapter focuses on the equity considerations raised by such claims. We
review key demographic facts on smoking prevalence, explore smokers’
adjustment behavior as tobacco taxes are increased, and marshal empirical
evidence from countries.


Smoking behavior and consumption expenditure on tobacco show large
disparities across population groups. Smoking prevalence is generally higher
among the poor. Worldwide, almost 30 percent of those in the poorest wealth
quintile currently smoke, compared to 21 percent of those in the wealthiest
 quintile. From a tax perspective, an increase in tobacco excise taxes is
almost always financially regressive. However, such an analysis considers
only short-term changes in disposable income and fails to include additional,
highly relevant outcomes.


A complete, accurate picture of the impacts of increasing tobacco excise taxes
must incorporate health benefits such as higher productivity in labor markets,
deaths averted and future (public and private) health expenditures saved, as
well as impoverishment averted. The price elasticity of demand for tobacco
is higher among poor households, which means that these show a stronger
response in their smoking behavior and receive a greater share of the health
and subsequent economic benefits of a tobacco tax increase than do better-off
households. There will be poor households who will suffer from higher taxes
on tobacco; however, good policy design can help these losers from higher
taxes to become winners in the medium and long term. When these factors
are considered, health gains and higher long-term labor-market productivity
among poorer people offset the apparent short-term financial regressivity of an
increase in tobacco excise taxes. What was portrayed as a regressive measure
is in fact a progressive policy change that creates welfare gains for poor and
vulnerable households.




122 // Executive Summary
6
     Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes

     TURNING SHORT-TERM LOSERS
    INTO LONG-TERM WINNERS?
     Rouselle F. Lavado, Moritz Meyer, Iryna Postolovska, and Renzo Efren Sotomayor




     INTRODUCTION41
     There are about 1.1 billion smokers in the world, and the tobacco burden is increasingly
     affecting low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), where around four in five smokers
     live. Secondhand smoke exposure remains a major problem; of the six million annual
     deaths from tobacco-related diseases, 600 thousand are connected to secondhand
     smoke exposure (NIH and WHO 2016). Tobacco taxation is a cornerstone of the World
     Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) and has
     been described by some experts as the single most important population-based health
     intervention (Jamison et al. 2013). However, some policy makers have used the potential
     regressivity of tobacco excise taxes as an argument against further tax increases.

     From a public health perspective, raising the price of cigarettes reduces consumption,
     therefore saving lives and sparing scarce health system resources. From an economic
     perspective, taxes are generally accepted as a means to correct for the negative
     consequences of certain individual decisions on society as a whole, termed externalities:
     for example, the increased costs to the health system and loss of productivity caused
     by smoking-related illnesses among smokers and non-smokers. However, introducing
     or increasing taxes on tobacco items raises concerns about their distributional impact.
     Since in many countries the poor spend a larger proportion of their disposable income
     on smoking than the better off, some observers argue that higher tobacco tax rates will
     disproportionately hurt the poor.




     41 Comments on this chapter were provided by Alan Fuchs and Patrick Hoang-Vu Eozenou. The authors would like to thank Blanca
     Moreno-Dodson and Patricio V. Marquez for guidance.
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Using a broader definition of welfare, which goes beyond short-term changes in financial
status, shows that a tax on tobacco could actually be both progressive on the individual
and family level,42 as well as socially desirable. Even though individuals are often aware of
tobacco’s harms, they become prolonged smokers — i.e., tobacco addicts — in large part
because they neglect self-induced damage for their health and abstract from negative
externalities for society. This reflects the psychological tendency to assign more weight to
costs and benefits near at hand than to those in the distant future — a pattern known as
hyperbolic discounting (Laibson 1997). Such behavior can ultimately generate large long-run
individual costs for smokers. In this context, tobacco taxation could act as a device to help
smokers internalize both the financial and health cost by reinforcing people’s self-control
(Cherukupalli 2010). This is consistent with the evidence, discussed below, of the high
percentage of smokers who would like to quit and often have tried several times to do
so. The expected impact at both individual and societal level strengthens the case for
increased tobacco taxation.

This chapter focuses on equity considerations relevant to tobacco taxation, and how
these may inform tax policy. Identifying households and individuals who will be
impacted by tax changes is critical in analyzing equity implications. Accordingly, the
first section of this chapter reviews key demographic facts on smoking prevalence and
tobacco consumption at the individual and household levels, including characteristic
socioeconomic gradients in smoking. The second section explores the adjustment
behavior of households and individuals as tobacco taxes are increased. The third
reviews empirical literature on countries that have increased tobacco taxes. The last
section concludes.



WHO SMOKES? SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
PATTERNS OF PREVALENCE
Smoking behavior and consumption expenditure on tobacco show large disparities across
population groups. Findings in this section present the latest available data on smoking
prevalence (across the welfare distribution, between adults and adolescents, and by
gender) and update findings from earlier studies (Bobak et al. 2000; IARC 2011; Yurekli et
al. 2016). We have compiled the latest available data on smoking prevalence from national
budget and consumption surveys, the Global Adult Tobacco Surveys (GATS), Global Youth
Tobacco Surveys (GYTS), and the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). These data reveal
the heterogeneity in smoking patterns across various socioeconomic categories.




42 The assumption here is that households share resources among individuals in the household. When one member of the family
smokes, the rest of the family have to consume less as the budget constraint becomes binding.



124 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
Figure 1: Share of Households Which Reports Positive Expenditure on Tobacco Items (by Decile of
National Welfare Distribution)

LOWER MIDDLE INCOME COUNTRIES                                                    UPPER MIDDLE INCOME COUNTRIES
100%                                                                             100%

90%                                                                               90%

80%                                                                               80%

70%                                                                               70%

60%                                                      arm2013                  60%                                                          col2010

50%                                                      bgd2010                  50%                                                          irq2006

40%                                                      gha2012                  40%                                                          mex2012
30%                                                      ind2011                  30%                                                          tha2010
20%                                                      vnm2012                  20%                                                          zaf2010
 10%                                                                               10%

  0%                                                                                0%
         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                                               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Data source: Global consumption data base.
Note: Horizontal axis shows decile of the welfare distribution (from poorest to richest). Countries are Armenia (arm), Ghana (gha), South
Africa (zaf ), Bangladesh (bgd), Vietnam (vnm), India (ind), Colombia (col), Mexico (mex), Thailand (thai), and Iraq (irq). Lower middle-income
economies are those with a GNI per capita between $1,026 and $4,035; upper middle-income economies are those with a GNI per capita
between $4,036 and $12,475.



                      A global comparison of smoking behavior shows that the share of households reporting
                      consumption of tobacco products differs substantially across countries but also along
                      the welfare distribution within each country (between relatively poor and rich house-
                      holds). Consumption can also differ by population groups, as in the case of South Africa,
                      where smoking prevalence differs among the black (African), white, colored (mixed
                      black and white ancestry), and Asian (mainly Indian) populations (Sitas et al. 2013). For
                      lower and upper middle-income countries, Figure 1 shows that countries exhibit marked
                      differences in the share of households reporting tobacco consumption. These patterns
                      reflect different social norms and price levels, among other factors. At the same time, data
                      compiled from household surveys suggest that, in the large majority of countries,
                      the share of households consuming tobacco is higher among the relatively poor than
                      among richer households.43 Additional analysis of consumption behavior in Armenia,
                      for example, shows that, not just the quantity, but also the quality of tobacco items
                      consumed changes substantially across the welfare distribution. Moving from the poorest




                      43 A limitation of reporting by household is the possibility of confounding factors varying across deciles, such as household size and the
                      number of adults (potential smokers) in the households. If poorer households have more potential smokers compared to richer ones, then
                      it is more likely that they will report positive expenditure. Moreover, the analysis by household does not look into sharing of resources
                      between household members, and between men and women who often show different smoking behavior.



                                                                                                                                                           125
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Figure 2: Share of Expenditure Which Goes to Tobacco Items (by Decile of National Welfare Distribution)

LOWER MIDDLE INCOME COUNTRIES                                                   UPPER MIDDLE INCOME COUNTRIES
10%                                                                             10%

 9%                                                                              9%

 8%                                                                              8%

 7%                                                                               7%
                                                                                                                                        col2010
 6%                                                     arm2013                  6%

 5%                                                                              5%                                                     irq2006
                                                        bgd2010
 4%                                                                              4%                                                     mex2012
                                                        gha2012
 3%                                                                              3%                                                     tha2010
                                                        ind2011
 2%                                                                              2%                                                     zaf2010
                                                        vnm2012
 1%                                                                               1%

 0%                                                                              0%
         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                                             1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Data source: Global consumption data base.
Note: Horizontal axis shows decile of the welfare distribution (from poorest to richest). Countries are Armenia (arm),
Ghana (gha), South Africa (zaf ), Bangladesh (bgd), Vietnam (vnm), India (ind), Colombia (col), Mexico (mex), Thailand
(thai), and Iraq (irq). Lower middle-income economies are those with a GNI per capita between $1,026 and $4,035;
upper middle-income economies are those with a GNI per capita between $4,036 and $12,475



to the richest decile in Armenia, the share of households consuming high-quality tobacco
items almost triples.44

Additionally, across all countries included in the analysis, relatively poorer households
spend a higher share of their available budget on tobacco than richer households. Figure
2 shows that, in both lower middle-income and upper middle-income countries, smoking
prevalence and the share of household expenditure devoted to tobacco vary along the
welfare distribution: higher in the first decile (poor) and declining as we approach the
tenth decile (rich).


Differences by Welfare Status
Smoking prevalence is generally higher among the poor. Based on the results of the
Demographic and Health Surveys from 52 countries,45 we find a consistent wealth gradi-
ent in smoking prevalence. Worldwide, almost 30 percent of those in the poorest wealth
quintile currently smoke, compared to 21 percent of those in the wealthiest quintile. The
gradient appears to be more pronounced in low- and lower middle-income countries,


44 Total expenditure reflects both quantities and prices. Based on the country example of Armenia, where relatively richer households
consume higher-quality tobacco products that are expected to be more expensive, it is likely that not only total expenditure on
tobacco items decreases over deciles but also the total quantities of tobacco consumed.
45 Raw datasets are obtained from: http://dhsprogram.com/data/



126 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
        Figure 3: Adult Male Smoking Prevalence by Country Income Classification and Quintile
        of the Welfare Distribution

                                                       40
                                                                   38
                                                              37
Smoking prevalence (% of male population ages 15–49)




                                                       35                                                                   33
                                                                                               35
                                                                                                                                                         31
                                                       30                                     32
                                                                                                                           30                                                           30
                                                                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                                                                        28

                                                       25
                                                              23

                                                       20
                                                                                                                            18
                                                                                               19

                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                         13

                                                       10                                                                                                                     Income
                                                                                                                                                                                 LIC
                                                        5                                                                                                                        LMIC
                                                                                                                                                                                 UMIC

                                                       0
                                                             Q1 (poor)                        Q2                           Q3                           Q4                       Q5 (rich)

        Data Source: Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) latest year since 2007; World Bank income classification.



                                                            where the smoking prevalence among the poorest quintile is 1.8 and 1.4 times higher,
                                                            respectively, than the prevalence among the wealthiest quintile (Figure 3 and Figure
                                                            4).46 These results align with those of previous studies, which have found associations
                                                            between higher socioeconomic status (typically measured in terms of individual or
                                                            household income or expenditure levels, or educational attainment) and lower probability
                                                            of smoking (Bobak et al. 2000; IARC 2011; Kostova et al. 2013). The relationship is quite
                                                            consistent in most countries for which DHS data are available, with the exception of
                                                            Armenia,47 the Kyrgyz Republic, Mali, Namibia, and Niger (Annex Figure 1). The atypical
                                                            findings in this group of countries probably reflect their early stages in the tobacco
                                                            epidemic (Lopez et al. 1994; Thun et al. 2012). In the early phases of the epidemic’s
                                                            characteristic “natural history,” when overall smoking prevalence is still increasing within
                                                            a country, smoking rates are more likely to be higher among the better off. As countries
                                                            transition, cigarettes become more affordable for the poor, while those in the higher
                                                            socio-economic strata become more aware of the potential risks associated with
                                                            smoking.48 As a result, the relationship is reversed, with the poor now more likely to
                                                            smoke than the rich.


                                                            46 David and colleagues (2010) also find a similar pattern using data from the World Health Surveys.
                                                            47 Raw datasets are obtained from: http://dhsprogram.com/data/
                                                            48 The transition period takes quite some time, as smoking is an addiction, awareness is limited, and elasticity is low for higher house-
                                                            holds. Hence, this process takes some time and big gains are difficult in the short term.



                                                                                                                                                                                                 127
       Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




       Figure 4: Ratio of Adult Male Smoking Prevalence in the Poorest Quintile vs. Adult Male Smoking Prevalence in
       the Wealthiest Quintile

                                                  Poland
                                    Germany
                                                                    Ukraine
                                                                              1.4                                      Kazakhstan
                          France                                    1.3                                                                                            Mongolia

                                          Italy                                                                                       0.7
                  Spain                                                                      0.8
                                                                             Turkey                       1.2
                                                        1.2                                                                                                                                            Japan
                                                                                                                                                           China
                                                                                            Iraq                Iran
                                                                                                                           Pakistan
                          Algeria                 Libya                                                                    1.2                 1.6
                                                                    Egypt
                                                                                            Saudi                                      India         1.5
                                                                                            Arabia                                      2.0
                     0.8             0.8                              Sudan                                                                                                         1.6
1.1                                                                                            Yemen
                     1.1                                                                                                                                               2.5
                                    0.6
      3.8                                                                             1.0
         4.3                               1.5
                                                          Congo                                           5.0
                                          2.0           (Kinshasa)                  1.5                                                                                       1.4
                                                                                                    1.7
                                                              2.8             1.7
                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                3.1                 2.4

                                                                       1.9                         1.0
                                                  0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                Australia
                                                                                    1.4
                                                          South                     1.3
                                                          Africa




Light green is the lowest and dark green is highest
0.500                                                                                                              5.000
Data Source: Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) latest year since 2007.



       There are a number of possible explanations for higher smoking prevalence among
       the poor (Bobak et al. 2000). First, poor people are less aware of the adverse health
       consequences of smoking. A number of studies have found significant disparities in
       tobacco-related knowledge by income and education (Oncken et al. 2005; Rutten et al.
       2008; Siahpush et al. 2006). For example, using data from the International Tobacco
       Control (ITC) Four Country Survey, Siahpush et al. (2006) found that the odds of knowing
       that smoking causes heart disease, stroke, and lung cancer were 71 percent, 34 percent,
       and 83 percent higher, respectively, for respondents with high income as compared
       to those with low income.

       In addition, some observers have argued that smoking can become a coping mechanism
       for the poor — a way for people to release some of the stress resulting from their material




       128 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
deprivation — or a reward (Droomers et al. 2002; Graham 1994; Peretti-Watel et al. 2009).
There is also some evidence that poor people are more likely to become nicotine depen-
dent, as indicated by markers such as the time between waking up and smoking the first
cigarette of the day, or perceived difficulty in abstaining from cigarettes; these findings
may be related to non-cognitive skills, including self-control (Jarvis 1998; Wardle et al.
1998). Moreover, from an opportunity-cost perspective, given the same perceived
benefits and adverse outcomes related to smoking, potential loss of labor income due to
ill health is lower for the poor.49 Such socially stratified smoking patterns impose a heavier
disease burden on the poor, and therefore contribute to widening social and economic
disparities between more and less privileged segments of society.


Differences by Age
Almost 22 percent of the world’s adult population currently smoke. Adult smoking
prevalence is highest in East Asia and the Pacific, where 30 percent of adults smoke.50
Meanwhile, the lowest rates are currently found in Sub-Saharan Africa (16 percent),
although recent trends have shown significant increases.

Globally, almost 10 percent of students reported smoking at least one cigarette in the 30
days prior to being surveyed. This finding is based on data from the Global Youth Tobacco
Surveys (GYTS), a school-based survey of students aged 13–15 years. The highest rates are
observed in East Asia and the Pacific (16 percent), Latin America and the Caribbean
(11 percent), and Europe and Central Asia (10 percent) (Figure 5). In some countries,
smoking prevalence among youth is alarmingly high. We find that over 30 percent of
students in Czech Republic, Lithuania, and Latvia reported smoking cigarettes in the past
month. In Papua New Guinea, this number reached 44 percent.


Differences by Gender
Prevalence of smoking is significantly lower among females as compared to males.
This can largely be attributed to social and cultural norms. Based on the latest available
data, only 7 percent of women smoke globally compared to 36 percent of men (Figure
6). The gender differential, however, appears to be much smaller among youth. In many
countries, young women report rates of tobacco use similar to those of their male
counterparts. This could be a result of changing norms influenced by aggressive tobacco
marketing campaigns specifically targeting young women (Yurekli et al. 2016). This trend
suggests that the number of adult women smoking in the future is also likely to increase,




49 While the poor would lose less in absolute terms, in relative terms, the cost to their and their families’ resiliency is greater, including
the risk of falling into more extreme poverty due to incapacity of the key breadwinner.
50 Smoking prevalence is highest in Kiribati (55 percent), Lao PDR (38 percent), and Indonesia (35 percent).



                                                                                                                                          129
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Figure 5: Smoking Prevalence: Youth vs. Adults, Latest Year Available Since 2006
                         35%
                                     30%          29%
                         30%
                                                                                26%
Smoking Prevalence (%)




                         25%
                                                                                                                          22%
                         20%                                                                   20%
                               16%                                17%
                                                                                                            16%
                         15%
                                            10%             11%                                                     10%
                         10%
                                                                                                       8%
                                                                           7%
                          5%                                                              5%


                         0%
                               East Asia    Europe &      Latin America Middle East      South Asia   Sub-Saharan    Total
                               & Paciﬁc    Central Asia    & Caribbean & North Africa                    Africa

                                                                        Youth    Adult
Source: Global Youth Tobacco Surveys and WHO Global Health Observatory, latest available year.
Notes: Smoking prevalence for youth is from the Global Youth Tobacco Surveys for latest year available since 2006.
Only includes data from nationally representative surveys. The GYTS is a school-based survey of students aged 13–15
years. One limitation of GYTS is that it misses out-of-school youth who will most likely have higher smoking prevalence.
The adult smoking prevalence is from the WHO Global Health Observatory estimates based on data from the Global
Adult Tobacco Surveys (GATS) and other national statistics.



but the extent of such increases is likely to differ by region and will depend on other factors,
such as gender empowerment (Hitchman and Fong 2010). In fact, Thun et al. (2012) have
posited that the stages of the tobacco epidemic in LMICs might differ significantly by gender.



HOW HOUSEHOLDS ADJUST WHEN
TOBACCO TAXES RISE
How regressive or progressive the incidence of taxation will be can be assessed by
well-established methodologies. The following data are required: (a) information on total
expenditure and expenditure on tobacco products, which can be obtained from house-
hold surveys; and (b) information on the tax rates, both excise and VAT. Price elasticities
of consumption are a crucial input when simulating expected changes in consumption
behavior in response to an increase in tobacco taxes. Reliable estimates at the country
level are still limited in developing countries but are becoming increasingly available.
They, together with more comprehensive data available for higher income countries,
provide a basis for modeling consumption behavior in developing countries. Estimates
show that price elasticities are concentrated in the -0.20 to – 0.60 range, but there is larger
variation in elasticities in LMICs than in HICs, with estimates ranging from -0.15 to -0.90




130 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
    Figure 6: Smoking Prevalence by Gender and Region, Latest Year Available Since 2006
                         60%


                                              49%
                         50%                                       47%
                                                                                                       44%
Smoking Prevalence (%)




                         40%
                                                                                                                                                                    36%
                                                                                                                             35%


                         30%                                                                                                                       28%
                                                                                   26%
                                          23%

                         20%

                                                                 12%             13%                                                                             14%
                                  10% 10%                  11%                                                                               11%
                                                                                                     10%
                         10%                          8%                 9% 8%                  9%
                                                                                                                        7%                               7% 7%
                                                                                                                   4%              5%
                                                                                           3%                                           4%
                                                                                                              3%

                          0%
                                      East Asia         Europe &         Latin America     Middle East            South Asia       Sub-Saharan              Total
                                      & Paciﬁc         Central Asia       & Caribbean     & North Africa                              Africa

                                                                         Girls         Women               Boys         Men
    Source: Smoking prevalence for adolescents is from the Global Youth Tobacco Surveys for latest year available since 2006.
    The adult smoking prevalence is from the WHO Global Health Observatory estimates based on data from the Global Adult
    Tobacco Surveys (GATS) and other national statistics.


                         (IARC 2011; Jha et al. 2015). Recent estimates from Lebanon and the Kyrgyz Republic, for
                         example, have found elasticities of -0.26 and -0.54, respectively (Postolovska et al. 2017;
                         Salti et al. 2016).

                         The distributional impact of higher excise rates on tobacco51 is primarily determined
                         by the consumption behavior across different groups of the welfare distribution before
                         the reform, the proposed changes in tax base and tax rate, and the elasticity to change
                         behavior following the reform. Here, the standard fiscal incidence analysis describes
                         regressivity and progressivity in terms of short-term changes in the available budget
                         for different segments of the welfare distribution. We will argue shortly that a broader
                         definition of welfare, encompassing more than financial welfare or taking account of
                         medium- and long-term welfare as well as short-term changes in consumption behavior,
                         can actually shift the results of a fiscal incidence analysis.

                         Findings from a fiscal incidence analysis describe the distributional impact of taxes (but
                         also transfers) and can guide the design of tax policies in terms of equity considerations.
                         This analysis revolves around the observation that most taxes do have a distributional




                         51 Either through a higher value added tax or an increase in the excise rate.



                                                                                                                                                                       131
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Figure 7 (a): Share of Households (by                  Figure 7 (b): Share of Consumption
Decile of the Welfare Distribution)                    Expenditure on Tobacco (by Decile,
which Report Tobacco Consumption                       Conditional on Smoking)

80%                                                    12%

70%
                                                      10%
60%
                                                       8%
50%

40%                                                    6%

30%
                                                       4%
20%
                                                       2%
10%

 0%                                                    0%
       1    2   3    4   5    6    7   8    9   10             1   2    3   4    5    6    7   8    9   10

Note: Horizontal axis shows decile of the welfare      Note: Horizontal axis shows decile of the welfare distri-
distribution (from poorest to richest).                bution (from poorest to richest).
Data sources: Global consumption data base, ILCS       Data sources: Global consumption data base, ILCS
Armenia                                                Armenia



impact, as they impose a larger burden for some individuals or households than for
others. Traditionally, a fiscal incidence analysis uses market income to rank households
from the poorest to the richest and then assesses the tax payment across the welfare
distribution. A tax is progressive if the proportion paid — in relation to market income —
increases as income rises. A tax is regressive if the opposite is true: if, as people’s incomes
rise, they pay out a smaller proportion of their income for the tax. In other words, a
regressive tax is a tax that takes a larger percentage of market income from low-income
earners than from high-income earners.

We explore this issue in greater depth by looking at the situation in a specific country,
Armenia (Figure 7). According to data collected from the national household budget
survey, the share of Armenian households that report tobacco consumption is smaller
for the bottom of the welfare distribution. (As discussed earlier, Armenia is one of a small
number of countries where this pattern is observed.) In 2013, 36 percent of households
in the second decile of the welfare distribution reported positive expenditure on tobacco
products. This share increases almost monotonically to 56 percent for the ninth decile
(that is, as we move up the income scale from poorer to richer). However, if we look at the
share of each household’s consumption expenditure that is spent on tobacco, this picture
changes systematically. Restricting the sample to households that report positive expen-
diture on tobacco, the share spent on tobacco (relative to total expenditure) decreases
from 9 percent for the second decile to 6 percent for the ninth decile. This being the case,



132 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
Box 1 // What Guides Optimal Tax Policy?
Under the Twin Goals, the World Bank is promoting           •	 Equity: Tax policy is fair if all individuals in society
policies that seek to end absolute poverty and boost the       contribute (bear the burden of taxes) according to
income growth of the bottom 40 percent of the welfare          their ability to pay. Under this consideration, taxes
distribution. Putting these goals into practice implies        contribute to reducing inequality.
that policy recommendations pay special attention           •	 Externalities imposed by consumption of some
to the distributional impact of any policy reform, to          goods and services: Discourage harmful behavior
ensure that the relatively poor in the population are not      that has negative externalities for other members
adversely hit either by higher costs or lower benefits.        of society. For instance, higher excises on health-
Tax policy provides multiple examples where consider-          damaging addictive products trigger a reduction in
ations of equity influence the definition of the tax base      their consumption, therefore benefiting society as
and the design of tax rates. For instance, a personal          a whole.
income tax with multiple brackets and increasing mar-
                                                            Each of these considerations supports policy mak-
ginal tax rates ensures that households which show a
                                                            ers to evaluate the potential welfare implications of
higher ability to pay also contribute more to tax collec-
                                                            taxes from an ex-ante perspective. However, there
tion. However, equity is not the only consideration that
                                                            are numerous trade-offs among these objectives,
should guide policy makers in the design of tax policies.
                                                            which authorize different policy choices depending
The literature on public finance establishes at least       on overall development goals and priorities. Further-
four major considerations which should guide the            more, complementary measures such as redistributive
optimal design of tax policy:                               policies can help to mitigate negative effects, and turn
•	 Revenue collection and administrative cost:              losers of a reform into winners.
   Mobilize revenues that ensure financial and fiscal       For example, an excise tax on tobacco must be
   sustainability of the government budget, taking          designed taking into account all these objectives,
   account of the feasibility and administrative cost       using a medium-term horizon, in order to make a
   of enforcing the policy. Accordingly, any proposal       policy choice that is consistent with broader devel-
   to change tax base or tax rates needs to be eval-        opment goals. More specifically, the assessment on
   uated in terms of gains or losses of revenues.           the distributional impact needs to go beyond short-
•	 Efficiency: Minimize dead-weight loss of taxation        term changes in the financial status, but should also
   by prioritizing taxation of goods that are inelastic     account for behavioral changes in smoking behavior
   in demand. Under this principle, tax policy should       and long-term gains related to higher productivity
   aim to reduce distortions to taxpayers’ decisions.       in labor markets and better health. Moreover, policy
   Note, though, that this general principle needs to       makers need to account for private and public gains,
   be interpreted with caution for decisions warped         because an excise tax on tobacco helps to eliminate
   by addiction (such as smoking).                          negative externalities and thereby raises social welfare.




                   we expect that any increase in taxes or excises on tobacco will be financially regressive, at
                   first glance: it will reduce available budgets more for relatively poor households than for
                   relatively richer households.

                   The preliminary findings we’ve described concerning the financial regressivity of higher
                   tobacco taxes and excises do not account for changes in consumption behavior, which
                   might also show differences across the welfare distribution. Results concerning regressivity


                                                                                                                          133
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




change if the analysis incorporates: behavioral adjustments, other economic gains, and
additional dynamic considerations that affect people’s welfare, beyond direct changes to
their available budgets (Fuchs and Meneses 2016). We will look carefully at each of these
elements in turn.


Behavioral Adjustments
As evidenced by numerous empirical studies, the demand for tobacco products is
relatively inelastic, due to the addictive element of tobacco consumption and lack of
substitutes. This means that an increase in the price of tobacco products will lead to
a less than proportional decrease in quantity sold. Existing literature suggests that in
response to a 10 percent increase in prices for tobacco items, demand decreases by
around 4 percent (IARC 2011). This effect is higher in developing countries and varies
according to income. Relatively poorer households adjust their behavior more than
richer households, with an estimated elasticity of 0.8 versus 0.4, respectively, which
sharply reduces apparent regressivity.

The addiction to tobacco may be a rational decision made by individuals; this may influence
adjustment behavior when prices change. The most commonly used framework to
explain rational addiction behavior was introduced by Gary Becker and Kevin Murphy
in 1988. Their model suggests that individuals may rationally engage in addictive behav-
iors to maximize their utility over their lifespan (Becker and Murphy 1988). The model
distinguishes between myopic and rational addiction. Myopic addiction determines the
person’s current consumption only based on his or her past consumption and discounts
the future at an infinitely high rate. On the other hand, a person with a rational addiction
determines his or her consumption not only based on past consumption (or past prices),
but also based on future prices. In other words, if a rationally addicted person expects the
price to increase in the next period, he or she will decrease his or her consumption in the
current period. It is important to note that the future price not only includes the actual price
of the good but also the cost associated with its consumption (such as health care costs).

The rational addiction model has been widely criticized, particularly for its assumption
of perfect information and of the individual’s ability to correctly assess the risk of smoking
(Chaloupka and Warner 2000; Chaloupka et al. 2000). These assumptions contradict
empirical evidence, which shows that individuals regret that they ever started smoking
and would like to quit but are not able to (Fong et al. 2004; Gruber and Koszegi 2002).
According to 2013 Gallup polling, 74 percent of smokers in the United States would like
to quit, and more than 85 percent of smokers report having tried to quit at least once.
Quitting success rates, however, are quite low. Moreover, as discussed earlier, knowledge
of tobacco-related risks is also quite low in many settings, particularly among the poor
(Oncken et al. 2005; Rutten et al. 2008; Siahpush et al. 2006;) and among young people.



134 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
An important element to consider when discussing decisions related to tobacco con-
sumption is the notion of time-inconsistent preferences. A person who exhibits different
relative preferences on two separate occasions has time-inconsistent preferences (Becker
and Mulligan 1997; Gruber and Kozsegi 2002; Laibson 1997; O’Donoghue and Rabin 2003;
O’Donoghue and Rabin 2015). In relation to smoking, individuals often indicate that they
would like to quit after a certain amount of time, but fail to do so when the time comes.
While individuals appear to make long-run decisions taking into account all costs and
benefits, in the short-run they base their decision on immediate costs or gratification. In
other words, they discount the future. This is the phenomenon of hyperbolic discounting
evoked previously.

A central assumption in rational addiction theory is that of constant preferences. Empirical
evidence, however, has suggested that most individuals exhibit present-biased preferences.
This results in self-control problems, as individuals may constantly postpone their plans
to stop smoking. A number of studies have investigated this phenomenon. For example,
Kan (2007) and Choi and Boyle (2013) find that an individual’s intention to quit smoking
is associated with her support for commitment devices (such as smoking bans and
cigarette excise tax increases). This further challenges the validity of time-consistent
preferences. Notably, Gruber and Mullainathan (2002) find that tobacco taxes can make
smokers happier. This indicates that a time-inconsistent model of smoking is more
appropriate. It also suggests that cigarette taxes can improve welfare.

Since the adverse health outcomes related to tobacco consumption are only observed in
the long run, with few immediate consequences of smoking, time-inconsistent preferences
negatively influence the individual’s ability to exhibit self-control. The poor, in particular,
might be willing to quit but have fewer resources available to them to stop smoking.

Tobacco taxes can thus be viewed as a self-commitment device. While behavioral anomalies
may be costly to all individuals, the poor have less disposable income to waste (Mullainathan
and Shafir 2009). By encouraging individuals to quit or preventing them from starting
smoking, the distortion in behavior caused by taxes can actually raise welfare among
those who are at risk of smoking.

Monetary incentives to stop smoking have been found to be successful. A bank in the
Philippines, for example, offered smokers an opportunity to open a CARES (Committed
Action to Reduce and End Smoking) savings account as an incentive to quit (Gine et al.
2010). The authors found that smokers randomly offered the CARES plan were 3 percentage
points more likely to pass the urine test for smoking cessation at the end of the study
(Gine et al. 2010).

The nature of smoking addiction also helps us predict, to a large extent, the possible
responses to tobacco price increases. Literature shows that youth are more responsive to
price changes than older populations, as recent reviews suggest that price elasticity for


                                                                                              135
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




youth may be two to three times higher than for older smokers (IARC 2014; WHO 2011),
primarily due to lower disposable incomes. Since adolescent smokers have shorter smoking
histories than adults, they are likely to respond more to price changes than long-time
smokers who are addicted (IARC 2011; Lewitt, Coate, and Grossman 1981). Moreover,
price changes can lead to peer effects, which have been found to be a large determinant
of smoking among youth (Clark and Loheac 2007; Fletcher 2010; Powell, Tauras, and Ross
2005). Not only can higher prices directly reduce youth smoking, but also they can
indirectly affect smoking by decreasing peer smoking.


Other Economic Gains
Thanks in part to the higher elasticity of demand for tobacco products among relatively
poorer households, such households will be the main beneficiaries of other economic
gains, both monetary and non–monetary, when tobacco taxes rise. These additional
benefits include higher productivity in the labor market and better health, resilience
through lower risk of breadwinners falling ill or dying prematurely, as well as cost saving
(both private and public health expenditure) in the treatment of tobacco-related illness.

When considering the potential for smoking cessation to improve people’s labor pro-
ductivity and earnings, we recall that households in which someone smokes appear to
earn less over time than otherwise similar households in which there are no smokers.
Such evidence comes, for example, from the Philippines Family Income and Expenditure
Survey (FIES), in which researchers have applied cohort analysis to repeated waves of
FIES data to capture the long-term effects of smoking. Results show that, over time,
the incomes of smokers and non-smokers diverge, with smokers earning less (Figure 8).
By favoring smoking cessation among people at the lower end of the welfare scale,
tobacco taxes have the potential to reduce the number of people suffering from this
smoking-related earnings handicap.


Dynamic Considerations
Undoubtedly, the most important reason to increase tobacco taxes is to discourage use of
the product and, as a result, avert the potential adverse health consequences of smoking.
Not only can higher excise rates reduce the number of deaths through induced smoking
cessation, but they can also decrease expenditures on treatment for tobacco-related
diseases. Given the large costs associated with such treatment, by encouraging smokers
to quit or averting initiation, tobacco taxes can bring financial risk protection to house-
holds by preventing such medical expenditures altogether (Verguet et al. 2015). Again,
these gains will be higher for relatively poor households — as they show a higher smoking
prevalence today and their demand is more responsive to price changes. In sum, the multiple
benefits accruing to low-income households have the potential to offset the additional
monetary burden imposed on these households through an increase in tobacco prices.


136 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
Figure 8: Smokers Tend to Earn Less over Time

COHORT 1: AGE 21
       1: AGE 21 TO
                 TO 47
                    47                                        COHORT 10:
                                                                     10: AGE
                                                              COHORT         48 TO
                                                                         AGE 48 TO 74
                                                                                   74
COHORT
 12                                                             12
                                                                12
 12


11.5
11.5                                                          11.5
                                                              11.5

  11
  11
                                                                11
                                                                11
10.5
10.5

                                                              10.5
                                                              10.5
 10
 10


9.5
9.5                                                            10
                                                               10
       20
       20        25
                 25        30
                           30         35
                                      35        40
                                                40   45
                                                     45                50
                                                                       50        55
                                                                                 55        60
                                                                                           60        65
                                                                                                     65        70
                                                                                                               70
                     of Household
                 Age of
                 Age              Heads
                        Household Heads                                       Age of
                                                                              Age    Household Heads
                                                                                  of Household Heads
            Non-Smoker
            Non-Smoker         Households with
                               Households      Smokers
                                          with Smokers                  Non-Smoker
                                                                        Non-Smoker         Households with
                                                                                           Households with Smokers
                                                                                                           Smokers

Source: FIES 1997, 2000, 2003, 2006, and 2009



                  Box 2 illustrates the overall results of this dynamic. It presents the potential consequences
                  of increasing the tobacco tax in Kyrgyz Republic (Figure 9).

                  As many of these gains are difficult to quantify monetarily, the standard fiscal incidence
                  analysis traditionally ignores these changes. To have a holistic view of the impact of tobacco
                  taxation, its effect has to be viewed as incorporating the following: (i) averted premature
                  deaths; (ii) higher incomes; (iii) averted out-of-pocket expenditures from tobacco-related
                  diseases; and (iv) averted impoverishment (considering that poverty is not just low income




                  Box 2 // Estimating the Potential Consequences of Increasing
                  Tobacco Taxes in the Kyrgyz Republic
                  At present, tobacco taxes in the Kyrgyz Republic are among the lowest in the region. Yet smoking
                  is one of the country’s top causes of mortality, implicated in more than 20 percent of deaths
                  among males. An extended cost-effectiveness analysis (ECEA) was conducted for the Kyrgyz
                  Republic to assess the health, financial, and distributional consequences of raising cigarette
                  taxes, with a particular focus on financial risk protection. In particular, we estimated the number
                  of premature deaths averted, out-of-pocket expenditures on tobacco-related diseases averted,
                  and number of poverty cases averted as a result of tobacco tax increases. Estimates were made
                  using the WHO-recommended 75 percent tax rate. Given that smoking is heavily concentrated
                  among men in the Kyrgyz Republic, the ECEA was conducted for the male population only.




                                                                                                                    137
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Figure 9: Smoking Prevalence (% of Adult Population) by Wealth Quintile: Kyrgyz Republic
                         35%
                                                                                                     30%
                         30%
                                                26%
                                 25%                         25%                 25%
Smoking Prevalence (%)




                         25%

                         20%

                         15%

                         10%

                         5%

                         0%
                               Quintile 1   Quintile 2    Quintile 3          Quintile 4           Quintile 5
                               (poorest)                                                           (richest)

Source: Authors’ calculations using KIHS 2015




Box 3 // Higher Tobacco Taxes Would Bring Large Health
and Financial Benefits
Our results indicate that a higher tobacco tax would bring large health and financial benefits to
Kyrgyz households and be pro-poor. Under the 75 percent tax, 104,000 premature deaths would
be averted, along with US$ 2.4 million in out-of-pocket expenditures and 12,100 new poverty
cases. In addition, government savings on tobacco-related health expenditures would amount to
US$ 7.3 million. As shown in Figure 10, the benefits of tobacco tax increases are concentrated
among the bottom 60 percent of the population, with almost 50 percent of averted deaths and
45 percent of out-of-pocket expenditures averted accruing to the bottom two consumption
quintiles. Given, however, the higher smoking prevalence among the richer quintiles, the price
increase would also bring about benefits for the highest quintile in terms of reductions in
out-of-pocket expenditures related to tobacco-related diseases.




but also includes human development and social inclusion variables). Averted premature
deaths among quitters were the primary health outcome. The averted deaths were then
used to calculate numbers of averted cases of impoverishment and averted out-of-pocket
expenditures due to the lower incidence of tobacco-related diseases.

This dynamic approach thus balances short-term (financial) losses against long-term
(financial and non-financial) gains (see Box 3). Meanwhile, the possibility to change
behavior and thereby reduce negative smoking-related externalities for society makes
tobacco taxes a good candidate for inclusion within so-called “sin taxes.”



138 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
Figure 10: Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Results by Individual Consumption
Quintile for a Shift to a 75 Percent Tobacco Excise Tax Rate
100%                 11                           0.3                         0.9                          0
 80%                 17                           0.4                         1.3
                                                                                                            7
 60%                 25                           0.6                         1.8
 40%                 25                           0.6                         1.7
 20%                                                                                                        5
                     27                           0.5                         1.5
  0%                                                                                                       0
              Premature deaths           OOP expenditures                  Government                Poverty cases
               averted (1000s)          averted (million USD)            savings related            averted (1000s)
                                                                       to tobacco-related
                                                                        diseases averted
                                                                          (million USD)

                                   Q1 (poorest)         Q2      Q3       Q4         Q5 (richest)

Note: No poverty cases are averted in the poorest consumption quintile given that 32 percent of the population is
already below the poverty line.




       EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE FROM COUNTRIES

       Tobacco Tax Increases and Smoking Prevalence
       Even though low-income individuals smoke more than wealthier people (Bobak et al.
       2000), the price elasticity is also higher for the poor (Barkat et al. 2012; Townsend 1994).
       Based on this, poor smokers are likely to accrue relatively more health benefits than rich
       smokers as a result of a tax increase, while wealthier smokers are expected to pay the bulk
       of the tax burden. Estimates from Thailand suggest that the lowest socioeconomic class
       would pay 6 percent of an increase in tobacco tax revenues but benefit from 58 percent
       of averted deaths (Jha et al. 2012). Results from China (Verguet et al. 2015) indicate that a
       50 percent increase in excise tax on cigarettes would lead to 79 million years of life gained;
       reduce household expenditures on tobacco by US$21 billion; diminish expenditures on
       tobacco-related diseases by US$6.6 billion; and provide financial risk protection equivalent
       to US$1.3 billion for the lowest-income quintile of households over a 50-year period.

       A study by Kim et al. (2006) investigated the effect among teenage students of an average
       29.0 percent increase in tobacco prices in Korea in 2004. They found that 11.7 percent
       quit smoking and 20.5 reduced consumption; however, 32 percent substituted cheaper
       brands, which indicates that tax increases are more effective in curbing consumption
       when applied on specific taxes rather than ad valorem.

       A longitudinal study by Tabuchi and colleagues (2016) among Japanese smokers reported
       that from 2005 to 2012, smoking prevalence decreased from 30 to 24 percent. The


                                                                                                                      139
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




researchers found that a tobacco price increase of 37 percent in 2010 was significantly
associated with cessation and prevention of relapse among quitters — particularly those
with the lowest incomes.

In a systematic review for Latin American countries, Guindon and colleagues (2015)
found that cigarette prices have a negative and statistically significant effect on tobacco
consumption in 32 studies examined.

More recent country experience in the Philippines shows that the increase in the country’s
tobacco taxes, that raised the minimum tax more than fourfold, led to a decrease in smoking
prevalence — from 30 percent in 2011 to 25 percent in 2015 (Kaiser et al. 2016). Results
from surveys also reveal that the number of cigarettes smoked per day decreased from
10 to 9. Reduction in smoking was greatest among youth (18–24 years old), with prevalence
dropping from 35 to 22 percent from 2012 to 2015. For the wealthiest, smoking prevalence
fell from 25 to 14 percent, among the middle class it stayed the same at 26 percent, and
among the poorest, prevalence fell from 38 to 27 percent.

Finally, there is a concern that higher cigarette taxes might simply lead to smokers’ replacing
cigarettes with other health-damaging products. However, there are few close substitutes
for tobacco and a relatively small variety of tobacco products besides cigarettes (bidis,
cigars, pipes). Jha et al. (2011) found that the substitution between cigarettes and bidis
in India are is quite limited, involving switching from bidis to cigarettes and not the other
way around. In settings outside the particular consumption patterns of India, substitution
effects are more common. Chaloupka et al. (2012) have reported that part of the reduction
in consumption of one tobacco product might be offset by increases in the use of other
tobacco products, if the prices of these other products do not also rise. This has also been
observed for roll-your-own tobacco in the United States (Furman 2016). Therefore, the
recommendation is to implement comparable increases in the taxes on all tobacco products
where this is practicable. In the case of South Asia, it is more prudent to start with higher
cigarette taxes while better regulating bidis (Jha et al. 2017).


Tobacco Tax Increase and Government Revenues
Some policy makers express concerns that an increase in tobacco tax could lead to lower
revenues. The decrease in consumption provoked by the higher tax might actually push
revenues below the baseline level (Laffer 2014). This relationship between rates of taxation
and resulting government revenue is the so-called Laffer curve, one implication of which is
that increasing tax rates beyond a certain point will no longer lead to higher revenue.52



52 The IMF report on “How to design and enforce tobacco excises” (Petit and Nagy 2016) summarizes the most recent discussion on
the optimal design of tax instruments on the revenue side of the government budget. This report explores whether excises on tobacco
should be ad valorem or specific and outlines options on how to use incentives on the expenditure side to raise accountability and
maximize health impact, for example by earmarking for expenditures.



140 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
In practice, however, this point is difficult to identify (Petit and Nagy 2016). The Laffer curve
has also yet to be observed in countries that have increased taxes for tobacco. Experience
from various countries shows that, even though tobacco consumption decreases because
of the tax, the percentage increase in excise tax per unit is greater than the percentage
decrease in tobacco consumption. In Thailand, tax revenue doubled when the cigarette
excise rose from 60 percent to 80 percent of wholesale prices between 1994 and 2007
(Vethesatogit 2008). From 1990 to 2012, excise tax per pack increased by 552 percent in real
terms, while excise tax revenues increased by 283 percent (Blecher and Van Walbeek 2014).
In the Philippines, one year after the implementation of the “sin tax” law, tax collections from
excise had increased by 86 percent, compared to the previous year. In 2015, total sin tax
collection amounted to approximately US$ 3 billion, more than 1 percent of the country’s
GDP (Kaiser, Bredenkamp and Iglesias 2016).



LONG-TERM HEALTH GAINS FROM
TOBACCO TAXATION: THE EXPERIENCE
OF HIGH-INCOME COUNTRIES
The full impact of reducing smoking prevalence on the occurrence of smoking-attributable
diseases in developing countries will take many decades to become evident. However,
low- and middle- income countries can benefit from the experience of developed countries
that succeeded in reducing smoking prevalence during the previous century.

At the beginning of the twentieth century, lung cancer was rare in the United Kingdom;
however, as the consumption of manufactured cigarettes increased, the incidence of
lung cancer became epidemic. By the middle of the century, with 80 percent of British
men and 40 percent of women smoking, lung cancer became a major cause of death in
the country (Doll et al. 1994). In the 1950s, based on case-control studies, the scientific
community concluded that smoking was the main cause of lung cancer. Later, more
evidence would show that smoking was connected to cardiovascular and respiratory
diseases, low birth weight, and other forms of cancer, as is well known today.

In the second part of the twentieth century, the United Kingdom managed to substantially
decrease the prevalence of smoking, which eventually translated into a reduction in
lung cancer occurrence. The prevalence of smoking among men in early middle age was
halved between 1950 and 1990, while the lung cancer death rate fell even more rapidly.
Today, in the United Kingdom, there are twice as many ex-cigarette smokers as smokers
above the age 50 years (Peto et al. 2000).




                                                                                               141
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




The U.K. experience shows us the following:

   •	 Widespread smoking cessation has approximately halved lung cancer mortality
      from the level that would have been expected if former smokers had continued to
      smoke.
   •	 People who start smoking in early adulthood but stop smoking before 40 years of
      age avoid more than 90 percent of the risk of developing lung cancer and other
      diseases. Even those who quit at age 50 avoid more than half the excess risk.
   •	 Smokers who stop before 30 years of age have a risk not significantly different from
      that of non-smokers.
   •	 In terms of life expectancy, people who quit smoking at 60, 50, 40, and 30 years of age
      gain around 3, 6, 9, and nearly 10 years of life, respectively, compared to persistent
      smokers. Similarly, the cumulative risk of getting lung cancer by age 75 in these
      groups was 10, 6, 3, and 2 percent, respectively.
   •	 On average, cigarette smokers die about 10 years younger than non-smokers (Doll
      et al. 1994; Peto et al. 2000).

France also followed the trend of widespread smoking cessation in high-income
countries. But unlike the United States and the United Kingdom, which each took about
35 years to halve per-adult cigarette consumption (from ten to five cigarettes per adult
per day), France only took 15 years to halve its consumption (Jha 2012). Smoking
prevalence in France, as in many other developed countries, increased during the first
half of the 20th century, then particularly after the Second World War. At the beginning
of the 1990s, France adopted a more aggressive tobacco taxation policy that led to a
threefold increase in the inflation-adjusted price of cigarettes, and, by 2005, to a halving
of cigarette consumption from six to three cigarettes per adult per day (Figure 11).
According to Jha and Peto (2014), the sharp increase in tobacco taxation was the most
important reason for the dramatic decline in cigarette consumption. Consequently,
the corresponding lung cancer rates among men aged 35–44 fell sharply from 1999
onwards. Finally, the revenues collected in real terms during this period passed from
around 6 to 12 billion euros (Jha 2012).

Finally, the United States is a third case providing evidence of the population health
benefits associated with cutting smoking prevalence. “Smoking and Health” was the
Surgeon General’s Report that started a half-century campaign against smoking, based on
the dangers and negative health outcomes exposed in that seminal report (CDC 2010).
During the second part of the 20th century, the United States make considerable efforts to
reduce cigarette consumption, including limiting smoking in public places, educational
campaigns to alert people about the dangers of smoking, and — most importantly —
substantial excise tax hikes to raise cigarettes prices (Moolgavkar et al. 2012). According to
CDC data, all these measures have produced a clear negative trend in tobacco consumption


142 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
      Figure 11: Smoking, Male Lung Cancer, and Cigarette Price. France 1980–2010
                                   6.0
                                                                                              Number cigarettes/
                                   5.5                                                           adult/day                             300

                                   5.0          Lung cancer death rates per 100,000
Number/adult/day and death rates




                                                  (divided by four); men age 35–44
                                                                                                                                       250




                                                                                                                                                 Price (% relative to 1980)
                                   4.5

                                   4.0
                                                                                                                                       200
                                   3.5

                                   3.0
                                                                                                                                       150
                                   2.5
                                                                                              Relative price
                                   2.0                                                                                                 100
                                   1.5

                                   1.0                                                                                                 50
                                         1980            1985             1990        1995           2000          2005         2010
                                                                                       Year
        Source: Jha (2012). The lung cancer death rates per 100,000 are divided by 4, so as to enable these to be on the same scale as smoking
        amount per day.



                                                  in the United States, where the smoking prevalence among adults fell from 42.4 percent
                                                  in 1964 to 16.8 in 2014.

                                                  The impact of changes in smoking prevalence on the prevalence of tobacco-related
                                                  diseases can be evaluated. In the case of lung cancer, tobacco is responsible for the vast
                                                  majority of cases (90 percent). From 1991 to 2003, the observed lung cancer death rate
                                                  (per 100,000) decreased from 59.0 to 54.2 (an 8.1 percent reduction). Among men, during
                                                  the same period, the lung cancer death rate passed from 89.9 to 71.9, a 20.0 percent
                                                  reduction (Thun and Jemal 2006).

                                                  A study by Moolgavkar et al. (2012) quantifies the cumulative impact of changes in smoking
                                                  behaviors on lung cancer mortality in the United States for the period 1975–2000. These
                                                  behavior changes were the fruit of policies adopted starting in the mid-1950s. The
                                                  authors’ model compares the actual smoking trends and lung cancer deaths with a
                                                  scenario in which the Surgeon General’s report never existed, and no tobacco control
                                                  policies were implemented. The analysis shows that approximately 795,851 lung cancer
                                                  deaths were averted during the 1975–2000 period: 552,574 among men and 243,277
                                                  among women.

                                                  Evidence from high-income countries such as the United Kingdom, France, and the
                                                  United States, shows us that substantially increasing tobacco taxes and prices leads to a
                                                  reduction in smoking prevalence and smoking-related diseases and deaths. The poor are



                                                                                                                                             143
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




more sensitive to tobacco price changes. Therefore, they have benefited most from these
mortality and morbidity reductions.

While disease and death rates from smoking-attributable causes have fallen sharply in
developed countries, smoking prevalence and smoking-related diseases are accumulating
in the developing world. Based on the evidence from developed countries, substantially
increasing taxes on tobacco could rapidly modify the trend in developing countries,
improving outcomes in population health, particularly among the poor.



CONCLUSIONS
From a tax perspective, an increase in excise tax on tobacco is almost always going to be
financially regressive. However, this view is quite myopic, since the broader (short- and
medium-term) picture includes health effects such as deaths averted and future health
expenditures saved, as well as higher earnings and impoverishment averted. There will be
poor households who will suffer financially from higher taxes on tobacco; however, good
policy design can help these losers of higher taxes to become winners financially in the
medium and long term. The extent that tobacco taxes are regressive can also be offset
by dedicating a part of the incremental tax revenue to health, as in the Philippines, where
proceeds from tobacco taxes were used to pay health insurance premiums for the poor.
When all these factors are considered, health gains, coupled in the longer term with higher
productivity and reduced health-related risks in labor markets, offset the regressive nature of
an increase in tobacco taxes. When all these relevant outcomes are included in the reckoning,
they often turn what appeared as a regressive measure into a progressive policy change
that creates considerable welfare gains for poor and vulnerable households.




144 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
REFERENCES
Andreasyan, D., Manukyan S., Tsaturyan S., Gharakhanya, N., Postosyan, A., Bazachayan, A., Zelvian, P. 2013.
Health System Performance Assessment, 2013. Yerevan: National Institute of Health.

Barkat, A., Chowdhury, A. U., Nargis, N., Rahman, M., Khan, M. S., & Kumar, A. 2012. “The economics of
tobacco and tobacco taxation in Bangladesh.” Paris: International Union against Tuberculosis and Lung
Disease.

Becker, G. S., & Murphy, K. M. 1988. “A theory of rational addiction.” The Journal of Political Economy, 675–700.

Becker, G. S., & Mulligan, C. B. 1997. “The endogenous determination of time preference.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 729–758.

Blecher, E. and van Walbeek, C. 2014. “COP6Update: An increase in the excise tax does not reduce
government revenue.” Geneva: Framework Convention Alliance.

Bobak, M., Jha, P., Nguyen, S., Jarvis, M., & Mundial, B. 2000. “Poverty and smoking.” In Tobacco control in
developing countries (pp. 41–61). Oxford University Press.

Carvalho, L. 2010. Poverty and Time Preference (No. 759). RAND Corporation Publications Department.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health. 2014. The Health Consequences of Smoking — 50 Years of Progress:
A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, USA.

Chaloupka, F. J., Tauras, J. A., & Grossman, M. 2000. “The economics of addiction.” In Tobacco control in
developing countries, 107–129.

Chaloupka, F. J., & Warner, K. E. 2000. “The economics of smoking.” Handbook of health economics, 1, 1539–1627.

Chaloupka, F. J., Yurekli, A., Fong, G.T. 2012. “Tobacco taxes as a tobacco control strategy.” Tobacco
Control 2012;21:172–180.

Cherukupalli, R. 2010. “A behavioral economics perspective on tobacco taxation.” American Journal of
Public Health 2010; 100: 609–615.

Choi, K., & Boyle, R. G. 2013. “Minnesota smokers’ perceived helpfulness of 2009 federal tobacco tax
increase in assisting smoking cessation: a prospective cohort study.” BMC Public Health 13(1), 965.

Clark, A. E., & Lohéac, Y. 2007. “’It wasn’t me, it was them!’” Social influence in risky behavior by adolescents.”
Journal of Health Economics 26(4), 763–784.

David, A., Esson, K., Perucic, A. M., & Fitzpatrick, C. 2010. “Tobacco use: equity and social determinants.”
Equity, social determinants and public health programmes, 199.

Doll, R., Peto, R., Wheatley, K., Gray, R., Sutherland, I. 1994. “Mortality in relation to smoking: 40 years’
observations on male British doctors.” BMJ, 901–911.

Droomers, M., Schrijvers, C., & Mackenbach, J. P. 2002. “Why do lower educated people continue smoking?
Explanations from the longitudinal GLOBE study.” Health Psychology 21(3), 263.

Forouzanfar, M. & GBD Collaborators. 2016. “Global, regional and national comparative risk assessment of
79 behavioral, environmental and occupation, and metabolic risks or clusters of risks, 1990–2015:
a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015.” Lancet 386(10010): 2287-323. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00128-2.




                                                                                                                145
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Fletcher, J. M. 2010. “Social interactions and smoking: Evidence using multiple student cohorts,
instrumental variables, and school fixed effects.” Health Economics 19(4), 466–484.

Fong, G. T., Hammond, D., Laux, F. L., Zanna, M. P., Cummings, K. M., Borland, R., & Ross, H. 2004. “The
near-universal experience of regret among smokers in four countries: findings from the International
Tobacco Control Policy Evaluation Survey.” Nicotine & Tobacco Research 6 (Suppl 3), S341-S351.

Fuchs, Alan & Meneses, F. 2016. “Are Tobacco Taxes Really Regressive? Evidence from Chile. The World
Bank. Draft mimeo.

Furman, J. 2016. “Policy, Politics, and the Tripling of Federal Tobacco Taxes in the United States to Deter
People from Smoking, Save Lives, and Mobilize Revenue over the last 30 years. Six Lessons from the
U.S. Experience with Tobacco Taxes.” Presentation at the World Bank Conference. “Winning the Tax Wars:
Global Solutions for Developing Countries,” Washington, DC, May 24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.org/en/
topic/health/brief/tobacco

Giné, X., Karlan, D. & Zinman, J. 2010. “Put Your Money Where Your Butt Is: A Commitment Contract for
Smoking Cessation.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(4): 213–35.

Graham, H. 1994. “Gender and class as dimensions of smoking behaviour in Britain: insights from a survey
of mothers.” Social Science & Medicine, 38(5), 691–698.

Gruber, J., & Mullainathan, S. 2002. “Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers Happier?” (No. 8872). National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Guindon, E., Paraje, G., & Chaloupka, F. 2015. “The impact of prices and taxes on the use of tobacco products
in Latin America and the Carribean.” American Journal of Public Health, 105:e9-e19.

Hitchman, S. C., & Fong, G. T. 2011. “Gender empowerment and female-to-male smoking prevalence
ratios.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 89(3), 195–202.

International Agency for Research on Cancer. 2011. IARC Handbooks of Cancer Prevention, Tobacco Control,
Volume 14, Effectiveness of Tax and Price Policies for Tobacco Control. IARC.

Jamison, D., Summer, L., Alleyne, G.., Arrow, K, Berkley, S., Binagwaho, A., Bustreo, F., Evans, D., Feachem, R.,
Frenk, J., Ghosh, G., Goldie, S., Guo, Y., Gupta, S., Horton, R., Kruk, M., Mahmoud, A., Mohohlo, L., Ncube, M.,
Pablos-Mendez, A., Reddy, K.S., Saxenian, H., Soucat, A., Ulltveit-Moe, K, & Yamey, G. (2013). “Global Health
2035: a world converging within a generation.” Lancet, 382: 1898-955.

Jha, Prabhat. 2012. “Death and Taxes: Epidemiological and Economic Evidence on Smoking.” Global Heart,
139–142

Jha, P., Guidon, E., Joseph, R., Nandi, A., John, R., Rao, K., Chaloupka, F., Kaur, J., Gupta, P., and Rao, M. 2011.
“A Rational Taxation System of Bidis and Cigarettes to Reduce Smoking Deaths in India.”
http://www.cghr.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/A-rational-taxation-system-of-bidis-and-cigarettes-to-
reduce...India-2011.pdf

Jha, P., Khan, J., Mishra, S., Gupta, P. 2017. “Raising taxes key to accelerate tobacco control in South Asia.”
BMJ 357:j1176 doi: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j1176

Jha, P., MacLennan, M., Chaloupka, F. J., Yurekli, A., Ramasundarahettige, C., Palipudi, K., … & Gupta, P.
C. 2015. “Global hazards of tobacco and the benefits of smoking cessation and tobacco taxes.” Disease
Control Priorities, Third Ed.

Jha, Prabhat, and R. Peto. 2014. “Global Effects of Smoking, of Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco.” NEJM
370:60-68.




146 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
Kaiser, K., Bredenkamp, C. & Iglesias, R. 2016. Sin Tax Reform in the Philippines: Transforming Public Finance,
Health, and Governance for More Inclusive Development. Directions in Development. Washington, DC:
World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0806-7.

Kan, K. 2007. “Cigarette smoking and self-control.” Journal of Health Economics 26(1), 61–81.

Kim, H., Cho K., Kwon, S., & Lim, J. “The Effect of the Increase in Tobacco Price on Adolescent Smoking in
Korea: Smoking Reduction and Brand Switching.” Health and Social Welfare Review 32(3), 429–460.

Kostova, D., Tesche, J., Perucic, A. M., Yurekli, A., Asma, S., & GATS Collaborative Group. 2014. “Exploring
the relationship between cigarette prices and smoking among adults: a cross-country study of low-and
middle-income nations.” Nicotine & Tobacco Research 16 (Suppl 1), S10-S15.

Laffer, A B. 2014. Handbook of tobacco taxation: theory and practice. San Francisco: Laffer Center at the
Pacific Research Institute.

Laibson, D. 1997. “Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 443–477.

Lewit, E., Coate, D., & Grossman, M. 1981. The effects of government regulation on teenage smoking.

Lopez, A. D., Collishaw, N. E., & Piha, T. 1994. “A descriptive model of the cigarette epidemic in developed
countries.” Tobacco Control 3(3), 242.

Moolgavkar, S.H., Holford, T.R., Levy, D.T., Kong, C.Y., Foy, M., Clarke, L., Jeon, J., Hazelton, W.D., Meza, R.,
Schultz, F., McCarthy, W., Boer, R., Gorlova, O., Gazelle, G.S., Kimmel, M., McMahon, P.M., de Koning, H.J.,
Feuer, E.J. 2012. “Impact of Reduced Tobacco Smoking on Lung Cancer Mortality in the United States
during 1975–2000.” JNCI 104 (7).

Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. 2009. “Savings policy and decision-making in low-income households.” In
Insufficient funds: Savings, assets, credit, and banking among low-income households, 121, 140–42.

O’Donoghue, T., & Rabin, M. 2003. “Studying optimal paternalism, illustrated by a model of sin taxes.”
The American Economic Review 93(2): 186–191.

O’Donoghue, T., & Rabin, M. 2015. “Present bias: Lessons learned and to be learned.” The American
Economic Review 105(5), 273–279.

Oncken, C., McKee, S., Krishnan-Sarin, S., O’Malley, S., & Mazure, C. M. 2005. “Knowledge and perceived risk
of smoking-related conditions: a survey of cigarette smokers.” Preventive medicine 40(6), 779–784.

Peretti-Watel, P., Seror, V., Constance, J., & Beck, F. 2009. “Poverty as a smoking trap.” International Journal
of Drug Policy 20(3): 230–236.

Petit, P., & Nagy, J. 2016. “How to design and enforce tobacco excises?” Washington, DC: Fiscal Affairs
Department, International Monetary Fund.

Peto, R., Darby, S., Deo, H., Silcocks, P., Whitley, E., Doll, R. 2000. “Smoking, smoking cessation, and lung cancer
in the UK since 1950: combination of national statistics with two case-control studies.” BMJ, 323–329.

Postolovska I., Lavado, R., Tarr, G., Verguet, S. 2017. “Estimating the distributional impact of increasing
tobacco taxes in Armenia: Results from an extended cost-effectiveness analysis.” Washington, DC: The
World Bank.

Powell, L. M., Tauras, J. A., & Ross, H. 2005. “The importance of peer effects, cigarette prices and tobacco
control policies for youth smoking behavior.” Journal of Health Economics, 24(5), 950–968.




                                                                                                                    147
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Rutten, L. J. F., Augustson, E. M., Moser, R. P., Beckjord, E. B., & Hesse, B. W. 2008. “Smoking knowledge and
behavior in the United States: sociodemographic, smoking status, and geographic patterns.” Nicotine &
Tobacco Research 10(10): 1559–1570.

Salti, N., Brouwer, E., & Verguet, S. 2016. “The health, financial and distributional consequences of
increases in the tobacco excise tax among smokers in Lebanon.” Social Science & Medicine 170: 161–169.

Siahpush, M., McNeill, A., Hammond, D., & Fong, G. T. 2006. “Socioeconomic and country variations in
knowledge of health risks of tobacco smoking and toxic constituents of smoke: results from the 2002
International Tobacco Control (ITC) Four Country Survey.” Tobacco Control 15 (Suppl 3): iii65-iii70.

Sitas, F., Egger, S., Bradshaw, D., Groenewald, P., Laubscher, R., Kielkowski, D., Peto, R. 2013. “Differences
among coloured, white, black, and other South African populations in smoking-attributed mortality at
ages 35–74 years: a case-control study of 481 640 deaths.” Lancet 382 (9893):685–93.

Tabuchi, T., Fujiwara, T., & Shinozaki, T. 2017. “Tobacco Price Increase and smoking: behavior changes in
various subgroups: a nationwide longitudinal 7-year follow-up study among a middle-aged Japanese
population.” Tobacco Control 26(1):69–77. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2015-052804. Epub 2016 Feb 15.

Talhout, R., Schulz, T., Florek, E., van Benthem, J., Wester, P., & Opperhuizen, A. 2011. “Hazardous
Compounds in Tobacco Smoke.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 8(2):
613–628. http://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph8020613

Townsend J, Roderick P, Cooper J. 1994. “Cigarette smoking by socioeconomic group, sex, and age:
effects of price, income, and health publicity.” BMJ 309:923–927.

Thun, M., Jemal, A. 2006. “How much of the decrease in cancer death rates in the United States is attributable
to reductions in tobacco smoking?” Tobacco Control 15 (5): 345–347.

Thun, M., Peto, R., Boreham, J., & Lopez, A. D. 2012. “Stages of the cigarette epidemic on entering its
second century.” Tobacco Control 21(2): 96–101.

U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization. 2016. The Economics of Tobacco and
Tobacco Control. National Cancer Institute Tobacco Control Monograph 21. NIH Publication No.
16-CA-8029A. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of
Health, National Cancer Institute; and Geneva, CH: World Health Organization.

Venthesatogit, P. 2008. “Benefits that Thailand tobacco control law and program brings to the country.”
Tobacco and Health. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Verguet, S., Gauvreau, C. L., Mishra, S., MacLennan, M., Murphy, S. M., Brouwer, E. D., … & Jamison, D. T.
2015. “The consequences of tobacco tax on household health and finances in rich and poor smokers in
China: an extended cost-effectiveness analysis.” The Lancet Global Health, 3(4), e206-e216.

Yurekli, A., Nargis, N., Goodchild, M., Visaruthvong, C., Delipalla, S., Blecher, E., … & Chaloupka, F. 2016.
“Economics of Tobacco Control and Health.” In World Scientific Handbook of Global Health Economics and
Public Policy: Volume 2: Health Determinants and Outcomes (pp. 191–283).




148 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
Annex Figure 1: Smoking Prevalence (% of Population Ages 15-49) by Wealth Quintile
                  Albania                     43                           45                                  43                             41                                  45                           39
                 Armenia                           63                        56                                      68                             64                                  63                             66
               Azerbaijan                     49                             57                                45                              51                                  48                            46
              Bangladesh                        60                                   71                              65                             62                              57                           46
                    Benin      8                               15                                9                              8                              4                                   5
             Burkina Faso            22                          23                                    22                             20                                22                              21
                  Burundi      12                              15                                    15                          11                                9                                10
               Cambodia                32                                  47                          36                               34                                  27                         19
               Camaroon            14                           17                                 18                               16                             11                               11
                 Comoros            19                         16                                   20                               19                               21                              17
       Congo (Brazzaville)          20                                31                             26                              21                              17                              13
Congo Democratic Republic           19                               28                              25                              20                             14                              10
             Cote d’Ivoire           25                               31                             26                               24                               24                               21
      Dominican Republic      8                              13                                  10                             6                              5                                   6
                 Ethiopia     6                             7                                   6                               5                              6                                   7
                   Gabon            23                                34                             25                               22                                19                            17
                  Gambia           20                                26                            20                                 20                                 21                           17
                    Ghana     4                             9                                   6                               5                              2                               1
                  Guyana                 29                                    51                     33                                 25                              24                            17
                     Haiti     10                           12                                   9                                  13                             11                              7
                Honduras             25                              29                               29                                 26                             18                                23
                Indonesia                            72                                   81                              79                             76                              68                           57
                    Kenya          16                           18                                    20                             17                                15                           12
          Kyrgyz Republic                  44                          38                                  33                               42                                     49                               57
                  Lesotho                35                           35                                   37                              37                                 37                            27
                   Liberia     10                               17                                   14                             13                         4                               4
              Madagascar                 28                          30                                26                              25                                   28                              31
                   Malawi          17                                29                               21                             18                             14                             8
                 Maldives                     49                                57                              51                             47                                42                               50
                     Mali          15                          15                                12                               13                                 18                            18
             Mozambique             19                           24                                   24                             22                              17                         10
                 Namibia            19                          18                                  18                             15                                 22                           19
                    Nepal                30                        39                                   34                             33                              25                            24
                    Niger          15                          15                                 11                              13                                14                             19
                  Nigeria      7                           4                                    7                                7                                 7                           7
                 Pakistan               28                      25                                     31                              32                               31                          21
                  Rwanda       11                            17                                   11                              12                               9                            10
    Sao Tome and Principe     5                            10                                   5                               5                              1                               4
                  Senegal       15                            17                                   13                             14                                14                            16
             Sierra Leone               27                                38                             38                            33                             22                        10
                Swaziland         14                            17                                 13                             14                                14                           12
                 Tanzania          19                                27                              22                             18                               16                           16
             Timor-Leste                            66                              65                               68                             68                                   67                           62
                     Togo      8                             14                                   12                             10                            5                               4
                  Uganda        12                                25                               17                            11                            8                               5
                  Ukraine                      52                                   61                          54                                 55                              51                            43
                   Zambia          19                                 34                              22                             17                                17                           11
               Zimbabwe             21                               26                               22                              24                                20                           14

                             0 20 40 60 80                0 20 40 60 80                        0 20 40 60 80                   0 20 40 60 80                  0 20 40 60 80                   0 20 40 60 80
                                Total 15–49                 Q1 (poorest)                                  Q2                              Q3                                 Q4               Q5 (wealthiest)

Source: Demographic and Health Surveys. Latest year available since 2006.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       149
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Annex Table 1: Smoking Prevalence (% of Population Aged 15 or Older) by Country,
Estimates from GATS Surveys since 2007

                                             TOTAL                    FEMALES                   MALES

 Argentina                                   22%                      16%                       29%

 Bangladesh                                  23%                      2%                        45%

 Brazil                                      17%                      13%                       22%

 China                                       28%                      2%                        53%

 Egypt                                       19%                      1%                        38%

 India                                       14%                      3%                        24%

 Indonesia                                   35%                      3%                        67%

 Malaysia                                    23%                      1%                        44%

 Mexico                                      16%                      8%                        25%

 Philippines                                 28%                      9%                        48%

 Poland                                      30%                      24%                       37%

 Romania                                     27%                      17%                       37%

 Russian Federation                          39%                      22%                       60%

 Thailand                                    24%                      3%                        47%

 Turkey                                      31%                      15%                       48%

 Ukraine                                     29%                      11%                       50%

 Uruguay                                     25%                      20%                       31%

 Vietnam                                     24%                      1%                        47%

Source: Global Adult Tobacco Surveys.
Notes: Data are for different years: Brazil and Turkey (2008); Bangladesh, Egypt, India, Mexico, Philippines, Poland,
Russian Federation, and Uruguay (2009); China, Ukraine, and Vietnam (2010); Indonesia, Malaysia, Romania, and
Thailand (2011); and Argentina (2012).




150 // Beyond the Perceived Regressivity of Higher Tobacco Taxes: Turning Short-Term Losers Into Long-Term Winners?
Lower demand for tobacco
products in response to steeper
taxes increases consumers’
available resources for purchasing
other goods and services and for
savings. More spending outside
the tobacco sector can then spark
job creation in other parts of the
economy, with the net result of
creating more employment for
a country.




152 // Executive Summary
7
      THE EFFECTS OF TOBACCO
     TAXES ON EMPLOYMENT AND
    LABOR PRODUCTIVITY
     Hana Ross




     ABSTRACT
     Since tobacco-tax increases have the potential to cut tobacco consumption, they are also
     expected to reduce the number of tobacco-related jobs. The tobacco industry regularly
     invokes potential job losses as an argument against stronger tobacco control. This chapter
     provides an analytical framework for assessing the impact of higher tobacco taxes on
     employment and summarizes the available empirical evidence. It also explores the probable
     effects of tobacco taxes on labor productivity.

     Evidence suggests that raising tobacco taxes will have a gradual and relatively small
     impact on employment in the tobacco sector. At the same time, lower demand for
     tobacco products in response to steeper taxes increases consumers’ available resources
     for purchasing other goods and services and for savings. More spending outside the
     tobacco sector can then spark job creation in other parts of the economy with the net
     result of creating more employment for a country. Country studies confirm this. In one
     striking case, a study in Indonesia found that a 100 percent increase in the tobacco tax
     would eliminate 66,077 domestic tobacco-farming jobs while creating, over time, more
     than four times as many new jobs in other sectors.

     Tobacco industry-sponsored research often predicts that higher tobacco taxes will cause
     job losses. However, these studies do not account for the shift in consumers’ expenditures
     and exhibit other serious methodological flaws.

     Nevertheless, the industry still manages to organize opposition to higher tobacco taxes
     on the grounds of employment losses. To address these concerns, it is important to
     widely disseminate the scientific evidence and expose the industry’s role in job losses.
     At the same time, the government should promote the development of economically
     sustainable alternatives for tobacco growers and workers to reduce the size of any
     transitional job losses.
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Tobacco use and working on a tobacco farm compromise labor productivity through
multiple channels. Since both smoking and tobacco farming damage health, they
increase absenteeism and shorten the work career with negative consequences for lifetime
income. In addition, an early smoking onset and the use of child labor in tobacco farming
adversely affect educational performance, which reduces future labor productivity and
wages. By prompting reductions in use, tobacco taxes tend to favor labor productivity
gains. Governments seeking to raise tobacco taxes may find allies in the non-tobacco
private sector, since firms have an inherent interest in improved labor productivity.



INTRODUCTION
The tobacco industry often highlights the issue of tobacco-related employment when
seeking to forestall tobacco control measures, including taxation. Industry predictions
that higher tobacco taxes will cause net job losses in a country can hardly fail to awaken
policy makers’ concerns. But are these claims credible? Clarifying the issue is important,
so leaders can weigh tobacco policy choices with a realistic grasp of their probable social
and economic consequences.

This chapter provides an analytical framework for assessing the impact that higher
tobacco taxes will have on employment and summarizes the most recent empirical
evidence. I then take up a related topic, the impact of tobacco taxes on labor pro-
ductivity. I review evidence on how tobacco use compromises workers’ productivity,
ultimately supporting the hypothesis that higher tobacco taxes can be expected to
contribute to labor productivity gains.



THE IMPACT OF TOBACCO TAXES
ON EMPLOYMENT
Since tobacco tax increases have the potential to decrease consumption of tobacco
products, they are also expected to impact the number of tobacco-related jobs in both
the industrial and agricultural sectors. The tobacco industry claims that tax increases will
lead to significant reductions in employment in tobacco growing and manufacturing, as
well as wholesale, retail, and other economic sectors. On this basis, the industry claims to
defend farmers and small businesses against what it portrays as “unfair tobacco control
regulations.” Policy measures likely to result in job destruction often face significant, and
understandable, public skepticism. To what extent should policy makers give credence
to industry assertions about the employment impacts of tobacco taxes?




154 // The Effects of Tobacco Taxes on Employment and Labor Productivity
Background and Analytical Framework
In a dynamic economy, production inputs — including labor — are constantly shifting
between sectors due to interaction between supply and demand. An assessment of the
effects on the economy of any public policy measure, including higher tobacco taxes,
needs to take those dynamics into account.

Lower demand for tobacco products in response to higher taxes would free the resources
previously allocated to purchasing tobacco, making them available for the purchase
of other goods and services or for savings (Barber et al. 2008; Merrill et al. 2009;). These
new expenditures outside the tobacco sector will create new jobs in other parts of the
economy (U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization 2016). Additional
job-creating measures on the supply side could also be undertaken in parallel, as is
happening in the Philippines since 2013, where 15 percent of incremental excise tobacco
and alcohol tax revenue is earmarked to help tobacco farmers transition to alternative
livelihoods (Republic of the Philippines 2012).

Likewise, additional tax revenues generated from raising tobacco taxes would boost
government expenditures or reduce the deficit, which could lead to lowering the national
debt (Allen 1993). Higher savings or debt reduction would enhance fiscal sustainability,
which could lower interest rates and increase investments to further contribute to job
creation. These impacts would be amplified by the positive effects of higher tobacco
taxes on health, ability to work, and public health cost savings that smoking reduction
would also generate.

Nonetheless, the problem of transition can be difficult for those directly affected, partic-
ularly for those with limited transferable skills or capital. This poses challenges of political
economy, because the losses in employment in the tobacco sector, even if caused by the
industry itself and not by tobacco tax, are highly politicized by the industry. In contrast,
gains elsewhere in the economy are diffuse and harder to identify specifically.

There are two important economic factors to consider during the transition toward a
tobacco-free economy: the magnitude of the change in demand for tobacco products
and the speed of market adjustment to a new equilibrium. The empirical evidence points
to small and gradual changes in the demand for tobacco products at the country level,
which would allow sufficient time for the transition of employees to other sectors
experiencing higher demand due to the shift in consumer expenditures (Allen 1993). In
the United Kingdom, for example, it took cigarette sales 30 years to fall from 138 billion to
50 billion, or by 64 percent (Nicolaides-Bouman et al. 1993). This represents a reduction
of about 3.4 percent per year (Standford and Bates 1998).53


53 This decline resulted in some job losses. Between 1963 and 1985, the U.K. tobacco sector lost 19,400 jobs. However, 82 percent
of this loss (or 16,000 jobs) has been attributed to higher labor productivity, not to the decline in consumption (Sandford and Bates
1998). The declining cigarette consumption in the country did not have any detrimental impact on the U.K. economy: according to the
United Kingdom Office for National Statistics, U.K. GDP growth was 1.5 percent in 1962 and 4.3 percent in 1986.

                                                                                                                                155
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




The global cigarette market experienced a boom from 1970 to 2004, with production
of cigarettes increasing by 78 percent (Yurekli 2012). Despite this upward trend, the
global employment in tobacco manufacturing has been declining due to technological
advances and higher labor productivity (U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health
Organization 2016). Recent data on global cigarette sales, however, indicate that growth
is slowing down. Between 2005 and 2010 global cigarette sales volume increased by 4.7
percent and has been flat since 2011 (Euromonitor 2017). The latest figures point to about
a 1 percent annual decline in global cigarette market volume, with analysts expecting this
pattern to continue till 2020 (Euromonitor 2017). However, the retail value of the market
is still growing — it increased by 40.5 percent between 2005 and 2010, by 2.2 percent
between 2011 and 2015, and is expected to grow by about
1 percent annually till 2020. This means that at the global level
                                                                           Any reduction in global
any job losses in the short or medium term will be affected
minimally by the shrinking size of the cigarette market.
                                                                           tobacco trade would be
                                                                           gradual and accompanied
The same is true for tobacco farming. Between 2003 and 2012
                                                                           by a shift in consumers’
alone, the global market rose from 6.03 million tons to 7.5 million
tons of tobacco leaves, a 25 percent increase (Hu and Lee
                                                                           spending to other goods.
2015). This rise occurred despite tobacco industry-driven scien-
tific advances that lowered the amount of tobacco leaves needed per cigarette (Brown &
Williamson 1990; U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization 2016). Never-
theless, employment in tobacco farming has been falling over time due to improvements in
farming techniques and higher labor productivity (Capehart 2004; van Liemt 2002).

The effects of any tax increase on employment at the level of a specific country will also
depend on the extent to which the country is engaged in global trade. In a country that
is a net importer of tobacco products, the impact of higher tax on labor demand should
be positive, because money spent on tobacco products tends to leave the country, while
the switch of expenditures to other products/services tends to boost the domestic economy
and local jobs (U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization 2016). On
the other hand, for a net tobacco exporter, the volume of tobacco products exported
would be unrelated to domestic tax policy, but would depend on tobacco control efforts
in recipient countries. The reduction in domestic cigarette sales will have smaller effects
on employment as former cigarette users purchase alternative goods and services. If
the worldwide demand for tobacco products declines in response to higher taxes, the
volume of tobacco trade would also decline regardless of tax policy in the source country.
Since any reduction in global tobacco trade would be gradual and accompanied by a
shift in consumers’ spending to other goods, trade-related jobs would be affected by
tobacco taxes only in a limited way (U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health
Organization 2016).




156 // The Effects of Tobacco Taxes on Employment and Labor Productivity
Depending on a country’s production and sales, there could be some temporary small
employment losses due to reduced demand for tobacco products, with the magnitude
and duration of this loss depending on the extent to which investments in the tobacco
sector are specific to that sector. For example, farmland has many alternative uses, and
those who manufacture equipment for cigarette factories could retool to supply other
sectors. The employment effects of reduced demand for tobacco can also vary for
different regions within a country. Therefore, some regions could experience a net
employment loss while others would see an increase in employment. However, many
of the job losses would be temporary and relatively small, given the small share of
tobacco-related jobs in overall employment.


Empirical Evidence
Jacobs et al. (2000) summarized 20 studies published before 1999 on the impact of
tobacco policies (including taxation) on employment. The IARC Handbook (2011),
published more than 10 years later, added only three new studies on the subject,
suggesting that the issue is considered settled among academics. This chapter adds to
the body of empirical evidence on the matter of tobacco taxes and employment with
a particular focus on low- and middle-income countries, where the evidence until
recently has been rather sparse.

Agriculture and Leaf Processing
Even though tobacco farming is relatively labor intensive, few farms grow only tobacco,
meaning that there are fewer full time tobacco-related jobs than there are people working
on those farms. Tobacco leaf drying and warehousing is not very labor intensive, thus
adding only an insignificant number of jobs to the economy (IARC 2011).

The size of tobacco-related agricultural employment is small even in the few major
tobacco-growing countries. For example, the largest producer of tobacco leaves, China,
has only about 2 percent of its farmers growing tobacco (Hu, Mao, Shi et al. 2008). In
Indonesia, the fifth-largest producer of tobacco leaves (Statista, accessed 5/20/16), less
than 2 percent of farmers are involved in tobacco farming. Hence, an increase in
Indonesia’s tobacco tax/prices is not expected to have a large impact on jobs in agricul-
ture, given the minor role of the agricultural sector in the overall economy (Barber et al.
2008). The agricultural sector in Indonesia is ranked 62nd out of 66 sectors in terms of its
contributions to overall output, employment, and wages. A study predicts that a 100
percent increase in the tobacco tax in Indonesia, that would lead to an 8.9 percent decline
in tobacco consumption, would reduce the number of tobacco farming jobs by 10.6 percent
(66,077 jobs) while increasing overall employment by generating 281,135 new jobs
(Ahsan and Wiyono Ir 2007). Malawi, the sixth-largest tobacco leaf producer in the
world (Hu and Lee 2015) and the country with the highest relative tobacco farming



                                                                                             157
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




employment, has only 2.3 percent of its agricultural labor involved in tobacco farming
(Jacobs et al. 2000).

In Ukraine, for example, tobacco-related employment in agriculture has declined steadily
since 1989. By 2005, almost all domestically produced cigarettes used imported tobacco
leaves. However, this was due to the tobacco industry’s preference for a type of raw
tobacco that cannot grow in the country. A study found no relationship between tobacco
tax policy and the elimination of tobacco farming in Ukraine (Ross et al. 2009b).

In Uganda, BAT cancelled their contracts with all tobacco farmers, blaming the 2014
Tobacco Control Bill. However, the underlying reason for this decision was not tobacco
control, but the unpredictability of the tobacco crop in Uganda. BAT also closed its leaf
processing plant in Uganda in 2013, a year before the Tobacco Control Bill was approved,
and relocated it to Kenya (Gilmore et al. 2015).

A study in China using a simulation model predicted the impact of a 55 percent tax
increase on tobacco farming using a simple linear production relationship model. Using
a price elasticity of tobacco demand of -0.15 and assuming conservatively no increase in
expenditures for other products and services, the tax increase was expected to reduce
land use for tobacco farming by about 2 percent and to lower tobacco farmers’ gross
revenue by about 2 percent.54 This demonstrated the minimal negative economic impact
a significant tobacco tax increase would have on tobacco farmers in China without even
taking into account the jobs created in other sectors of the economy as result of an
expenditure shift (Hu, Mao, Shi et al. 2008).

Some studies suggest that since tobacco grows well on land that is usually less suitable for
other crops, the use of that land and associated labor could not be more productive com-
pared to an alternative. The skills and experience specific to tobacco growing may also not
be readily transferable to other crops (IARC 2011). However, case studies have shown that
many other crops, crop combinations, farming systems, and livelihood strategies offer better
opportunities for farmers than tobacco (Hu and Lee 2015; Leppan et al. 2014). In Yunnan
Province in China, for example, tobacco leaves had the lowest revenue-to-cost ratio in 2004,
indicating that other crops such as mulberry, silkworm, fruit, vegetable oil, rice or wheat
were more profitable (Hu, Mao, Shi et al. 2008). Tobacco farming is a risky undertaking that
rarely generates a net gain and often leaves farmers in a vicious cycle of poverty and debt
to tobacco companies (Hu and Lee 2015; Leppan et al. 2014).

Tobacco farmers are quite vulnerable to the global prices of tobacco leaves, which are
under the control of highly concentrated tobacco leaf dealers, with just four companies
dominating the trade (U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization 2016).



54 Some scholars have questioned the cited price elasticity as inappropriately low.



158 // The Effects of Tobacco Taxes on Employment and Labor Productivity
As result of the oligopolistic nature of the business, the export prices of tobacco leaves
dropped by more than half in real value just between 1980 and 2006 (Yurekli 2012),
motivating many tobacco farmers to switch to other crops (Wanzala, January 30, 2011; The
New Nation, June 28, 2010). Thus, these job losses in tobacco farming have been caused
by the market power of the leaf traders rather than by tobacco tax policy. In addition,
the industry’s preference for certain types of tobacco leaves has resulted in concentration of
tobacco leaf production in a few countries, while causing a sharp decline or elimination
of tobacco farming elsewhere.

Manufacturing
The production of tobacco products is not very labor intensive. Tobacco manufacturing
rarely employs more than 1 percent of total manufacturing labor (Jacobs et al. 2000), and
that share has declined over time due to mechanization, automation, and concentration
of the production process (Allen 1993; van Liemt 2002).

In Indonesia, for example, mechanization is one of the most important factors affecting
employment in cigarette manufacturing. As a result of mechanization and of the growth
in overall manufacturing in Indonesia, the contribution of cigarette manufacturing to
total manufacturing employment has declined precipitously. It went from 28 percent in
1970 to less than 6 percent in 2005, or less than 0.3 percent of total employment, even
while cigarette production increased by about 480 percent during the same period (Barber
et al. 2008). The decline in cigarette manufacturing employment is occurring despite
government tax policy designed explicitly to protect tobacco-manufacturing employment
(Barber and Ahsan 2009).

The experience of Indonesia is not unique. In Ukraine, cigarette production grew by 112
percent from 2000 to 2006, while employment in cigarette manufacturing fell by 25 percent.
The real tobacco tax was virtually unchanged during that period (Krasovsky 2010).

Even the less mechanized, but politically very visible bidi industry in India employs only
0.7 percent of the manufacturing labor force while paying 0.09 percent of the average
compensation provided by the sector (Nandi, Ashok, Guindon et al. 2015).

Many job losses in tobacco product manufacturing can be attributed to industry
restructuring decisions, not to tobacco taxation. For example, a company merger in
China in 2006 resulted in 59,000 job losses. In contrast, a 55 percent tax increase would
only lead to about 1,660–5,550 job losses in cigarette manufacturing (Hu, Mao, Shi et al.
2008). Moreover, this calculation of job losses is almost certainly overestimated, because
the simulation model did not take into account the jobs created in other sectors of the
economy as a result of an expenditure shift (Hu, Mao, Shi et al. 2008).

In 2006 and 2007, BAT closed factories in Uganda, Ghana, Mauritius, Zambia, and
Cameroon, and began to supply these markets from its main production facilities in


                                                                                          159
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




South Africa, Nigeria, and Kenya. This decision could not have been motivated by tobacco
tax policies, because South Africa and Kenya have some of the highest taxes on the
African continent. BAT explained the move as an effort “to establish a more cost-effective
operational base for the future” (BAT Annual Report 2011).

Similarly, despite the fact that Kyrgyzstan has one of the lowest tobacco excise taxes in
the region (WHO 2015), Imperial Tobacco decided in 2010 to close its local factory and
replace domestic production by imported cigarettes. In 2014, 82 percent of imported
cigarettes came to Kyrgyzstan from Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation, countries
with substantially higher cigarette taxes and cigarette prices (WHO 2015).

These examples demonstrate that tobacco taxes have played no role in job losses in
cigarette manufacturing.

Distribution
Many wholesale and retail businesses distributing tobacco products are not dependent
on them, since these products typically represent a small share of their turnover (Huang
and Chaloupka 2013). Even at duty-free stores at airports and on board airlines and ferries,
tobacco sales represent only 8 percent of global retail turnover (ETRC 2016).

A recent development in Ukraine clearly demonstrates the impact of a large tobacco tax
increase on the retail sector. When the government of Ukraine began to consider the
tax increase in 2008, the tobacco industry estimated that it would reduce the number of
licensed tobacco retailers from 90,000 to 30,000, or by two-thirds. When the tobacco tax
doubled in May 2009, the country had 89,758 licensed tobacco retailers. By December
2010, there were 90,916 licensed tobacco retailers in Ukraine, a slight increase as opposed
to the sharp decline predicted by the industry (Krasovsky et al. 2014).

A study in the USA investigating the impact of higher tobacco taxes on the density of
convenience stores, a proxy for profit of outlets responsible for approximately 51 percent
of the annual total retail sales of tobacco products in 2002, found a small positive effect
of higher tobacco taxes on convenience store density across states. The study concluded
that, contrary to tobacco industry and related organizations’ claims, higher cigarette
taxes and stronger tobacco control policies do not negatively affect convenience stores
or employment in the retail sector (Huang and Chaloupka 2013). The finding confirmed
earlier research demonstrating that the reduction in cigarette consumption has had no
impact on overall employment and the number of establishments in the retail sector in
the USA between 1990 and 2004 (Ribisl et al. 2011).

Overall Impact on Employment
Research on the impact of reduced demand for tobacco products on total employment
usually compares the current level of employment with the predicted level of employment
when tobacco expenditure is reduced. The explicit assumption is that these released


160 // The Effects of Tobacco Taxes on Employment and Labor Productivity
resources will be reallocated to other goods and services according to a certain expenditure
pattern. Even though many studies assume that money not spent on tobacco would be
spent elsewhere according to consumers’ existing (average) expenditure patterns, the
empirical evidence shows that recent quitters have different expenditure patterns, often
buying labor-intensive services such as recreation, education, and communications (van
der Merwe 1998d). In the U.K., for example, those who quit increased their expenditures
on luxury items, recreational goods, transport, communication, and educational services
(Buck et al. 1995).

Given that those who quit smoking use their tobacco money to consume other goods
and services, falling employment in the tobacco sector will be offset by jobs created in
other sectors, and the net impact will depend on the labor intensity of these other
industries relative to the tobacco industry. The most important studies of the impact of
reduced demand for tobacco products on total employment are summarized in Table
1. They either apply a static input-output model (or its extension in the form of a social
accounting matrix) or a dynamic regional econometric model. The static models compare
two alternative scenarios in a given year — one with and one without (or with reduced)
tobacco expenditure. The dynamic models simulate trade flows and feedbacks across
different sectors of the economy over time to capture the impact of a policy change on
outputs and employment.

Both the static and dynamic models found that lower demand for tobacco products
eliminates jobs in sectors directly linked to tobacco product production, such as cigarette
manufacturing and farming, but these losses are in most cases outweighed by increases
in employment in other industries. The result is a small positive effect on employment,
with the exception of a few economies with sizeable tobacco farming (e.g., Zimbabwe).
The size of the estimated net change of employment depends on the specific assumptions
used in the models such as changes in spending patterns after reduced tobacco demand
among previous users and governments, as well as the structure of the domestic economy.


Industry-Sponsored Studies
The industry’s vested interest in demonstrating the negative impact of higher tobacco
taxes on employment may have an influence on the methodology, presentation, and
interpretation of the results of the studies they fund. In contrast to academic studies,
tobacco industry-sponsored reports predict a devastating effect of eliminating tobacco
use on the economy and claim that there are no economically sustainable alternatives to
tobacco farming, particularly in low- and middle-income countries (Gilmore et al. 2015).

There are four major reasons why the estimates presented by the industry differ so dra-
matically from the results of scholarly research. First, the industry focuses on a reduction
in the gross number of jobs, assuming that the demand for tobacco products disappears



                                                                                             161
       Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Table 1: Studies of the Impact of Reduced Demand for Tobacco Products on Total Employment

WHERE              WHEN          METHOD                      ASSUMPTION                     RESULT                          SOURCE
Bangladesh         1994          Static input-output model   Eliminating tobacco use        Net gain of 1,098,919 jobs      Van der Merwe
                                                             (including bidis); quitters    (+0.4% employment)              (1998b)
                                                             spent as an average person
Bangladesh         2006/2007     Social accounting matrix    Tobacco expenditures           Output increased                Husain and
                                                             eliminated; 3 scenarios for    0.75–1.3%; GDP increased        Khondker (2016)
                                                             quitters — spent as an aver-   1.57–1.75%; household
                                                             age person, spent on food,     income increased 1.4–1.58%
                                                             and spent on recreation and
                                                             entertainment
Canada             1993          Qualitative assessment      Strong TC policies with        Negligible negative impact      Allen (1993)
                                                             focus on tax policies; lost    on employment
                                                             jobs absorbed via normal
                                                             workforce attrition
Canada             1995          Static input-output model   20% decline in domestic        Net loss of 6,129 jobs (-0.1%   Irvine and Sims
                                                             cigarette demand; quitters     employment)                     (1997)
                                                             spent as an average person
Glasgow            1989                       output model
                                 Static input-­              Eliminating domestic           Net gain of nearly 8,000        McNicoll and
(Scotland)                                                   tobacco consumption;           jobs (+0.3% of employment)      Boyle (1992)
                                                             quitters spent as an average
                                                             person
Indonesia          2003          Static input-output model   100% increase in tobacco       Net job increase by 281,135     Ahsan and Wiyono
                                                             tax                            (0.3% of employment)            (2007)

Pacific Islands    1997          Qualitative assessment      Tobacco use substantially      Small increase in employ-       Collins and Lapsley
                                                             reduced; easy to switch to     ment; improved balance of       (1997)
                                                             alternative crops; quitters    payments
                                                             spent as recent quitters
South Africa       1995          Static input-output model   Eliminating tobacco use;       Net gain of 50,236 jobs         Van der Merwe
                                                             quitters spent as recent       (+0.1% employment)              (1998a)
                                                             quitters
U.K.               1990          Static input-output model   40% of tobacco expen-          Net increase of 115,688         Buck et al. (1995)
                                                             diture goes to other           jobs (+0.5% of employ-
                                                             products/services; quitters    ment)
                                                             spent as recent quitters
USA, state         1992–2005     Dynamic economic model      Eliminating tobacco use;       Net job gain of 5,600 in        Warner and Fulton
Michigan                                                     quitters spent as an average   1992; additional job gain       (1994)
                                                             person                         of 1,500 by 2005 (+0.1%
                                                                                            employment)
USA                1993–2000     Dynamic economic model      Eliminating tobacco use        Net job gain of 47 in 1993;     Warner et al. 1996
                                                                                            net job gain of 133,000 by
                                                                                            2000.
USA                1993–2000     Dynamic economic model      Doubling the rate of           Net job gain of 19,719.         Warner et al. 1996
                                                             tobacco consumption
                                                             decline

Zimbabwe           1980          Static input-output model   Eliminating tobacco use;       47,463 jobs lost (-6.7%         Van der Merwe
                                                             farmers move to alternative    employment)                     (1998c)
                                                             crops




       162 // The Effects of Tobacco Taxes on Employment and Labor Productivity
overnight and is not replaced by corresponding demand for other products and services
(Agro-Economic Services Ltd. and Tabacosmos Ltd. 1987; Arthur Anderson Economic
Consulting 1993; PEIDA 1991; Price Waterhouse Economic Consulting 1992; Tobacco
Merchant Association 1995). This is a very unrealistic scenario given the gradual reduction
in the demand for tobacco products and the dynamic nature of the market economy.

Second, the industry estimates employ a multiplier that translates job losses in the tobacco
sector to other sectors via “expenditure-induced employment.” This employment refers to
jobs created when tobacco workers spend their incomes on other goods and services,
and dominates the estimates of the total employment loss (Jacobs et al. 2000; Warner
2000). Interestingly, the industry-sponsored studies do not use a similar multiplier when
funds not spent on tobacco are spent elsewhere in the economy. In other words, these
studies assume both no alternative spending and no multiplier from that spending.

Third, the industry counts part-time and seasonal jobs as full time jobs (Jacobs et al. 2000).
This is particularly relevant for estimating the number of tobacco–related jobs in agriculture,
because few farms grow only tobacco.

Fourth, in countries that export tobacco leaf or tobacco products, the industry deliberately
confuses the negligible impact of domestic tax policies on domestic tobacco employment
with the larger impacts that could result from changes in the global tobacco market
(Gilmore et al. 2015).

Many of the industry-funded reports are not peer-reviewed and/or are prepared under
specific clients’ terms that are not disclosed. In addition, the methods and data used and
assumptions made are often not adequately described, or the data are not publicly available
to allow other researchers to replicate the results. In contrast to academic studies, the
results are often presented as point estimates without any confidence intervals, and
the weaknesses of the applied methodology/data are not acknowledged or discussed.
Therefore, many industry-sponsored studies fall far short of the criteria for high-quality
research, which greatly undermines the credibility of their results.

Discussion
The results of academic studies clearly demonstrate the limited and gradual impact of
higher tobacco taxes on tobacco-related employment that will allow the economy to
adjust. In fact, tobacco-growing communities have been making such adjustments for
decades, diversifying to other crops while the younger and more educated generations
of tobacco farmers pursue other careers (U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health
Organization 2016).

Despite this scientific evidence, the tobacco industry still manages to organize opposition to
higher tobacco taxes on the grounds of employment losses, particularly among tobacco




                                                                                             163
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




farmers and small business owners, because the job losses can be relatively concentrated,
whereas employment gains tended to be spread throughout the economy.

To address these concerns, governments and non-government organizations should
widely disseminate evidence based on solid academic research. It needs to be made clear
that the significant decreases in employment in the tobacco sector have been caused
by improvements in technology as result of the tobacco industry’s pursuit of higher
productivity and profits. Both country case studies and global analyses of the industry’s
practices will further demystify the industry’s claims about job losses and highlight its role
in declining tobacco-related employment. At the same time, the government should
promote the development of economically sustainable alternatives for tobacco growers
and workers to reduce the size of any transitional job losses.

Given the global nature of the tobacco leaf market and relative ease of securing alternative
suppliers, policies such as crop diversification or buy-outs are largely ineffective (Jacobs et al.
2000; PAHO 1992). On the other hand, diversification, placed within broader rural develop-
ment programs, could reduce transition costs for poor farmers (Leppan et al. 2014). Research
shows that tobacco farmers are receptive to shifting out of tobacco production, if they get
adequate support, such as access to public extension services, access to credit/subsidies for
alternative crops, and access to functioning market structure (Leppan et al. 2014).

Crop diversification programs and retraining of workers currently engaged in tobacco-product
manufacturing could, given overall government funding constraints, be funded by some
of the revenues from the tax increase. In the Philippines, for example, 15 percent of the
incremental tax revenue from tobacco and alcohol products is earmarked to support
alternative livelihoods for tobacco farmers (Republic of the Philippines 2012).

However, the development of adequate measures to address small transitional unemploy-
ment should not halt other tobacco control measures, including tobacco tax increases.
The tobacco industry’s vested interest in defeating or slowing down the implementation
of tobacco control policies leads it to argue that these two measures are interlinked and
need to be implemented simultaneously. Insisting on this linkage can only delay
implementation of the various provisions of the FCTC, including Article 6, dealing with
price and tax measures to reduce the demand for tobacco.

As the evidence above has shown, tobacco taxes have a relatively minor impact on
employment. In contrast, their positive effects on health, as well as on government
revenues, are substantial, as documented in the previous chapters.




164 // The Effects of Tobacco Taxes on Employment and Labor Productivity
        THE IMPACT OF TOBACCO TAXES
        ON LABOR PRODUCTIVITY
        Tobacco use is negatively associated with labor market outcomes. This relationship has
        been extensively documented in high-income countries (U.S. Department of Health and
        Human Services 2014). Low- and middle-income countries have sufficient evidence on
        the impact of tobacco use on health outcomes, but the link between labor market
        outcomes and tobacco use has been less studied.

        There are both direct and indirect effects of smoking on overall labor market performance.55
        The direct effects are related to lower productivity while at work. This primarily reflects
        smoking breaks taken throughout the working day, which substantially reduce the total
        number of hours worked and workers’ productivity (Halpern et al. 2001). In addition,
        nicotine addiction can also reduce productivity even when workers remain on the job
        (so-called presenteeism).

        The indirect effects occur through two important forms of human capital: health status
        and educational attainment. Poor health due to smoking is associated with higher
        absenteeism, therefore lower labor productivity (Bunn et al. 2006; Halpern et al. 2001).
                                               Higher absenteeism can also lead to negative career devel-
                                               opments, smaller probability of receiving a promotion, and
 The effects of tobacco                        lower wage increases (Cowan and Schwab 2011; Kristein 1983;
        use on education                       Levine et al. 1997; Weng et al. 2013). In addition, an employer
   can be formed early                         may consider smoking behavior as a signal of a lifestyle that
       in life and remain                      is socially less acceptable and discriminate against smokers
                                               (Levine et al. 1997; Wang et al. 2014). At the macro level, premature
  persistent. Therefore,
                                               deaths among smokers decrease overall labor productivity
early smoking initiation                       and negatively impact countries’ GDP (CDC 2008; Ross et al.
    can have significant                       2009a; Ross et al. 2009b).
       consequences on
                                               An early smoking onset can also negatively affect educational
  short- and long-term                         performance (Zhao et al. 2012). Since it is often forbidden to
             labor market                      smoke at schools, smokers need to leave the campus during
            performance.                       breaks, which results in distraction from school-based activities
                                               and late return to classrooms. Students who smoke are more
        motivated to search for side jobs, because they need to finance their habit. Time spent
        working eventually reduces the time spent on studying, and this subsequently harms
        students’ performance at school. Therefore, early smoking onset indirectly deteriorates
        labor market performance through compromised education. The effects of tobacco


        55 This is different from the negative effects of tobacco on the health of farmers who grow it.




                                                                                                                 165
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




use on education can be formed early in life and remain persistent. Therefore, early
smoking initiation can have significant consequences on short- and long-term labor
market performance.


Empirical Evidence
Among the direct causes of lower labor productivity among smokers, smoking breaks
dominate in terms of magnitude, even though the time lost varies widely due to individual
companies’ policies. In the United States, smoking breaks are responsible for 8 to 30 minutes
(1.7–6.5 percent) lost time per day (Javitz et al. 2006), while presenteeism accounts for
1–4 percent of productivity loss per year (Berman et al. 2013).

A U.S. study assuming 30 minutes unsanctioned smoking break per day per smoker
attributed about 87 percent of the direct effect of smoking on productivity to these
breaks, and the rest to presenteeism (Berman et al. 2013). However, the study assumed
only 1 percent presenteeism productivity loss, meaning that the weight of smoking
breaks in the estimate could have been inflated. The productivity loss caused by absen-
teeism represented 16.8 percent of the productivity loss due to smoking breaks and was
only 12 percent larger than the presenteeism productivity loss (Berman et al. 2013).

A meta-analysis of occupational studies in the U.K. revealed that current smokers had a
33 percent higher risk of absenteeism and were absent for an average of 2.74 more days
per year compared to non-smokers. The total cost of absenteeism due to smoking in the
United Kingdom was estimated to be £1.4 billion in 2011 (Weng et al. 2013).

A recent study from Uganda estimated the value of smoking-break productivity loss in the
military. Smokers took on average two additional breaks, each lasting about 14 minutes,
which resulted in productivity loss of Ugshs 88,138.8 (US$ 25.51) per smoker per year
using average salary to value the productivity (Basaza et al. 2016). In addition, tobacco
use was associated with higher absenteeism. Smokers and non-smokers in the army
reported 11.6 and 3.2 days absent from work in one year, respectively. The excess sick
days translated to 30,466.8 Ugshs (US$ 8.82) per soldier per year (Basaza et al. 2016).
The total costs of smoking related to labor productivity in the Uganda People’s Defense
Forces with 45 thousand active duty personnel was approximately US$ 576,229 per
year (Basaza et al. 2016).

Current smokers have been found to earn less than non-smokers, even after controlling
for education: 1-8 percent less in the United States (Leigh and Berger 1989; Levine et al.
1997), 8 percent less in Canada (Auld 1998), and 10 percent less among male workers
in the Netherlands (van Ours 2004). In Europe, smoking reduced wages by up to 22.7
percent (Bondzie 2016). A study using longitudinal data representing the U.S. population
suggests that smoking has a negative effect on wages via health status, but also via



166 // The Effects of Tobacco Taxes on Employment and Labor Productivity
other common factors among persistent smokers such as myopia that leads to reduced
investment in human capital, including health (Grafova and Stanfford 2009).

Using nationally representative data from the Netherlands, a 2015 study found that early
smoking onset among men, but not among women, adversely affects educational
performance, which later results in lower labor market performance. In addition, early
onset of cigarette use reduced labor market performance even after controlling for
education and other socio-economic characteristics (Palali 2015).

In general, smokers also have lower lifetime income measured by earnings over a
15-year period (Böckerman et al. 2015), are more likely to be on sick leave (Lundborg
2007; Skillgate et al. 2009; Tsai et al. 2005), and are more likely to receive disability
pensions (e.g. Eriksen et al. 1998; Haukenes et al. 2013; Husemoen et al. 2004; Lalluka
et al. 2015).

A 2016 study used national representative data from Sweden to investigate the long-term
effects of smoking on disability retirement. It found that smokers in the 50–64 age group
had a six percentage point higher probability of receiving (full) disability pension. The
results are largely driven by health problems severe enough to merit hospitalization.
Accounting for confounding factors such as family environment reduced the effect size,
but the relationship was still significant (Bengtsson and Nilsson 2016).

In the United States, the average annual smoking-attributable productivity loss due to
premature death from 2005–2009 amounts to $156.4 billion, including $5.7 billion in lost
productivity due to secondhand smoke exposure. Since this estimate does not include
other important costs, such as the lost productivity due to morbidity, it significantly
underestimates the full value of lost productivity due to smoking (U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services 2014).

The annual productivity loss due to smoking-related premature mortality in the Russian
Federation amounted to at least US$ 24.7 billion in 2006, or more than 3.22 percent of
GDP (Ross et al. 2009a). Increasing tobacco tax to the level of 70 percent of retail price could
have reduced this loss by US$3 billion while averting up to 2.7 million tobacco-related
deaths (Ross et al. 2009a).

Smoking-related productivity loss due to premature mortality in Ukraine reached com-
parable proportions, amounting to 3.6 percent of Ukraine’s GDP, or US$ 3 billion, in 2005.
This loss could have been reduced by US$ 356 million by setting the tobacco tax level
at 70 percent of retail price, a policy change that would also prevent between 249,000
and 994,000 tobacco-related deaths. Fewer smoking breaks at work after the tax increase
would have further improved labor productivity by US$ 249 million. The combined effect
would have resulted in a productivity gain of US$ 605 million, or 0.7 percent of GDP, in
2005 (Ross et al. 2009b).


                                                                                             167
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




In Vietnam, the productivity losses due to smoking-attributable morbidity and mortality
reached US$ 126.1 million and US$ 454.6 million in 2011, respectively. This productivity-­
related cost represented about 49.5 percent of the total costs of smoking in Vietnam and
was equivalent to approximately 0.48 percent of the country’s GDP (Hoang Anh et al. 2016).

Tobacco growing often comes at the expense of staple crop production on the farm, with
serious environmental, health, and socio-economic impacts (Leppan et al. 2014; Wood
et al. 2013). For example, two World Bank studies in Malawi found a negative correlation
between child anthropometric measures and tobacco farming (World Bank 2007; Wood
et al. 2013). Further, tobacco farms frequently use child labor, which has adverse impacts
on children’s school attendance, their education, and thus on their future labor productivity
(Lecours et al. 2012).

As discussed in Chapter 8, working on a tobacco farm can lead to adverse health
consequences due to chemical exposures or the absorption of nicotine through skin,
which causes green tobacco sickness (Hu and Lee 2015; Leppan et al. 2014). In fact, the
health of many people living near a tobacco farm can be negatively impacted due to
the improper disposal of containers with chemicals and runoff of pesticides and other
chemicals damaging the local water supply (Hu and Lee 2015; Leppan et al. 2014).

Thus, tobacco farming can reduce labor productivity due to its negative impact on both
education and health (Hu and Lee 2015; Leppan et al. 2014).


Discussion
The empirical evidence from both high-income settings and low- and middle-income
countries points to sizeable losses of labor productivity due to tobacco use and tobacco
farming. Many of those losses are due to the negative impact of smoking and tobacco
farming on health, but this is not the only channel of influence. Early smoking onset and
tobacco farm child labor reduce educational attainment, while smoking breaks lower
productivity on the job.

Evidence presented in this chapter is dominated by high-income country studies. Very little
is still known about the impact of smoking on wages and unemployment in low- and
middle-income countries and among the poor, for example.

The few macro-level studies that have projected the impact of higher taxes on labor
productivity reported a sizeable improvement in economic performance. Some of this
impact will be experienced in the long run due to the delayed effect of higher tobacco
taxes on numerous public health outcomes and possibly education, but a country can
expect an immediate improvement in labor productivity due to fewer smoking breaks
and an instantaneous improvement in some population-level health indicators.




168 // The Effects of Tobacco Taxes on Employment and Labor Productivity
In order to maximize the impact of a tax increase in improving labor productivity, tax
policy should be accompanied by additional measures such as support for cessation
services and more comprehensive smoke-free laws that are enforced. Collaboration with
the private sector on that front will be essential, as private firms have an inherent interest
in labor-productivity outcomes. The additional revenue from a tax increase could con-
tribute to financing these measures, if needed. This approach has already been adopted
in several countries, including Thailand (Meeyai et al. 2015).



REFERENCES
Ahsan A, Wiyono N. 2007. The impact analysis of higher cigarette price to employment in Indonesia.
Demographic Institute, Faculty of Economics, University of Indonesia.

Allen RC. 1993. The false dilemma: the impact of tobacco control policies on employment in Canada.
Ottawa, Ontario: National Campaign for Action on Tobacco.

Anh PHT, Thu LT, Ross H, Anh NQ, Linh BN. 2016. “Direct and Indirect Costs of Smoking in Vietnam.” Tobacco
Control 25:96-100. Published Online First: 15 Dec 2014, doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2014-051821.

Auld, M.C. 1998. Wage, Alcohol Use, and Smoking: simultaneous estimates. Discussion Paper No. 98/08,
Department of Economics, University of Calgary.

Barber S and Ahsan A. 2009. “The tobacco excise system in Indonesia: Hindering effective tobacco control
for health.” Journal of Public Health Policy Vol. 30, 2, 208–225.

Barber S, Adioetomo SM, Ahsan A, Setyonaluri D. 2008. Tobacco Economics in Indonesia. Paris: International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

Basaza R, Otieno E, Musinguzi A, Mugyenyi P, Haddock CK. 2016. “Factors influencing cigarette smoking
among soldiers and costs of soldier smoking in the work place at Kakiri Barracks, Uganda.” Tobacco
Control 2016.

Bengtsson T and Nilsson A. 2016. Smoking Behaviour and Early Retirement Due to Chronic Disability. IZA
Discussion Paper No. 9881.

Berman M, Crane R, Seiber E, et al. 2013. “Estimating the cost of a smoking employee.” Tobacco Control 23:
428–33.

Böckerman P, Hyytinen A and Kaprio J. 2015. “Smoking and long-term labour market outcomes.” Tobacco
Control 2015.

Bondzie EA. 2016. Effect of Smoking and Other Economic Variables on Wages in the Euro Area.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2727228

British American Tobacco. 2011. Annual Report, 2011.

Brown & Williamson. 1990. Product Knowledge Seminar. Spring 1990. Internal document No. 594000683

Buck D, Godfrey C, Raw M, Sutton M. 1995. Tobacco and jobs. Society for the Study of Addiction and Cen-
tre for Health Economics, York: University of York.

Bunn WB 3rd, Stave GM, Downs KE, et al. 2006. “Effect of smoking status on productivity loss.” J Occup
Environ Med 48: 1099–108.




                                                                                                         169
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Capehart T. 2004. Trends in U.S. Tobacco Farming. Economic Outlook Report. United States Department
of Agriculture. https://www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/publications/tbs25702/48597_tbs25702.pdf

Collins D, Lapsley H. 1997. The economic impact of tobacco smoking in Pacific Islands. Sydney: Pacific
Tobacco and Health Project, Adventist Development and Relief Agency, Australian International Devel-
opment Assistance Bureau.

Cowan B, Schwab B. 2011. “The incidence of the healthcare costs of smoking.” J Health Econ 30: 1094–102.

Eriksen W, Natvig B, Rutle O, Bruusgaard. 1998. “Smoking as a predictor of long-term work disability in
physically active and inactive people.” Occupational Medicine 48: 315–320.

Euromonitor International. 2017. Cigarettes: Global. Euromonitor International.

Gilmore AB, Fooks G, Drope J, Bialous SA, Jackson RR. 2015. “Exposing and addressing tobacco industry
conduct in low and middle-income countries.” Lancet 385: 1029–1043.

Grafova, Irina B. and Frank P. Stanfford. 2009. Industrial Labor Relationship Review 62(3): 381–393.

Halpern MT, Shikiar R, Rentz AM, Khan ZM. 2001. “Impact of smoking status on workplace absenteeism
and productivity.” Tobacco Control 10: 233–238.

Haukenes I, Riise T, Haug K, Farbu E, Maeland JG. 2013. “Smokers’ increased risk for disability pension:
social confounding or health-mediated effects? Gender-specific analysis of the Hordaland Health Study
Cohort.” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 67: 758–764.

Hu T and Lee AH. 2015. “Tobacco Control and Tobacco Farming in African Countries.” Journal of Public
Health Policy 36(1): 41–51.

Hu T-w, Mao Z, Shi J, Chen W. 2008. Tobacco Taxation and Its Potential Impact in China. Paris: International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

Huang J and Chaloupka FJ. 2013. “The economic impact of state cigarette taxes and smoke-free air policies
on convenience stores.” Tobacco Control 22: 91–96.

Husain MJ and Khondker BH. 2016. “Tobacco-free Economy: A SAM-based Multiplier Model to Quantify the
Impact of Changes in Tobacco Demand in Bangladesh.” Margin-the Journal of Applied Economic Research
10: 1 (2016): 55–85.

Husemoen LLN, Osler M, Godtfredsen NS, Prescott E. 2004. ”Smoking and subsequent risk of early
retirement due to chronic disability.” European Journal of Public Health 14: 86–92.

IARC. 2011. Effectiveness of Tax and Price Policies for Tobacco Control. Volume 14, IARC Handbooks.

Irvine IJ, Sims WA. 1997. “Tobacco control legislation and resource allocation effects.” Can Public Policy 23:
259–73.

Jacobs R, Gale F, Capehart T, Zhang P, Jha P. 2000. “The supply-side effects of tobacco-control policies.”
Chapter 13 in Tobacco Control in Developing Countries. Editors Prabhat Jha and Frank Chaloupka. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Javitz HS, Zbikowski SM, Swan GE, et al. 2006. « Financial burden of tobacco use: an employer’s perspective.”
Clin Occup Environ Med 5: 9–29.

Krasovsky K, Andreeva T, Grygorenko A, Polishchuk M, Skipalsky A, Stoyka O. 2014. Tobacco Control in
Ukraine. Second National Report.–Kyiv: Ministry of Health of Ukraine.

Krasovsky KS. 2010. ““The lobbying strategy is to keep excise as low as possible” — tobacco industry
excise taxation policy in Ukraine.” Tobacco Induced Diseases 8(10).



170 // The Effects of Tobacco Taxes on Employment and Labor Productivity
Kristein MM. 1983. “How Much Can Business Expect to Profit from Smoking Cessation?” Preventive Medicine
12(2): 358–81.

Van Liemt G. 2002. The world tobacco industry: Trends and prospects. International Labour Office, WP
179-2002. http://www.thenetwork.org.pk/Resources/Reports/PDF/24-7-2011-22-20-13-894-Tobacoo%20
imdustry%20trend.pdf

Lallukka T, Rahkonen O, Lahelma E, Lahti J. 2015. “Joint associations of smoking and physical activity with
disability retirement: a register-linked cohort study.” BMJ Open 5: e006988.

Lecours N, Almeida GE, Abdallah JM, Novotny TE. 2012. « Environmental health impacts of tobacco farming:
a review of the literature.” Tobacco Control 21(2): 191–6.

Leigh, J. P., and Berger, M. C. 1989. “Effects of smoking and being over- weight on current earnings.”
American Journal of Preventative Medicine, Vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 8–14.

Leppan W, Lecours N and Buckles D. 2014. Tobacco Control and Tobacco Farming. Separating Myth from
Reality. IDRC. http://idl-bnc.idrc.ca/dspace/bitstream/10625/53191/1/IDL-53191.pdf

Levine PB, Gustafson TA, and Velenchik AD. 1997. “More Bad News for Smokers? The Effects of Cigarette
Smoking on Labor Market Outcomes.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, April 1997, pp. 493–509.

Lundborg P. 2007. “Does smoking increase sick leave? Evidence using data on Swedish workers.” Tobacco
Control 16: 114–118.

McNicoll IH, Boyle S. 1992. “Regional economic impact of a reduction of resident expenditure on
cigarettes: a case study of Glasgow.” Appl Econ 24: 291–6.

Meeyai A, Yunibhand J, Punkrajang P, Pitayarangsarit S. 2015. “An evaluation of usage patterns, effectiveness
and cost of the national smoking cessation quitline in Thailand.” Tobacco Control 24: 481–488.

Merrill RM, Castleton RA, Lindsay GB. “Sectors of the Russian economy that would benefit from reduced
cigarette sales.” Tobacco Control 18: 505–508.

Nandi A, Ashok A, Guindon GE, Chaloupka FJ, and Jha P. 2015. “Estimates of the economic contributions
of the bidi manufacturing industry in India.” Tobacco Control 24:369–375.

Nicolaides-Bouman A, Wald N, Forey B, and Lee P. 1993. International Smoking Statistics: A Collection of
Historical Data From 22 Economically Developed Countries. New York: Oxford University Press.

Oxford Economics. 2013. The Economic Impact of the Tobacco Products Directive from Reductions in
Incidental Purchases. November 2013.

Palali A. 2015. Early Smoking, Education, and Labor Market Performance. Discussion Paper. No. 2015-
03325. Tilburg University. June 2015. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2623037

Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). 1992. Tobacco or health: status in the Americas. A report of
the Pan American Health Organization. Pan American Health Organization.

Republic of the Philippines. 2012. Republic Act No. 10351: Sin Tax Reform Act of 2012. Manila.

Ribisl KM, Evans WN, Feighery EC. 2011. “Falling cigarette consumption in the U.S. and the impact upon
tobacco retailer employment.” In: Bearman P, Neckerman K, Wright L, eds. Social and Economic Conse-
quences of Tobacco Control Policy. New York: Columbia University Press.

Ross H, Shariff S and Gilmore A. 2009a. Economics of Tobacco Taxation in Russia. Paris: International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.




                                                                                                           171
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Ross H, Shariff S and Gilmore A. 2009b. Economics of Tobacco Taxation in Ukraine. Paris: International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

Standford A & Bates C 1998. Job losses in the tobacco industry: the impact of tobacco policies. London:
Action on Smoking and Health.

Skillgate E, Vingård E, Josephson M, Holm LW, Alfredsson L. 2009. “Is smoking and alcohol consumption
associated with long-term sick leave due to unspecific back or neck pain among employees in the public
sector? Results of a three-year follow-up cohort study.” Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine 41: 550–556.

Statista, http://www.statista.com/statistics/261173/leading-countries-in-tobacco-production/, accessed
5/20/16.

The European Travel Retail Confederation (ETRC). http://www.etrc.org/current-issues/tobacco-retailing.html.
Accessed 5/25/16.

“Tobacco growers in a fix.” The New Nation, Bangladesh’s Independent News Source. June 28, 2010.

Tsai SP, Wen CP, et al. 2005. « Workplace smoking related absenteeism and productivity costs in Taiwan.”
Tobacco Control 14: i33–7.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2014. The Health Consequences of Smoking — 50 Years
of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health.

U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization. 2016. The Economics of Tobacco and
Tobacco Control. National Cancer Institute Tobacco Control Monograph 21. NIH Publication No.
16-CA-8029A. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of
Health, National Cancer Institute; and Geneva, CH: World Health Organization.

Van der Merwe R. 1998a. “The economics of tobacco control in South Africa.” In: Abedian I, van der Merwe
R, Wilkins N, Jha P, eds. The economics of tobacco control: towards an optimal policy mix. Cape Town: Medical
Association of South Africa Press: 251–71.

Van der Merwe R. 1998b. “Employment and output effects for Bangladesh following a decline in tobacco
consumption.” Washington, DC: Population, Health and Nutrition Department, World Bank.

Van der Merwe R. 1998c. Employment and output effects for Zimbabwe with the elimination of tobacco
consumption and production. Washington, DC: Population, Health and Nutrition Department, World
Bank.

Van der Merwe R. 1998d. “Employment issues in tobacco control.” In The Economics of Tobacco Control:
Towards an Optimal Policy Mix (ed. I. Abedian, R. van der Merwe, N. Wilkins, and P. Jha), pp. 199–209. Cape
Town: Medical Association of South Africa Press.

Van Ours JC. 2004. “A pint a day raises a man’s pay; but smoking blows that gain away.” Journal of Health
Economics 23: 863–886.

Wang Ji-Wei, Zhi-Ting Cui, Ning Ding, Cheng-Gang Zhang, Tricia Usagawa, Helen Louise Berry, Jin-Ming
Yu, Shen-Sheng Li. 2014. “A qualitative study of smoking behavior among the floating population in
Shanghai, China.” BMC Public Health 14: 1138. http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/14/1138

Wanzala O (January 30, 2011). “High premiums push farmers out of tobacco.” Daily Nation.

Warner KE. 2000. “The economics of tobacco: myths and realities.” Tobacco Control 9:78–89.




172 // The Effects of Tobacco Taxes on Employment and Labor Productivity
Warner KE, Fulton GA, Nicolas P, Grimes DR. 1996. “Employment implications of declining tobacco
product sales for the regional economies of the United States.” Journal of the American Medical Association
275(16): 1241–1246.

Warner KE, Fulton GA. 1994. “The economic implications of tobacco product sales in a non-tobacco state.”
JAMA 271: 771–6.

Weng SF, Ali S, and Leonardi-Bee J. 2013. “Smoking and absence from work: systematic review and
meta-analysis of occupational studies.” Addiction 108: 307–319.

Wood B, Nelson C, Kilic T, Murray S. 2013. Up in Smoke? Agricultural Commercialization, Rising Food
Prices and Stunting in Malawi. The World Bank. Policy Research Working Paper 6650. October 2013.

World Bank. 2007. Malawi poverty and vulnerability assessment: Investing in our future. Full Report
36546-MW. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Health Organization. 2015. Tobacco taxation policy in Kyrgyzstan. Regional Office for Europe of the
World Health Organization.

Yurekli Ayda A. 2012. Tobacco Supply & Trade. World Health Organization. Presentation at the World
Conference on Tobacco or Health Singapore, March 23, 2012.

Zhao M, Konishi Y, Glewwe P. 2012. “Does smoking affect schooling? Evidence from teenagers in rural
China.” Journal of Health Economics 31: 584–598.




                                                                                                       173
The long-term prospects of
shrinking the tobacco leaf market
suggest that opportunities exist
for tobacco farmers to switch to
other crops, but this will require
addressing market failures
and advantages provided by
governments as well as the tobacco
industry, particularly in low-income
countries.




174 // Executive Summary
8
    The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption

   WHAT WILL IT TAKE FOR
  FARMERS TO SWITCH TO
 OTHER CROPS?
    Teh-Wei Hu, Angela Lisulo, and Melissa Brown




    ABSTRACT
    This chapter seeks to: (a) review trends in global tobacco supply and producer incentives
    in the face of changing global demand; (b) document the relative financial returns for
    farmers from tobacco versus alternative crops, based on recent trends in global tobacco
    demand and prices; and (c) discuss the feasibility of farmers’ switching from growing
    tobacco to other crops. We give special attention to the potential impact of current
    patterns on vulnerable groups, including women and poor smallholder farmers.

    Although taxes may eventually affect the market for tobacco leaf by lowering demand,
    global supply is not expected to decrease sharply in the immediate term, based on current
    price and production trends. Indeed, today, the global demand for tobacco is increasing
    despite strengthened control measures, including higher taxes on cigarettes. In China, a
    dominant actor in the global tobacco market, current trends show a steady increase in
    demand with a domestic supply that is relatively insulated from consumption tax effects.

    The long-term prospects of shrinking the tobacco leaf market suggest that opportunities
    exist for tobacco farmers to switch to other crops, but this will require addressing market
    failures and advantages provided by governments as well as the tobacco industry, particularly
    in low-income countries. A large-scale crop switch from growing tobacco to alternative
    crops would require assistance with technical knowledge, capital investment, other forms
    of agricultural support by governments, and marketing channels for farmers who shift
    to alternative crops. In the meantime, tobacco production creates unique negative
    externalities and health effects for farmers that require management, particularly as
    they may disproportionately impact vulnerable populations, especially in some African
    countries. There is a tendency for tobacco companies to under-grade the tobacco in
    order to maximize their profits. As a result, many farmers do not earn enough to repay
    their loans and get caught in a spiral of perpetual indebtedness to the companies.
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




A number of institutional, financial, and technical barriers impact switching away from
tobacco production. These include: the tobacco industry’s ability to shift tobacco
production around globally to maintain supply; countries’ reliance on tobacco exports for
foreign exchange; farmers’ limited access to capital and value-chain financing for alternative
crops; and the lack of technical expertise or services to facilitate other cash-crop production.
Reducing tobacco supply in line with the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control will
require addressing these issues. Both producer-country governments and international
partners have roles in helping tobacco farmers adopt alternative crops.



INTRODUCTION
The World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC)
calls for measures to reduce the demand for tobacco products and address tobacco
supply issues globally. With respect to tobacco supply, the treaty has specified that
signatories should promote economically viable alternatives to tobacco for farmers,
reduce the amount of land cultivated for tobacco leaf, and protect the environment and
health of farmers. The FCTC specifically acknowledges that tobacco control efforts would
be expected to impact tobacco producers and farmers while also reducing demand for
tobacco products. While tobacco control efforts may have limited economic impact in
some tobacco producing countries, those with a narrow export base or greater reliance
on tobacco for foreign exchange may experience a larger impact.

This chapter explores issues around tobacco production and supply in light of tobacco
control efforts and the anticipated lower demand for tobacco leaf. In particular, this
chapter seeks to:

   •	 Review trends in global tobacco supply and producer incentives in the face of
      changing global demand,
   •	 Document the relative financial returns from tobacco versus alternative crops, based
      on recent trends in global tobacco demand/prices, and
   •	 Discuss the feasibility of farmers’ switching from growing tobacco to other crops.
We give attention to the potential impact of current patterns and policy options on
vulnerable groups, including women and poor smallholder farmers. Overall, our findings
show that opportunities exist for tobacco farmers to switch to other crops, but that, in
most settings, farmers will require technical and investment support to make this
transition successfully.




176 // The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption: What Will It Take for Farmers to Switch to Other Crops?
                                                   POTENTIAL EFFECTS OF HIGHER
                                                   TOBACCO TAXES ON GLOBAL AND
                                                   LOCAL TOBACCO SUPPLY
                                                   Today, the global demand for tobacco is increasing despite increased taxes on its main
                                                   product, cigarettes. Around the world, tobacco leaf is primarily used in the form of cig-
                                                   arettes. In recent years, various control measures have been employed in an attempt to
                                                   curb the use of tobacco.56 As part of these efforts, 11 countries raised cigarette taxes to
                                                   more than 75 percent of retail prices between 2012 and 2014, while 106 of 183 countries
                                                   raised cigarette taxes by smaller percentages (WHO 2015).57 In addition, since 2005, many
                                                   countries have implemented at least one non-price tobacco control measure, such as
                                                   smoke-free legislation, a ban on tobacco advertisements, or enforcement of a health
                                                   warning on tobacco packages (WHO 2015). Despite the implementation of these various
                                                   tobacco control measures, global cigarette consumption increased from 5.7 trillion ciga-
                                                   rettes in 2000 to 5.8 trillion cigarettes in 2014 (The Tobacco Atlas 2016).

                                                   China is currently leading global consumption of tobacco leaf through cigarette use.
                                                   Although global cigarette use is stable, there are regional disparities in the consumption
                                                   of cigarettes, with Europe seeing a mild decline and Africa a mild increase in their respec-
                                                   tive consumption of cigarette products over recent decades. China remains the primary
                                                   source of demand. This is attributed to a combination of higher GDP per capita, thus


  Figure 1: Global Cigarette Consumption by WHO Region (in Trillions of Cigarettes), 1980–2013
                                    2.50
Cigarette Consumption (trillions)




                                                                                                                                                                                  AFRO
                                    2.00
                                                                                                                                                                                  AMRO
                                    1.50
                                                                                                                                                                                  China

                                    1.00                                                                                                                                          EMRO

                                                                                                                                                                                  EURO
                                    0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                  SEARO
                                      —
                                                                                                                                                                                  WPRO
                                              80      82      84      86      88      90      92      94      96      9   8     00 02 004 006 008 010 012
                                           19      19      19      19      19      19      19      19      19      19         20 20   2   2   2   2   2

  AFRO: Africa, AMRO: Americas, EMRO: Eastern Mediterranean, EURO: Europe, SEARO: South-East Asia, WPRO: Western Pacific.
  Source: The Tobacco Atlas, 2016.


                                                   56 WHO’s MPOWER strategy focuses on six elements: monitoring tobacco use, protecting people from tobacco smoke, offering help
                                                   to quit tobacco use, warning about the dangers of tobacco, enforcing bans on tobacco promotion, and raising taxes on tobacco.
                                                   57 WHO (2015), Appendix IX, Tax and Price Data, table 9.5: Average national taxes and retail prices for a pack of 20 cigarettes, globally
                                                   listed 11 countries have raised cigarette taxes to more than 75 percent of retail prices of tobacco: Bangladesh, Bosnia, Chile, Czech
                                                   Republic, Estonia, France, Greece, Herzegovina, Latvia, Romania, Slovenia, and the United Kingdom.



                                                                                                                                                                                         177
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Figure 2: Global Production of Tobacco Leaf (tons)

                        10,000,000
                         9,000,000
                        8,000,000
                        7,000,000
Production (tons)




                        6,000,000
                        5,000,000
                        4,000,000
                        3,000,000
                        2,000,000
                         1,000,000
                                 —




                                                                                                                                                                                                              2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                2005
                                                                                                                                                                                         2003


                                                                                                                                                                                                       2007
                                                                                                                                                                                  2001




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2013
                                                                                                                                        1989
                                                                                                                          1985
                                                                                                                   1983




                                                                                                                                                                           1999
                                             1963
                                                    1965


                                                                  1969




                                                                                                                                                      1993
                                                                                                                                                             1995
                                                                                                                                 1987
                                                           1967




                                                                                                     1979




                                                                                                                                                                    1997
                                                                                1973
                                                                                       1975
                                                                                              1977




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2011
                                                                                                            1981




                                                                                                                                               1991
                                      1961




                                                                         1971




                                                                                                                            Year
Source: FAOSTAT (2016).



Figure 3: Global Area Harvested (Ha) and Global Yield (Hg/Ha) for Tobacco Leaf
                          6,000,000                                                                                                                                                                              19,000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 18,000
                          5,500,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17,000
  Area Harvested (Ha)




                          5,000,000                                                                                                                                                                              16,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Yield (Hg/Ha)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15,000
                          4,500,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14,000

                         4,000,000                                                                                                                                                                               13,000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12,000
                          3,500,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11,000

                          3,000,000                                                                                                                                                                              10,000
                                                                                                                                                               2000



                                                                                                                                                                                   2006

                                                                                                                                                                                           2009
                                                                                                                                                                           2003
                                                                                                                           1988
                                                1964




                                                                                                                   1985




                                                                                                                                                                                                       2012
                                                                    1970




                                                                                                        1982




                                                                                                                                               1994
                                                           1967




                                                                                                                                                       1997
                                                                                               1979
                                                                            1973

                                                                                       1976




                                                                                                                                    1991
                                        1961




                                                                                                                      Year
                                                                                       Area Harvested (Ha)                                      Yield (Hg/Ha)
Source: FAOSTAT (2016).


greater affordability, and population growth (The Tobacco Atlas 2016). In general, the
continuous increase in tobacco consumption is attributed to world population growth,
insufficiently large tobacco tax increases, and aggressive promotion efforts by the
tobacco industry in many lower middle-income countries (Mendez, Alshangeety, and
Warner 2013; Ng, Freeman, and Fleming 2014).

The global supply of tobacco leaf is moderately increasing, such that it now stands at
levels similar to those seen during the 1980s. Despite annual fluctuations, tobacco leaf
production has been on an upward trend over the past few decades, although a sharp


178 // The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption: What Will It Take for Farmers to Switch to Other Crops?
Figure 4: Country Share of Total Tobacco Production (%) (2011–2013 Average)




       42.6% share
       5–15% share
       1–5% share
       <1% share


Source: FAOSTAT (2016).




Table 1: Shares of Global Annual Production of Tobacco Leaf by Region (%)

                                                 2000             2013
 Africa                                          7.9              8.5

 Asia                                            63.2             67.8

 China                                           38.1             42.4

 Caribbean                                       0.8              0.5

 Central America                                 1.1              0.8

 Northern America                                7.9              5.1

 South America                                   11.4             13.9

 Europe                                          7.7              3.4

 Oceania                                         0.1              0.1

Source: Shares calculated from data provided by FAOSTAT (2016).




                     decline was experienced in the late 1990s. Latest figures for annual tobacco production
                     stand at 7.4 million tons (2013) (FAOSTAT 2016), which represents an increase of 10.4
                     percent from 2000. Global production increases can largely be attributed to the rising
                     productivity in tobacco farming. Global average yields have increased markedly, while
                     the area under cultivation has been decreasing since its peak in the late 1990s, despite
                     a moderate recent increase. Analysis of supply and demand trends have shown that the
                     global supply of tobacco leaves exceeds demand (Bialono 2008; Jones, Austin, Beach et al.
                     2008; Otanez and Glantz 2011).


                                                                                                                179
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




An increasing share of world tobacco leaf production has shifted from higher-income
countries to lower-income countries over time. In recent years, the share of global annual
tobacco leaf production has increased for the regions of Africa, Asia, and South America,
while the shares held by North America, Europe, Central America, and the Caribbean have
declined. As of 2013, China has the largest share of global tobacco leaf production
(42.4 percent), followed by Brazil (11.4 percent) and India (11.1 percent) (FAOSTAT 2016).

Increased taxes on tobacco consumption could be expected to reduce demand and
translate into lower supply. Tobacco leaf has a global market, however, so a tax increase
on tobacco leaf products in one country may not translate into a significant negative
impact on tobacco leaf production within that country, depending on trade policy and
leaf quality. A tobacco tax increase is therefore expected to negatively impact farmers’
livelihoods if the economy is closed to tobacco trading, as in China and Indonesia, where
most of the tobacco leaf produced is used for the domestic manufacturing and con-
sumption of cigarettes.

To better examine the impact of a cigarette tax increase on tobacco leaf production
within a country, we use China and Indonesia as examples. According to the latest
statistics, as noted above, China is the world’s largest tobacco leaf producer with 42.4
percent of total global production; Indonesia ranks fifth, with 3.5 percent of total world
tobacco leaf production (FAOSTAT 2016).

China: In a study on tobacco taxation and its potential economic impact in China (Hu,
Mao, Shi, and Chen 2008), the authors used two estimates of price elasticities of the
demand for cigarettes in China: a lower estimate (-0.15) and a higher estimate (-0.50).
Calculations were based on China’s cigarette tax rate in 2005, when taxes represented 40
percent of the retail pack price, or 4.52 RMB (US$ 0.55) per pack. China consumed 94.1
billion packs in 2005. A tax increase of 1 RMB (US $ 0.12) per pack to 5.52 RMB (US$ 0.67),
yielding a new tax rate equivalent to 51 percent of the retail price, was found to reduce
cigarette consumption by anywhere from 3.1 billion packs to 10.4 billion packs, depend-
ing on the price elasticity used. Since the Chinese tobacco industry estimated that it
requires 0.041 tons of tobacco leaf to produce one case (50,000 pieces) of cigarettes,
the estimated reduction in demand for tobacco leaf would range from 26,055 tons to
87,296 tons. China produced 2.7 million tons of tobacco leaf in 2013. The reduction in the
demand for tobacco leaf thus represented just 1–3 percent of total Chinese tobacco leaf
production — a minor impact on the overall volume of national tobacco leaf production.

Indonesia: In January 2010, the government of Indonesia increased its excise tax rate by
10 percent (to 57 percent of the cigarette retail price). The tobacco industry argued that
this tax increase would reduce tobacco farmers’ income and employment in the tobacco




180 // The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption: What Will It Take for Farmers to Switch to Other Crops?
    Figure 5: Producer Prices for Five Leading Tobacco Leaf Producers (2013)
                               5000
                               4500
   Producer Prices (US$/ton)




                               4000
                               3500
                               3000
                               2500
                               2000
                                1500
                               1000
                                500
                                  0
                                       2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010                 2011   2012    2013   2014

                                                 United States of America       Brazil      China        Indonesia          India
Source: FAOSTAT (2016).



                                        industry. A study was conducted to ascertain the effects of the excise tax rate change.
                                        Researchers interviewed a random sample of more than 500 tobacco farmers in tobacco-
                                        producing areas of central Java, eastern Java, and western Nusa Tenggara in June 2010.
                                        The results of the study showed that almost 80 percent of respondents were not aware of
                                        the tobacco tax increase and did not report any effect on their tobacco growing (Triasih,
                                        Hasbullah, Santii, and Vetty 2012).

                                        The tobacco tax and resulting increase in cigarette prices in Indonesia do not appear to
                                        have had a significant impact on tobacco farming because: (1) Tobacco farmers grow
                                        diverse crops and engage in both farming and non-farming economic activities; (2)
                                        Tobacco crops in Indonesia tend to be rotated on a given plot of land once every three
                                        years, and farmers usually grow tobacco as a secondary crop along with other crops, such
                                        as chili, garlic, potatoes, and fruits; and (3) Indonesia’s total arable land devoted to tobacco
                                        leaf production has fluctuated with a slight decline in recent years (Barber, Adioetomo,
                                        Ahsan, and Setyonaluri 2005; FAOSTAT 2014).

                                        Despite increased taxes, tobacco leaf producer prices have been rising in recent years
                                        for at least some producers. Producer prices have generally been climbing over the past
                                        decade for the five countries that lead global tobacco leaf production: China, Brazil, India,
                                        USA, and Indonesia. This trend has also been evident for smaller global producers, such as
                                        Zimbabwe, despite price fluctuations in the past two decades. Notably, producer prices in
                                        Zimbabwe in 2015 had increased by more than 80 percent since 2005.

                                        Although taxes may eventually affect the market for tobacco leaf by increasing consumption
                                        prices and lowering demand,58 the global supply of tobacco leaves is not expected to
                                        decrease sharply in the immediate future. Tobacco leaf production is likely to remain



                                                                                                                                      181
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




stable, given the lack of any rapid decline in global demand for tobacco leaf and the trend
of increasing producer prices. The global supply of tobacco leaves does not immediately
appear to be affected by increased cigarette taxes, given the nature of the tobacco value
chain, as we saw in the cases of China and Indonesia.

Although not explored here, the profitability incentive of the tobacco industry is also likely
to maintain steady global supply. Generally, tobacco processors and cigarette producers
seek the lowest labor costs among lower-income countries and establish vertical integration
through contracting tobacco leaf farmers as a monopoly buyer, and encouraging
economies of scale in growing tobacco leaves (Lappan, Lecours, and Buckle 2013).



RELATIVE RETURNS FROM TOBACCO
VERSUS ALTERNATIVE CROPS
Many countries believe that tobacco farming can bring in much-needed government
revenue, provide employment to rural populations, earn foreign exchange for the country,
and provide cash income for individual farmers. Tobacco farmers often consider tobacco
farming as more profitable than growing other crops, when they do not take into account
their own labor inputs and potential health hazards. The tobacco industry is interested in
having a stable supply and relatively low price of tobacco leaf. Thus, the tobacco industry and
the government often work together to promote tobacco farming. This section provides
a few examples of the relative returns from growing tobacco versus alternative crops in
several tobacco-growing countries.

Farmers’ incentive to shift away from tobacco cultivation will be driven by the relative
costs and returns from growing tobacco leaf versus alternative crops. Relative returns
were compared in a number of tobacco growing countries and are grouped by the type
of tobacco growing economy, according to the World Bank classification, i.e., low-income
countries, lower middle-income countries, and upper middle-income countries.59 It is
important to notice that this comparison does not take into account the environmental
and health damage caused by growing tobacco, which is not associated with growing
the crops used for comparison. These issues, along with the reasons for this apparently
irrational behavior by farmers, are discussed later in this chapter.




58 This will only happen if tax rates are increased to the point where affordability is reduced, and in the context of a comprehensive
tobacco control program that includes additional measures such as advertising, education, and medical targeted advice.
59 Each study has used different approaches to estimate cost and revenue. Some studies do not include own labor time as costs,
other imputed hired labor cost to own labor costs. The methodology is noted under each country example.



182 // The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption: What Will It Take for Farmers to Switch to Other Crops?
Table 2: Comparison of Returns for Tobacco Leaf and Alternative Crops (in US$), Low-Income Countries

ZIMBABWE                                                      TANZANIA
(Keyser       Net Profit per Day                              (Kidani et al. 2013)     Net Profit per Acre
2007)         Small Communal       Small Commercial
              Farmers              Farmers
Tobacco       1.29–1.78            3.30                       Tobacco                  161
Paprika       2.75                 4.18                       Maize                    116
Maize         0.21                 0.79                       Ground nut               194
Soy Beans     1.76                 1.76
Cotton        1.79                 1.64
Groundnuts    1.60                 1.47
Coffee        3.17




               Low-Income Countries
               In Zimbabwe, for communal tobacco farmers in 2007, growing tobacco leaf was more
               profitable than growing maize, but was not as profitable as coffee and paprika. Tobacco
               yielded a return comparable with soybeans, groundnuts, and cotton. For small-scale
               commercial tobacco farmers, growing tobacco leaf was more profitable than all other
               crops except paprika. Paprika, however, is a nontraditional crop that depends on special
               marketing channels and had a particularly strong market at the time of the study. In this
               study, total production costs included all variable costs or cash costs, as well as fixed
               investment costs. However, total production costs were not defined so as to include an
               unpaid value for family labor.

               In Tanzania, the earnings from growing tobacco leaf were higher than from growing maize,
               but less than the earnings from growing groundnuts. In this study, total labor cost was
               calculated as the imputed local hired labor wage multiplied by farmers’ own labor time.


               Lower Middle-Income Countries
               In Kenya, results show that tobacco had the smallest returns of all the crops included in
               the study. Cost and return data were collected in the Kuria and Migori Kenya tobacco-
               growing region (INRS 2007). Results for tobacco were compared with those for several
               commercial crops, including passion fruit, pineapple, soybeans, watermelon, and pepper.
               One measure used was the net returns to family land, labor, and management per day. Of
               note, families spent 176 days growing tobacco, 173 days for pineapple, 31 days for pepper,
               and around 50 days for other crops. Another study comparing maize versus tobacco was
               conducted in Kenya during 2010 (Lu 2010) and similarly found higher returns for maize.
               The total per-acre cost of growing tobacco leaf was estimated at KSH 73,000 (US$ 723;
               1 USD = KSH 101), with a total revenue per acre of KSH 88,000 (US$ 871) and total labor


                                                                                                             183
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




time of 83 person-days per acre. In contrast, the total cost to grow one acre of maize was
KSH 5,005 (US$ 50), with the total revenue per acre of maize calculated at KSH 23,400
(US$ 232). Maize production required 65 person-days per acre. This gave maize a
higher per-acre return and lower labor requirements than tobacco. Neither of these studies
included own-family labor costs, which are likely to be higher for tobacco, as for hired labor.

In Indonesia, an in-depth study of the costs and returns of tobacco farming in Central
Java (Keyser and Juita 2003) showed that potatoes, groundnuts, and corn had a better net
profit per day than tobacco leaf, but tobacco leaf showed a better return than carrot or
garlic production.


Table 3: Comparison of Returns for Tobacco Leaf and Alternative Crops (in US$),
Lower Middle-Income Countries

 KENYA                                                      INDONESIA

 (Ochola and Kosura,            Net Profit Per              (Keyser 2007)       Net Profit Per
 2007)                          Acre/Per day                                    Acre/Per day
 Tobacco                        2.02                        Tobacco (Kretek)    1.42

 Passion Fruit                  47.71                       Potato              9.32

 Pineapple                      7.47                        Carrots             0.81

 Soy beans                      3.63                        Garlic              0.25

 Watermelon                     43.9                        Ground nuts         2.42

 Pepper                         24.78                       Corn                2.61


 Lu (2010)
 Tobacco                        1.79

 Maize                          2.84



Upper Middle-Income Countries
In China, returns on tobacco are clearly lower than for other crops, despite subsidies and
production quotas established by the Government. Field surveys were conducted with over
1,000 farmers in two tobacco-growing provinces of Southwest China, Guizhou and Sichuan,
in 2007 and 2008. The study cohort ranged from farmers growing 100 percent tobacco to
those growing mixed crops to farmers growing no tobacco at all. The revenue-to-cost ratio
was found to be 2.6 for tobacco, 2.5 for grain, 4.3 for beans, and 3.7 for oil-seed/or fruit (Jiang,
Chen, Mao, and Hu 2009). These costs did not include families’ own labor time; however, since
tobacco is more labor-intensive than other crops, tobacco leaf would have a lower revenue-
to-cost ratio than the other crops if labor were considered.



184 // The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption: What Will It Take for Farmers to Switch to Other Crops?
            Similarly, during 2008 and 2010, UCLA School of Public Health researchers joined with the
            Yuxi Municipality Bureau of Agriculture in a pilot study to organize a farmers’ cooperative.
            Yuxi is situated in a major tobacco-growing area in Yunnan Province. The cooperative
            provided assistance to farmers to undertake tobacco crop substitution. The cooperative
            recruited 458 farmers by providing high-yield alternative crop seeds, pesticides, and
            crop-marketing information. The cooperative collected cost and revenue data for 458
            families farming non-tobacco crops and 282 tobacco-farming families. They found that
            the average net profit (income minus cost) per acre was US$ 4,586 for growing tobacco,
            US$ 5,554 for broccoli, US$ 5,550 for cauliflower, and US$ 10,175 for grapes. The overall
            income for non-tobacco farmers was higher by between 21 percent and 110 percent per
            acre than for those who were growing tobacco leaf (Li, Wang, Xia, et al. 2012). It should be
            noted that this study did not mention whether farmers’ own labor time was included in
            their cost estimations.

            Assessing returns to tobacco production in China is complicated by the government
            subsidies provided for growing tobacco and the production “quotas” assigned. Even
            with subsidies included, if farmers’ own labor cost (opportunity cost) is factored in, many
            tobacco farmers still do not make a better return than those who grow other crops (Jiang
            2009; Zhang, Jiang, Mao, and Hu 2009). Nevertheless, surveys show that local village officials
            often strongly encourage farmers to grow tobacco leaf so that the village can meet its
            assigned “quota.”



Table 4: Comparison of Returns for Tobacco Leaf and Alternative Crops (in US$), Upper
Middle-Income Countries

 CHINA                                                           BRAZIL
 (Hu et al. 2008)               Revenue cost ratio (per acre)    (Vargas and           Per ha per day
                                                                 Campos 2013)
 Tobacco                        2.6                              Virginia tobacco      3.05
 Grain                          2.5                              Burley tobacco        2.69
 Beans                          4.3                              Corn                  0.07
 Vegetable oil                  3.7                              Beans                 (1.62)
 Fruit                          3.7

 (Li et al. 2012)               Net profit per acre
 Tobacco                        4,586
 Broccoli                       5,554
 Cauliflower                    5,550
 Grapes                         10,175




                                                                                                        185
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




By contrast, in Brazil, a 2013 case study comparing the costs and returns for four crops —
Virginia tobacco, Burley tobacco, corn, and beans — suggested that growing tobacco is
far more profitable than growing the other two traditional crops. The methodology for
estimating costs and return figures is not described in this study. Virginia tobacco showed
net returns per day of US$ 3.05; Burley tobacco, $2.69; corn, only $0.07; and beans, a
negative return. However, farmers spent between 134–149 days growing tobacco and
22–26 days growing corn and beans, respectively (Vargas and Campos 2005). In addi-
tion, it should be noted that, since this study was supported by the Association of Brazilian
Tobacco Growers (Afubra), the findings may be biased toward tobacco growing.


Cross-Cutting Issues
The long-term prospects of shrinking the tobacco market suggest that opportunities
exist for tobacco farmers to switch to other crops, but that this will require addressing
market failures. The studies reviewed have shown that many crops are more profitable
than growing tobacco leaf, especially nontraditional commercial crops. This is more likely
in higher-income countries than low-income settings and assumes that markets are
fully functioning. In many cases, growing tobacco is highly profitable either because of
government subsidies or tobacco industry support to remedy market failures in terms of
access to credit, inputs, or output markets. In many countries, tobacco is produced under
contract farming arrangements where companies provide low-interest cash loans or
credit, fertilizer, seeds, and construction of tobacco leaf-curing facilities for those farmers
who can potentially produce high-quality tobacco leaf. Guaranteed cash payment upon
delivery of the crops reduces uncertainties around marketing.

A large-scale crop switch from growing tobacco to alternative crops would require
assistance with technical knowledge, capital investment, other forms of agricultural support
by governments, and marketing channels for growing alternative crops. Farmers may
lack the technical knowledge or investment capital to switch from tobacco leaf to other
potentially profitable crops, and some land may not be suitable for growing other crops,
especially after negative effects on land fertility due to years of tobacco growing.

The main findings of the Keyser and Juita study (2003) in Indonesia indicated that,
although other crops could offer a potentially better financial return to tobacco farmers,
substituting alternative crops in place of tobacco would require providing farmers
with financial, technical, and marketing assistance during the transition period. Table
4 incorporates the Yuxi farmers’ cooperative approach that has been used in China to
enable farmers’ transitioning away from tobacco. The model involves building farmers’
skills to assess and identify the best possible alternative crops, for example: gherkin,
cauliflower, broccoli, mushroom, and grapes. This skills-building is provided together with
fertilizer, product-marketing channels, warehouse storage, and distribution channels.



186 // The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption: What Will It Take for Farmers to Switch to Other Crops?
This comprehensive approach has been adopted as a model of crop substitution in Yunnan
Province.60 Additional successful examples from other countries are yet to be documented.



NEGATIVE EXTERNALITIES FROM
TOBACCO PRODUCTION
Unlike subsistence or other cash crop production, tobacco farming has two major negative
externalities: its impact on the environment, and its impact on human health.

The negative environmental impact of tobacco farming is the result of the heavy fuel
demand required to dry tobacco on the farm and the heavy nutrient requirement
associated with tobacco cultivation. In addition, tobacco farmers often cut down trees
to use for curing tobacco leaf, which has led to the depletion of forests.

In a 1999 study, China was assessed as having the most serious deforestation problem in
the world, followed by Tanzania, Zambia, and Indonesia (Geist 1999). In China, the tobacco-
related annual deforestation rate was 87,000 hectares, meaning that 17.8 percent of
annual deforestation is attributed to tobacco (Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids 2001).
Instances of deforestation also have been reported in Brazil, Cambodia, Kenya, and other
lower middle-income countries. Furthermore, growing tobacco leaf requires nutrient-rich
soil to stimulate leaf growth and nicotine content. This requirement leads to constant clearing
of new land as well as heavy use of fertilizers. Unlike other crops, which generate benefits
in the form of crop residues useful for soil nutrition or livestock feeding, the tobacco plant
does not provide any replacement to the soil and cannot be used for livestock.

Tobacco farming also impacts human health through the heavy use of chemicals and
through farmers’ absorption of nicotine during cultivation and harvesting. Tobacco
requires intensive application of pesticides, fertilizers, and chemical sprays to improve
the yield of the tobacco leaf crop. Farmers often have little knowledge of the toxicity of
such chemicals and have not been informed about the right ways to store, handle, and
use them. In areas where occupational safety and farm management practices are weak,
these chemicals are applied via handheld or backpack sprayers by farmers without pro-
tective gear (Lecours et al. 2011). Tobacco farmers in low- and middle-income countries
use toxic DDT, which has been banned in high-income countries. These farmers are often
exposed to chemical poisoning through pesticides and fertilizers.

Farmers face health hazards through the absorption of nicotine during harvesting and
curing of the tobacco leaf. The risk is substantially higher when the leaves are moist from
rain or dew, or when the workers do not wear protective clothing, which is often the case.


60 Results are shown in Table 4.




                                                                                             187
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Tobacco farmers try to save money by not providing such protection, and their knowledge
level concerning the problem is low (Hu and Lee 2014). Nicotine absorption and exposure
cause green tobacco sickness (GTS), whose characteristic symptoms include nausea,
vomiting, headache, muscle weakness, and dizziness. Other symptoms may include
lethargy, abdominal cramps, and fluctuations in heart rate and blood pressure (McKnight
and Spiller 2005). Children are more vulnerable to the sickness because of their smaller
body mass, which gives them less tolerance to the nicotine absorbed. A 2007 literature
review found that nonsmoking tobacco harvesters showed cotinine and nicotine levels
similar to those among active smokers in the general population, and that toxicity to the
cardiovascular system and carcinogenicity of chronic skin nicotine exposure were likely
to exist (Schmitt, Schmitt, Kouimintzis, et al. 2007).

According to a U.S. government-funded study, about 25 percent of workers harvesting
tobacco in one area of North Carolina suffered from GTS in a single season (Arcury et
al. 2001). Similarly, a 2010 health survey of 500 farmers in Indonesia found that almost
two-thirds of the farmers reported having body pain during the tobacco leaf planting,
maintenance, and harvesting periods. Fifty percent of tobacco farmers reported having
headaches during the same periods. Other tobacco sickness symptoms were reported,
including nausea/vomiting/stomachache, extensive sweating, itching, and shortness
of breath (Triasih, Hasbullah, Santi, and Vetty 2012). Similarly, in a recent survey of 400
women tobacco farmers in Tanzania, almost 70 percent reported having tobacco farming-
related illnesses, while 60 percent of the respondents were not aware of the negative
health consequences of tobacco farming. Within this group of women, 70 percent had
engaged in tobacco farming beyond 6 months of pregnancy (Hu and Lee 2016). In China,
half of 400 women tobacco farmers interviewed reported experiencing dizziness, 33 percent
experienced headaches, and 17 percent experienced nausea. About 40 percent of respon-
dents were not aware of the negative health effects of tobacco farming (Hu and Lee 2016).

Given the potential negative health impacts of tobacco farming, international best
practices identified by the International Labor Organization should be followed.61 The
U.S. Department of Labor, for instance, requires that employers who hire tobacco workers
provide information and training about nicotine hazard, GTS prevention, and appropriate
personal protective accessories, such as gloves, long-sleeve shirts, long pants, and
water-resistant clothing, before letting farmers handle tobacco leaves.62 The U.S. example
could be considered, given the cost and climate conditions for countries that do not
have such regulations.




61 See ILO Standards for Safety and Health in Agriculture: http://www.ilo.org/safework/info/standards-and-instruments/codes/
WCMS_161135/lang--en/index.htm
62 See https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/green_tob_sickness/index.html



188 // The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption: What Will It Take for Farmers to Switch to Other Crops?
BARRIERS AND FEASIBILITY OF SWITCHING
FROM TOBACCO TO OTHER CROPS
Tobacco farmers face three types of barriers that make it difficult to switch to alternative
crops: (1) institutional barriers, (2) financial barriers, and (3) informational/technical barriers.


Institutional Barriers
The tobacco industry encourages most governments to promote tobacco farming based
on the arguments that tobacco farming: (1) contributes to government earnings and tax
revenues; (2) improves farmers’ employment and income, especially cash income, and
relieves household poverty; (3) takes advantage of low-fertility land that is suitable for growing
tobacco leaf but would otherwise be underutilized; (4) generates export earnings; and (5)
promotes local economic development. These arguments have been formulated to
challenge advocates of tobacco control (Jacobs, Gale, Capehart, Zhang, and Jha 2000).

In China, tobacco farmers experience strong pressure from local government officials
to engage in tobacco farming. In China, tobacco farming is entirely under the control of
the China National Tobacco Corporation (CNTC), from central government through to
the local village level. The CNTC is government-owned, and it is also the largest cigarette
manufacturer in the world. The CNTC has the overall responsibility of setting tobacco leaf
production quotas for all provinces in the country. It sets the purchase price for tobacco
leaf and determines marketing channels. CNTC is the sole legal buyer of tobacco leaf from
tobacco farmers. It is illegal for farmers in China to sell tobacco leaf to private cigarette
producers (Hu, Mao, Jiang, et al. 2007). Furthermore, the Chinese government has set a
20 percent tax on tobacco leaf to be used entirely for local government finance, and the
revenue is collected by the CNTC on behalf of local governments. This economic incen-
tive encourages local governments to fulfill their tobacco leaf production quotas, and it
ensures a steady supply of tobacco leaf for cigarette manufacturing.

Even when the tobacco industry is privately owned, as in Indonesia and African countries,
tobacco leaf is viewed as a valuable source of foreign exchange to the national economy
and therefore carries political weight. When the tobacco industry is under private
ownership, a contract system is established whereby tobacco companies provide loans
to farmers for inputs such as seeds, fertilizers and pesticides, to ensure a steady supply of
tobacco. In exchange, the farmers sell their tobacco leaf exclusively to their contracted
companies. This arrangement is widespread in producer countries. Since the tobacco
companies grade and price the leaf harvested by the farmers, and the tobacco company
is the sole buyer, there is a tendency for these companies to under-grade the tobacco in
order to maximize their profits. As a result, many farmers do not earn enough to repay
their loans and get caught in a spiral of perpetual indebtedness to the companies. These
farmers have no choice but to grow tobacco, resulting in what some have called “lifetime


                                                                                                  189
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




debt bondage” (Kagaruki 2010). As a result of the close relationship between the tobacco
industry and political institutions in these settings, small tobacco farmers face major
obstacles in switching from tobacco leaf to other crops. Many become effectively
trapped in tobacco farming.


Financial Barriers
Access to significant financing would be required for most tobacco farmers to make a
successful switch to growing other crops. Tobacco farmers interested in switching to
other crops would require initial capital to purchase seeds, fertilizers, and other farm sup-
plies, as well as to invest in the storage of and transportation for their alternative crops.
Furthermore, at least 18 months could be needed for tobacco farmers to realize their
income from other crops, from the initial identification of seed selection until revenue
collection from the alternative crop; farmers would require substantial and affordable
loans or funding to support their living expenses while they are growing alternative crops.

Some countries, such as Tanzania, do not allow traditional crops such as rice, wheat,
and soybeans to be exported to neighboring countries, thus restricting the markets for
these crops, which creates additional difficulty for farmers. Farmers do not find it easy to
sell these products to the market, and/or they do not get a fair price. This export policy
reduces incentives for tobacco farmers to grow alternative crops.

The relatively lower financial barriers in tobacco farming make it difficult for current tobacco
farmers to switch to other crops. In African countries, special provisions have been made by
the tobacco industry and financial institutions to allow farmers easier access to borrowing
money to grow tobacco, as opposed to other crops. In fact, in some countries, such as
Kenya and Tanzania, no loans are available for farmers to grow other crops. Moreover, farmers
always face a risk of losing a crop due to weather, transportation, or storage problems,
regardless of the crop. Tobacco farmers often have the backup of the contract from the
tobacco industry or risk insurance from the tobacco industry to mitigate these costs, so
farmers who grow other crops may encounter greater financial risks.


Information/Technology Barriers
Tobacco farmers are not adequately informed of their alternative crop choices. Surveys
of tobacco farmers were carried out in Tanzania and Kenya during which respondents
were asked to identify alternative crops they could grow. The results revealed a lack of
knowledge about crop choices: more than 60 percent of respondents could not identify any
alternative crops, and even those farmers who were aware of possible alternative crops
were unaware of how different crops may rely on a particular climate and soil conditions,
irrigation requirements, and overall market potential. Tobacco farmers often lack access
to this type of information (Hu and Lee 2016).



190 // The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption: What Will It Take for Farmers to Switch to Other Crops?
Tobacco farmers generally underestimate the opportunity cost of their own intensive
labor inputs in growing tobacco and the tobacco industry lets its farmers believe that
growing tobacco is more profitable than growing other crops. Without knowing the
comparative economic returns and the costs of growing alternative crops on the one
hand, and the negative effects on their health on the other hand, tobacco farmers may
have no desire or intentions to switch to other crops. Many farmers are not aware of the
negative health effects of tobacco farming. If they had knowledge of these potential
illnesses, tobacco farmers might have more incentives to switch to other crops.

Geographical conditions influence the location of tobacco farming. The factors that can
influence crop decisions include soil conditions, weather, water resources, and marketing
availability. For instance, many high-yield tobacco-growing areas are situated in hilly
areas such as in Southern China, Yunnan and Guizhou provinces, and in Southern Brazil.
To grow good quality tobacco leaf requires suitable soil content and organic ingredients
which have a bearing on the flavor of the tobacco leaf and provide a good yield of
tobacco crop. Weather conditions, including the right temperature, sunlight, and rainfall
are critical to special tobacco crops. For instance, in China the government has been
shifting tobacco growing from Northern China to Southern China, which is more suitable
to growing tobacco.


Feasibility of Switching from Tobacco Crops to Alternative Crops
To produce a crop requires four major input elements: land, labor, capital, and technology.
The profitability of a crop also depends on an efficient market infrastructure to make sure
the crop has a good market outlet and sustains its profits in the long term. Encouraging
tobacco farmers to switch to other crops requires removing the institutional barriers,
economic barriers, and information/technology barriers discussed above.

Governments have a role to play in assisting tobacco farmers to switch to alternative
crops. Based on the cited comparative economic returns from tobacco leaf versus alter-
native crops, and even without considering environmental and health damages, there are
other options for tobacco farmers besides tobacco. The government can take the initiative
to provide financial incentives, offer affordable loans, disseminate health information,
provide technical assistance, provide agriculture extension and irrigation, and create
market channels for alternative crop market output. The government could also raise the
taxes on cigarettes while ensuring that additional, fiscally sustainable budget allocations
assist tobacco farmers to switch from growing tobacco to growing other crops. The
example of the Philippines in 2012, when the government raised the tax on cigarettes and
designated the earmarked tax for alternative crops, is relevant due to its success in triggering
the switch. However, countries that do not have earmarked increases in tobacco taxes can
prioritize agriculture-sector spending that encourages farmers to produce other crops.



                                                                                               191
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




The international development community also has an important role to play in assisting
tobacco farmers to switch to alternative crops. For instance, the International Development
Research Center (IDRC) in Canada provided an experiment by growing bamboo as an
alternative crop livelihood strategy for tobacco smallholders in Kenya. The FAO, United
Nations Environmental Program (UNEP), and United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) provided technical assistance to Ghana to support tobacco
farmers to grow alternative crops (CTCA [date?]). In addition to assistance from relevant
government agencies, the implementation of large-scale tobacco-alternative farming
programs would require financial support, technology and know-how from international
organizations to help tobacco farmers shift to other crops. Institutions that could contribute
include United Nations technical agencies, as in the Ghana project, as well as development
banks, for example the World Bank Group and the African Development Bank. Global,
national, and local civil society organizations and academic research institutions could
also contribute decisively.

Governments, international NGOs and development agencies, and other trusted partners
might convince tobacco farmers to gradually diversify to alternative crops while they are
exiting tobacco. This option would reduce farmers’ financial risk and crop production risk
while at the same time demonstrating the feasibility of crop substitution during the
transition period.



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Although tobacco production may not be immediately affected by rising con-
sumption taxes, long-term trends point towards lower demand and the need
to find alternatives. Many countries are engaged in implementing tobacco control
programs focused on education, medical advice, and tax increases in order to reduce
cigarette use, with the aim of improving population health. However, as noted above, the
impact of these measures on global cigarette consumption has been rather limited. The
empirical evidence and available literature have also shown that the impact of tobacco
consumption taxes on the growth of tobacco farming has been very slow to materialize.
Thus, to date, taxes and other control measures have had a minimal effect on tobacco
farmers’ income. On the other hand, incentives to increase the supply of tobacco have
continued to operate forcefully. Upward drivers of tobacco production include industry
marketing strategies, financial incentives to farmers, and the oligopolistic global tobacco
production structure itself, as well as the industry’s political and institutional connections.
These forces have thus far prevented a decline in the production of tobacco leaf. Nonetheless,
long-term trends, as demonstrated by the shift in consumption in certain regions, imply
that demand will decline in the long run, requiring adjustments on the part of producers.




192 // The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption: What Will It Take for Farmers to Switch to Other Crops?
Given the challenges farmers will face in transitioning away from tobacco, govern-
ments in countries in which tobacco is a major crop may choose to initiate support
strategies early, to progressively assist tobacco farmers in adopting alternative
crops. Examples provided in this chapter illustrate that it is feasible for tobacco farmers
in a number of countries to grow other crops, which are often more profitable and less
detrimental than tobacco leaf. A successful switch to growing other crops will ultimately
improve the health and livelihoods of many tobacco farmers. However, wholesale
substitution of other crops in place of tobacco will require the effort of government
agencies, international organizations, and NGOs to help tobacco farmers overcome the
numerous barriers they face in switching to alternative outputs. Mounting well-publicized
programs to do so may in some cases be an important part, from the point of view of
political economy, of justifying significant increases in tobacco taxes. Depending on the
country, this could be important even if the share of agricultural employment in tobacco
production is quite small: all the more so, because the industry makes use of employment
loss as an argument against significant tobacco tax increases.

Safeguards should be applied in tobacco production irrespective of the diversifi-
cation agenda. As tobacco is still a major crop in many countries, to protect the health
of tobacco farmers, it would be important for governments to adopt health and safety
measures for current tobacco farmers in line with the best practices, such as those
required by the ILO.

The most appropriate role of institutions such as the World Bank may be in
supporting policy reforms and investments to improve agricultural productivity
and bolster the profitability of alternative crops. The World Bank does not provide
loans or support for tobacco-growing activities in any countries and is also not involved
in any large-scale projects involving crop substitution for tobacco leaf. Indeed, there is
currently no known large-scale crop substitution effort for tobacco leaf in the world,
and the model of crop substitution programs undertaken by drug control efforts is not
applicable to tobacco. Support from government agencies, international organizations,
and NGOs could catalyze ambitious crop-substitution programs for tobacco farmers,
addressing the institutional, financial, and technical barriers identified above. Key
obstacles include: countries’ overreliance on tobacco exports for foreign exchange;
farmers’ limited access to capital and value-chain financing for alternative crops; and the
lack of technical expertise and services to facilitate the production of non-tobacco cash
crops. In terms of political economy, it is important to develop such alternative-crop
programs to counter industry arguments against large tax increases.




                                                                                             193
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




REFERENCES
Arcury, T., Quandt, S., Preisser J., Norton, D. 2001. “The Incidence of Green Tobacco Sickness among Latino
Farmers.” Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine 43(7): 601–609.

Barber, S., Adioetomo, S., Ahsan, A., & Setyonaluri, O. 2008. Tobacco economics in Indonesia. Paris: Interna-
tional Union against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

Bialous, S. A. 2008. “Corporate practices undermining the implementation of economically sustainable
alternatives to tobacco growing.” Study conducted for the second meeting of the Study Group on
Economically Sustainable Alternatives to Tobacco Growing. Mexico City, June 17–19.

Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. 2001. Golden leaf, barren harvest: the cost of tobacco farming. Washing-
ton, D.C.

CTCA (Center for Tobacco Control in Africa). (No date) Factsheet on Alternative Livelihoods to tobacco
farming in Africa. Facebook: facebook.com/CTCAFRICA

FAOSTAT, The Statistics Division of the FAO at http://www.fao.org

Geist, H. J. 1999. “Global assessment of deforestation related to tobacco farming.” Tobacco Control 8(1):18–28.

Hu, T., Lee, A. 2015. “Tobacco control and tobacco farming in African countries.” Journal of Public Health
Policy 36 (1):41–51

Hu, T., Lee, A. 2016. “The role of women in tobacco farming.” A report submitted to the Gates Foundation,
the Public Health Institute, Oakland, CA.

Hu, T., Mao, Z, Jiang, H., Tao, M., & Yurekli, A. 2007. “The role of government in tobacco leaf production in
China: national and local intervention.” International Journal of Public Policy, Vol. 2, pp. 235–248.

Hu, T., Mao, Z., Shi, J., & Chen, W. 2008. Tobacco taxation and its potential impact in China. Paris: Interna-
tional Union against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

ILO. 2001. Tanzania child labour in commercial agriculture — tobacco: a rapid assessment. International
Labour Organization International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour. Investigating the
Worst Forms of Child Labour. No. 9. Geneva.

INRS. 2007. Case study on tobacco cultivation and possible alternative crops — Kenya. Study conducted
as a technical document for the first meeting of the Ad Hoc Group on Alternative Crops established by
the Conference of Parties to FCTC. Retrieved from who.int/tobaccoframework/cop/events/2007/kenya_
case_study.pdf

Jacobs R., Gale F., Capehart, T., Zhang, P., & Prabhat, J. 2000. “The supply-side effect of tobacco control
policies.” In P. Jha, & F. Chaloupka (Eds.), Tobacco control in developing countries. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Jiang, H., Chen, J., Mao, Z., & Hu, T. 2009. “On tobacco leaf tax reform and tobacco control” (in Chinese).
In T. Hu (Ed.), China tobacco tax: Historical development, current and future reform. Beijing: China Taxation
Press, pp.65–69.

Jones, A. S., Austin, W.D., Beach, R. H., & Altman, D.G. 2008. “Tobacco farmers and tobacco manufacturers:
implications for tobacco control in tobacco growing developing countries.” Journal of Public Health Policy
29 (4): 406–423.

Kagaruki, L. K. 2010. “Community-based advocacy opportunities for tobacco control: experience from
Tanzania.” Global Health Promotion, 17(2) Suppl: 41–4.




194 // The Supply Side of Tobacco Consumption: What Will It Take for Farmers to Switch to Other Crops?
Keyser, J. 2007. “Crop substitution and alternative crops for tobacco.” Study conducted as a technical
document for the first meeting of the Ad Hoc Study Group on Alternative Crops established by the
Conference of the Parties to the WHO Framework Convention for Tobacco Control.

Keyser, J., & Juita, N. 2003. “Smallholder tobacco growing in Indonesia: costs and profitability compared
with other agricultural enterprise.” HNP Discussion Paper, World Bank Economics of Tobacco Control
Paper No. 27.

Kidene, A., Mduma, J., Naho A., Hu, T. 2016. “Economic returns and costs of tobacco, maize and ground
nuts: The case of Tabora region, Tanzania.” African Statistical Journal, Vol. 19.

Lecours, N., Almeida, G. E., Abdallah, J. M., & Novotny, T.E. 2012. “Environmental health impacts of tobacco
farming: a review of the literature.” Tobacco Control 21(2): 191–96.

Li, V., Wang Q., Xia, N., Tang, S., & Wang, C. 2012. “Tobacco crop substitution: pilot effect in China.” American
Journal of Public Health 102(9): 1660–1663.

McKnight, R. H., and Spiller, H.A. 2005. “Green tobacco sickness in children and adolescents.” Public Health
Reports 9, 120(6): 602–605.

Mendez D, Alshangeety O, Warner KE. 2013. “The Potential Impact of Smoking Control Policies on Future
Global Smoking Trends.” Tobacco Control 22 (1): 46–51.

Ng M, Freeman M, Fleming, T et al. 2014. “Smoking Preference and Cigarette Consumption in 187 Countries.”
JAMA 711 (2): 183–212.

Ochola, S. A and Kosura W. 2007. Case Study on Tobacco Cultivation and Possible Alternative Crops —
Kenya, a report presented at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Study Group on Alternative Crops, organized by
WHO, February 2007.

Otanez, M., and Glantz, S. A. 2011. “Social responsibility in tobacco production? Tobacco companies’ use
of green supply chains to obscure the real costs of tobacco farming.” Tobacco Control 20(6): 403–411.

Schmitt, N.M., Schmitt, J., Kouimintzis, D.J. et al. 2007. “Health Risks in Tobacco Farm Workers: A Review of
the Literature.” J Public Health 15: 255. doi:10.1007/s10389-007-0122-4

The Tobacco Atlas (www.tobaccoatlas.org/cigarette.use)

Triasih, D., Hasbullah, T., Santi, Y., and Vetty, Y. 2012. “The impact of excise increase on income of tobacco
farmers.” In T. Hasbullah and P. Sarnantio (Eds.), Indonesia: The Heaven for Cigarette Companies and the
Hell for the People. Jakarta: University of Indonesia, School of Public Health, pp. 27–42.

Vargas MA, Campos RR. 2005. Crop substitution and diversification strategies: empirical evidence from
selected Brazilian municipalities. Washington, DC, World Bank, March 2005 (Health, Nutrition, and Popula-
tion Family (HNP) Discussion Paper, Economics of Tobacco Control Paper No. 28).

Waddie Leppan, Lecours N, Buckles, D. 2013. “Tobacco Control and Tobacco Farming: Separating Myth
from Reality.” International Development Research Center.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2015. WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2015: Raising
Taxes on Tobacco. Geneva: WHO.

Yu, V. 2010. “A financial comparison of farming maize versus tobacco.” www.nuruinternational.org




                                                                                                             195
llicit tobacco trade affects most regions. It is
estimated that the illicit tobacco trade share
(as a percentage of retail sales) ranges from
7.9 percent in North America upward to 8.4
percent in Eastern Europe and Asia and the
Pacific, 8.7 percent in Western Europe, 10.6
percent in the Middle East and Africa, and
16.7 percent in Latin America (Euromonitor
estimates).
Illicit tobacco trade is estimated to represent
9.9 percent of retail sales worldwide
(Euromonitor estimates, as reported by
WHO).
This situation constitutes a major public
health problem, as the lower retail prices of
illicit cigarettes lead to increased cigarette
consumption.
9
   PREVENTING AND
 CONTROLLING ILLICIT
  
TOBACCO FLOWS
    Enrique Fanta and Magaly Garcia




    ABSTRACT
    The illicit tobacco trade diminishes the capacity of increased taxes to cut tobacco use. It
    also costs governments some $40 to $50 billion annually in lost revenue. Thus, measures
    to control the illicit flow of tobacco products are a necessary complement to tobacco
    tax policy and public education campaigns. This chapter highlights the administrative
    options authorities have in controlling the illegal tobacco trade and presents successful
    examples from countries.

    The fraudulent sale of tobacco products constitutes about 10–12 percent of cigarette
    consumption worldwide. In low- and middle-income countries, 50 percent of cigarettes
    are thought to come from illicit sources. Besides its negative public-health and fiscal
    effects, illicit tobacco has been linked to organized criminal activity and terrorism.

    Proven tools are available to countries that want to combat illegal tobacco. The WHO
    Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products identifies effective measures, including:
    track-and-trace systems to follow tobacco products through the supply chain; excise tax
    stamps and other product markings; detection equipment at customs posts; physical
    control measures, such as separation of production and storage facilities; and penalties
    and sanctions. For each of these mechanisms, we discuss technical aspects and policy
    considerations. Beyond measures included in the WHO Protocol, we recommend that
    countries: (1) identify and measure incompliance before launching a control program,
    so as to target control action effectively; and (2) rigorously apply the rule of law. As
    enforcement capacities increase in sophistication, so too should the legal means tax
    and customs authorities have available to enforce compliance.

    Case studies from Turkey and the United Kingdom show how these countries successfully
    reduced illicit tobacco flows. Evidence from these and other contexts supports the
    following conclusions: (1) control and enforcement mechanisms significantly increase the
    impact of tobacco tax increases; (2) high-level political leadership speeds success; (3)
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




a global convergence toward common control and enforcement standards would benefit
all countries; (4) countries may improve outcomes by going beyond the strict requirements
of the WHO Protocol; (5) control programs often pay for themselves through improved
tax compliance; and (6) tackling illicit tobacco may unmask illicit activity in other sectors
and act as a deterrent for all such activity.



BACKGROUND:
WHY IS CONTROL IMPORTANT?
In the fight to curb tobacco-related disease, disability, and death, enforcement of measures
to control the illicit flow of tobacco is the necessary counterpart to a well-developed tax
policy and public education campaign. Illicit tobacco, in fact, diminishes the effectiveness
of increased taxes designed to reduce tobacco use and costs governments millions of dol-
lars in foregone revenue (World Bank 1999). Developing an effective control policy involves
multiple stakeholders and close collaboration with several government authorities. Such
an approach can increase revenues, many times exceeding implementation costs, while
improving public health outcomes. This chapter will highlight the administrative options tax
and customs authorities have in controlling the illegal trade of tobacco products and present
successful examples from around the world.

The World Health Organization (WHO) Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products
(“Protocol”) defines illicit tobacco trade as:

Any practice or conduct prohibited by law and which relates to production, shipment,
receipt, possession, distribution, sale or purchase, including any practice or conduct intended
to facilitate such activity. (WHO 2012, Article 1.6)

Illicit tobacco trade affects most regions. It is estimated that the illicit tobacco trade share (as
a percentage of retail sales) ranges from 7.9 percent in North America upward to 8.4 percent
in Eastern Europe and Asia and the Pacific, 8.7 percent in Western Europe, 10.6 percent in
the Middle East and Africa, and 16.7 percent in Latin America (Euromonitor estimates). Illicit
tobacco trade is estimated to represent 9.9 percent of retail sales worldwide (Euromonitor
estimates, as reported by WHO). In 2015, the volume of duty-not-paid cigarettes consumed
in the world was some 463 billion sticks, with an estimated value of US$ 40 billion (Euro-
monitor 2016). This situation constitutes a major public health problem, as the lower retail
prices of illicit cigarettes lead to increased cigarette consumption. The numerous regulatory
obligations and excise taxes on legally traded products create large potential profit margins
for smugglers, as does the smuggling of other specially taxed products like alcohol and cars.
Since cigarettes themselves are neither large nor heavy products, they are relatively easily
concealed and smuggled by a variety of means: personal vehicles, luggage, portal services,



198 // Preventing and Controlling Illicit Tobacco Flows
         Figure 1: Illicit Cigarette Market Share and Cigarette Prices by Country
                                                                                              Latvia
                                                          50


                                                          45
                                                                                                                                                                                             Y=-0.0076χ+0.1752
                                                                                           Lithuania                                                                                            Rz=0.04959
Illicit Trade Share as % of Legal Cigarette Consumption




                                                          40       Pakistan                            Dominican Republic

                                                                         Boliva              Malaysia
                                                          35

                                                                                  Peru Ecuador                                                                                     Ireland
                                                          30
                                                                        Iran
                                                                                                          South Africa
                                                                                  Brazil
                                                                        Egypt                  Poland
                                                          25
                                                                                           Bulgaria
                                                                      Tunisia
                                                                            Nigeria           Slovakia Estonia                      Venezuela
                                                          20                           Mexico
                                                                   Cameroon       UAE                Uruguay                                        Canada
                                                                                                 Costa Rica         Austria
                                                                            India     Colombia Croatia                                      France
                                                          Philippines
                                                           15                         Bosnia
                                                                         Kenya Guatemala               Romania
                                                                 Vietnam                Saudi ArabiaTurkey                                                     United Kingdom
                                                                            Serbia                         Greece
                                                                  Georiga          Indonesia                              Netherlands
                                                           10                 Alergia Morocco Slovenia          Portugal                         Sweden
                                                               Ukraine China                                                       Germany
                                                                                     Azerbaijan                           USA
                                                             Uzbekistan                                          Spain                        Switzerland
                                                                                        Argentina Hungary                                                  Singapore                                                          Norway
                                                            5                                                                     Finland
                                                                      Macedonia                                            Italy                                                                              Australia
                                                                                                        Chile                         Belgium
                                                                Kazakhstan           Thailand                      Israel                                                   New Zealand
                                                                                                                                 Denmark
                                                                              Russia     South Korea             Japan
                                                            0             Belarus
                                                               0                   2                      4                   6                    8                    10                     12                  14

         Source: Adapted from                                                                                                     Price Per Pack, USD
         CDC 2016. Created
         from data in Euromon-                                                      boats, cargo trains, donkeys, and shipping containers (Melzer 2010). The degree of the prob-
         itor International, 2015                                                   lem varies widely across the world, as can be seen in Figure 1. However, while Figure 1 pres-
         (illicit trade percentage),
         and WHO, 2010 (price).                                                     ents cross-country estimates of illicit tobacco trade reported by Euromonitor International
                                                                                    (2015) and price per pack data reported by WHO (2010), recent data from countries such as
                                                                                    Ireland, show that the market penetration of illicit cigarettes is being contained with effective
                                                                                    control mechanisms. For example, recent cigarette survey data for Ireland show that only 10
                                                                                    percent of the packs held by smokers surveyed are classified as illegal, and that only a further
                                                                                    8 percent of the packs are found to be legal Non-Irish Duty Paid (Ireland Office of the Reve-
                                                                                    nue Commissioners, et al 2017). Countries such as Malaysia and Ecuador (see Box 3 below)
                                                                                    have also adopted effective measures to curb tobacco smuggling.


                                                                                    What Does the Illicit Tobacco Trade Look Like?
                                                                                    There are four kinds of illicit tobacco products. Contraband cigarettes are genuine
                                                                                    products that have been bought and are illegally resold outside the country of origin
                                                                                    for financial profit. Counterfeit cigarettes are illegally manufactured and sold by those
                                                                                    other than the original trademark owner.63 Illicit whites are manufactured legitimately
                                                                                    in one country for the sole purpose of being smuggled into and sold in another country.

                                                                                    63 When detecting counterfeit cigarettes, it is important to meet with the legitimate tobacco companies to learn the differences
                                                                                    between legitimate and counterfeit products. For example, the paper used or images displayed may be different. Illicit tobacco is
                                                                                    generally more dangerous for public health.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        199
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




And unbranded tobacco is often sold as finely cut loose leaf tobacco and consumed in
roll-your-own form or inserted into empty cigarette tubes. It may be grown illicitly
without a license or imported.

Contraband or smuggled cigarettes that are sold through illicit trade networks and avoid
tax and duty altogether represent the biggest percentage of the illicit tobacco trade, up
to 90 percent of the total (CDC 2016). There are two ways in which they are traded: Boot-
legging is the illegal resale outside the country of origin of legally purchased duty-paid
cigarettes. And wholesale smuggling is the cross-border trade in untaxed cigarettes. The
illicit market for smuggled and counterfeit cigarettes has fallen worldwide (as an example,
21 percent of cigarettes in the United Kingdom were smuggled at the start of the 2000s,
and by 2007/08 that number fell to 10 percent). However, the market share of illicit
roll-your-own tobacco, estimated at 47 percent of illicit tobacco trade, is not showing
a decline (HM Government 2010). In addition to cigarettes being smuggled outside of
countries, genuine products are also diverted from production facilities directly into local
markets by illicit networks complicit with tobacco firms. These also avoid duties and
regulatory requirements.

The supply of smuggled, cheap cigarettes (roughly half the price of duty-paid premium
brand cigarettes in most cases) reduces the effectiveness of government attempts to
make the products unaffordable by increasing excise taxes. Cheap cigarettes allow for
greater youth uptake and continued use by lower-income smokers whose demand for
cigarettes is most sensitive to price. The sale of illicit cigarettes also undermines other tobacco
control measures such as age-of-sale restrictions and public health campaigns, since
contraband cigarette units often do not display health warnings (HM Government 2010).

Various studies have tried to determine what factors most influence the illicit trade in
tobacco products. Contributing factors to illicit trade are complex. Studies have shown


Box 1 // The Tobacco Industry Weighs In: Do Increased Taxes Lead
to Increased Levels of Illicit Tobacco?
The tobacco industry has often taken a position on whether increasing prices on cigarettes
increases or decreases illicit trade and applied significant lobbying efforts to convince policy-
makers of the industry’s point of view. In the early 1990s, the tobacco industry in Kenya strongly
encouraged authorities to raise taxes. It was later discovered that the tobacco industry was
complicit with the smugglers and was under-declaring production and values. Thus, in this case,
the industry stood to gain significantly from the government’s focusing on raising taxes and
doing little else (Ngeywo 2017). More commonly, the tobacco industry has taken the position
that increased prices will increase illicit trade and thus lower government revenues. Experience in
Canada and Sweden, however, has shown this is not the case. In the 1990s, Canadian and Swedish
authorities lowered tobacco taxes at the encouragement of the tobacco industry. Within one
year, tax revenues had fallen significantly, and cigarette consumption had increased (Cetinkaya
and Marquez 2017). To date, there is no conclusive evidence showing that increases in tobacco
taxation directly cause increases in illicit trade.
Box 2 // Follow the Money
The U.K., Canada, and Chile have all organized their illicit tobacco reform efforts by adopting a
strategy that essentially “follows the money.” By identifying the financiers of the production, stor-
age, transportation, and distribution of illicit tobacco, governments can target these sources and
have a broader-reaching effect. Most often the financiers are organized crime groups. The U.K.,
Canada, and Chile all created special teams tasked with identifying and targeting these groups.
Once identified, the groups found to be involved in the financial chain of the contraband should
be audited by the appropriate authorities including tax, customs, police, and money laundering units.




that higher levels of the following variables contribute to a higher share of illicit trade:
purchasing price, proximity to borders, Internet penetration, taxation levels, smoking
prevalence rates, sales per capita, GDP per capita or estimated disposable income,
unemployment rates, corruption, and presence of organized crime networks. In contrast,
higher levels of the following variables contribute to a lower share of illicit trade: per-
ceived legitimacy of tobacco taxes, rule of law/good governance indexes, prosecution rates,
punishments, and variables measuring law enforcement actions/effectiveness (including
border security and seizure rates) (OECD 2016).


Political, Social, and Economic Consequences of Illicit Tobacco Trade
An illicit distribution network, by virtue of its being illicit, is unregulated and creates
opportunities for exploitative behavior. Illegal networks both thrive in and contribute to
public and political corruption. Such networks provide unfair competition to legitimate
enterprises that do abide by the numerous regulatory requirements placed on the
growing of tobacco and the distribution and sale of cigarettes.

The sale of illicit tobacco has also been linked to serious organized criminal activity,
fueling what has been called the “unholy trinity of transnational crime, corruption, and
terrorism” (Shelley 2005). In Turkey, the government was able to gain a broader base
of support for tobacco control efforts when they made the link between the sale of
illicit tobacco products and the terrorist networks that the country had been fighting to
dismantle (Cetinkaya 2017). Since the 1980s, there is evidence that tobacco smuggling
operations have helped finance terrorist organizations around the world (Alderman 2012;
Brady 2013). And quite often, multiple sectors of the illicit economy interact and help
support each other. Groups that have been found to participate in the illicit trade of
humans, weapons, gemstones, antiquities, pirated electronics, narcotics, and more have
included the following: the Provincial Irish Republican Army (PIRA), the Liberation Tigers
of Tamil Eelam (LTIE), Hezbollah in Lebanon, Hamas in Palestine, the Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA), the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU), the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK),
the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb
(AQIM), and the Taliban in Afghanistan (OECD 2016).



                                                                                                 201
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Enforcement Measures Are Effective
Regulatory, health, and fiscal measures have helped reduce the sale of legitimate
cigarettes but have had limited effectiveness in reducing the number of smuggled
products. Control and enforcement measures, on the other hand, have proven to be
among the most effective tools in reducing contraband and illicit trade (IMF 2016). An
effective control strategy encompasses the entire supply chain and all of its points: from
the fields where tobacco leaves are grown, or the port of entry, to the final purchase
by the individual product consumer. Detection, seizure, and elimination must be
accompanied by thorough and systematic investigations.

Where comprehensive tobacco control policies that include increases in excise taxes,
public education efforts, smoking bans, and stronger control of illicit trade flows have been
implemented, there have been significant declines in cigarette consumption. In the United
States, those states that have made larger, sustained investments in comprehensive tobacco
control programs have seen cigarette sales drop approximately twice as much as in the
United States overall. In fact, smoking prevalence among adults and youths has declined
faster as spending for tobacco control programs has increased (CDC 2012).

In Turkey, strengthened tax administration and customs control efforts along with an
increase in taxes proved to be the most effective policy combination. Between the years
of 2003 to 2009, there was a 3.5 percent increase in the tax burden that led to 6.5 million
more packs of cigarettes being confiscated by authorities. Between 2010 and 2015, the
tax burden rose by a similar increment (3.4 percent). However, during this period Turkey
also implemented a series of non-price tobacco control initiatives. As a result, the num-
ber of packs of cigarettes confiscated by authorities increased by 100 million. In 2015
alone, the estimated tax loss resulting from seized smuggled cigarettes would have
been approximately 800 million Turkish Lira or US$ 265 million (Cetinkaya and Marquez
2017). Figure 2 illustrates the dramatic increase in confiscations as a result of control
and enforcement initiatives.

Though programs such as these do have significant associated costs, several localities
have demonstrated overall national cost savings after implementation. Recent research
suggests that if the illicit tobacco market in the United Kingdom is reduced by 80 percent
there would be a savings in the economy of £5.7 billion over 50 years (at net present
value) (HM Government 2010). Many countries and municipalities have funneled revenue
gains from higher excise tax rates to pay for control programs. When the U.S. state of
California increased its state excise tax rate in 1988, the government also dedicated a
portion to tobacco prevention and control programs. California has maintained relatively
stable funding since then and has since seen adult smoking rates fall from 22.7 percent
in 1988 to 13.1 percent in 2009. (CDC 2012). The tobacco control program has also been
associated with saving $86 billion in personal health care expenditures. (CDC 2012).


202 // Preventing and Controlling Illicit Tobacco Flows
           Figure 2: Cigarette Seizures Increase as Total Tobacco Tax Burden Rises:
           Turkey 2003–2015

                                               160

                                                                                                                                               143.4
                                               140
Packs of cigarettes conﬁscated (in millions)




                                               120                                                                                          106.4
                                                                                                                             106.2

                                               100                                                                  99.1


                                               80
                                                                                                           69.7
                                               60

                                                                                                  43.5
                                               40


                                               20                      7.2   11.9   10.7   10.1
                                                     3.6   4.3   4.8

                                                0
                                                     2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009                  2010     2011     2012      2013    2014      2015

        Source: Cetinkaya and Marquez 2017.




          MEASURES TO CONTROL
          ILLICIT TOBACCO FLOWS
          As mentioned earlier, many variables affect the illicit trade of tobacco. Thus, a tobacco
          control strategy must be multi-sectoral and involve all levels of public administration.
          The ministries of finance and trade, foreign affairs, justice, interior, customs, education,
          and health should be involved. Country examples indicate that where working groups
          have been formed with representatives of all these ministries, reforms are more easily
          enacted.64 Civil society also has an important role to play in advocacy and education.
          Strong governance institutions have proven to be the best equipped to implement tobacco
          control policies. Weak governance situations with poor tax administration and weak borders
          are the easiest targets for smuggling. Reform efforts in Turkey indicate control programs
          need to be firm yet flexible enough to respond to increases and decreases in contraband,
          and to changes in methods and suppliers as they adapt to counter-smuggling efforts.


          Tobacco-Related Controls
          Prioritizing and coordinating control of the supply chain and enforcement of tobacco
          regulations have proven to be effective measures in reducing tax evasion along with

          64 Chile created a special task force to control the illicit trade of tobacco under the “Oficina de Seguridad Publica,” with representatives
          of the Prosecutor General’s Office and customs, tax, health, and transportation authorities, as well as the Coastguard and the Police. The
          task force develops a single agenda, and the reforms are implemented in tandem and with coordination among all members.




                                                                                                                                                        203
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




the consumption of tobacco products. The most comprehensive and coordinated
approaches — at the federal, state, and local levels — have been the most effective and
shown the capacity to strengthen existing and future comprehensive tobacco pre-
vention and control work.

The WHO Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products (“the Protocol”) is an
international treaty that seeks to eliminate all forms of illicit trade in tobacco products
through a series of measures to be taken by countries acting in cooperation. The Protocol’s
obligations cover tobacco, tobacco products, and manufacturing equipment (machinery
to make tobacco products). It is an important base of enforcement action that has
proven effective. The key elements of the Protocol are the following:

   •	 To secure the supply chain: establishment of a global tracking and tracing regime
      within five years of entry into force of the Protocol; licensing and record-keeping
      requirements; and regulation of Internet sales, duty-free sales, and international transit.
   •	 To address current illicit trade: establishment of offenses, liability and seizure
      payments, as well as the disposal of confiscated products.
   •	 To boost international cooperation: obligations on information sharing, technical
      and law enforcement cooperation, mutual legal and administrative assistance, and
      extradition.

Below is a broad categorization of the most common measures that can be adopted to
control the illicit trade of tobacco.

The technological options used for control and enforcement are many and evolving
quickly. Some general issues should be considered when countries contemplate adopting
one of the tools described later in this section. These general concerns include:

   1.	 It is important to budget not only the acquisition of the tool, but also the maintenance
       and eventual upgrading that technology requires.
   2.	 A government should not rely on providers for access to data. This stipulation can
       be ensured through legislation or in the writing of the contract. Relatedly, there
       should be a governance model written that identifies the ministries that will have
       access to the data and the level of confidentiality that will be required of each.
   3.	 Each technological tool that is adopted should have the IT infrastructure that allows
       for the data captured to be used online and in real time by the relevant ministries.
   4.	 Logistical considerations should be assessed in order to allow placement of the
       equipment in the selected control areas.
   5.	 Dependence on any single provider should be avoided and efforts should be made
       to ensure a transfer of knowledge so that the country may build its own expertise.
   6.	 Lastly, there should be periodic performance audits undertaken by a third party


204 // Preventing and Controlling Illicit Tobacco Flows
Table 1: Brief Definitions of Common Control and Enforcement Tools

 APPROACH                DEFINITION

 Licensing               Official authorization for engaging in any activity within the tobacco supply chain,
                         from tobacco growing to product manufacturing to product transportation, retail,
                         and export.

 Product markings/       Counterfeit-resistant, affixed images on product packaging that indicate date and
 stamps	                 location of manufacture and the intended retail market. Also known as authentica-
                         tion systems.

 Track-and-trace         Systems incorporating both markers and national record-keeping structures to
                         enable tracking of tobacco products throughout the supply chain; tracing the
                         movement of products by transferring the tracking data into a national information-
                         sharing database.

 Enforcement             Commitment to detect and prosecute illicit trade activity.

 Agencies’               Coordination between agencies within and across borders to support intelligence
 coordination            gathering, joint customs operations, and sharing of best practices.

 Penalties               High/escalating fines, license revocation, or other measures that can be aimed at
                         retailers, consumers, and other participants in illicit trade to act as deterrents.

 Public awareness	       Disseminating information about the risks associated with illicit tobacco trade to
                         motivate support for enforcement activities.




                      that would relieve the host country of the requirement of maintaining the most
                      up-to-date knowledge of the technology used.

                One of the most important elements of a control strategy is the implementation of a
                track-and-trace system, required of all member countries in Article 8 of the Protocol.
                This system involves systematic, real-time monitoring of the movement of products
                through the supply chain (WHO 2012a). It is both a crime-prevention tool and a way to
                pinpoint where tobacco products are diverted into illicit markets. Albania, Brazil, Canada,
                Kenya, Malaysia, Morocco, Panama, the Philippines, Turkey, and select states in the United
                States have implemented track-and-trace systems with varying degrees of sophistication.

                The system performs several functions: it verifies the quantity produced or imported, verifies
                correct tax payments, tracks products through the supply chain, traces products back to
                their sources, and ensures a product’s authenticity (WHO 2012a). In order for the system
                to work as it was designed, all legally manufactured and imported unit packs (including
                those for export) need to be marked by unique identification numbers in a way that is
                not predictable and aggregation needs to be possible. This means that the identification
                numbers on individual unit packs need to be linked to those on cartons, master cases,
                and palettes. These numbers are applied by the manufacturer or at the exporter/importer



                                                                                                                205
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




site and contain data that allow for tracking and tracing and help ensure products are
authentic. The exchange of this data takes place at two levels: 1) between supply chain
partners or manufacturers and national authorities; and 2) between national and
international authorities. Because this system is only as good as its interoperability at
different levels, common data standards are important.

The costs of implementing a track-and-trace system vary by country. The main determinants
are the size of the market, scope of domestic manufacturing, imports and exports, the
comprehensiveness and the length of the contract with a vendor, the level of industry
concentration, and the implementation strategy (CDC 2016). Several countries that have
implemented these systems have required the tobacco industry to bear the costs. This
approach saves scarce government funds while generating more revenues. If the industry
passes the cost increase along to consumers, the arrangement will also increase health
benefits. The system components can be implemented by the industry relatively easily
and in bulk at the point of manufacture, reducing the cost per pack.

So far, there is no common set of standards for a track-and-trace system, nor a governance
model that is recommended by the Protocol. The Protocol only requires governments to
implement the system on a national scale, including small businesses, and to collaborate
and share the information generated on an international level.

KPMG recently noted that experience implementing track-and-trace systems in other
industries suggests the following:

   •	 Open standards drive costs down and raise adoption rates by increasing interop-
      erability between different national systems;
   •	 Incorporating track-and-trace systems into existing business processes can effectively
      lead to more rapid and reliable implementation;
   •	 Competition among providers should be encouraged by conducting open pro-
      curement, allowing for varied technology and service offerings;
   •	 Regional and global cooperation is essential;
   •	 Effective track and trace requires collaboration between industry and regulators; and
   •	 A dedicated forum to help develop track-and-trace guidelines is critical and might
      provide a “base” tracking and tracing system to enable low-cost deployment (KPMG
      et al. 2014).

Excise tax stamps and other product markings are other important control measures
that serve as a product authentication, track-and-trace, and revenue collection tool. These
stamps inform consumers if the product is legitimate and if the appropriate duties have
been paid. Such a stamp is issued by the excise authority at the value of the excise tax
and purchased by the producer or importer. Currently, stamps are mostly used on



206 // Preventing and Controlling Illicit Tobacco Flows
Box 3 // Experience from Ecuador
Ecuador recently underwent a bidding process for a track-and-trace system. The steps they took were the following:

   1.	 Analyzed the local regulatory environment.
   2.	 Commissioned a robust product market analysis that looked at what tools other countries were using. At this
       stage, Ecuador familiarized itself with the technologies on the market, services, and costs. Though it is not
       necessary to become an expert on the different technologies, which is a particular concern for least-developed
       countries, it is essential is to know the goals the country wishes to accomplish with the technology.
   3.	 Visited local tobacco companies to observe the installations. Specifically important were the number of
       plants, equipment, the generation of the equipment (to ensure compatibility with the technology), and the
       steps in the production process. This helps in establishing contracting goals and adjusting the request for
       proposals in the most effective way possible.
   4.	 Invited the largest number of providers to apply by not specifying any single technological option or
       brand names.
   5.	 Trained tax and customs staff to utilize the system selected.

There are three options that a government can undertake in the contracting of a track-and-trace system: i) hiring
a single provider; ii) establishing minimum requirements so that only qualified candidates may apply (the tobacco
companies then choose the winner); and iii) hiring a third party to carry out the process. Ecuador went with the
second method and invited the three finalists to site visits. This helped the companies refine their proposals to ensure
seamless compatibility with existing procedures and materials used by the tobacco companies. By adjusting the pro-
posal, the one firm that did meet all the requirements was able to reduce its initial budget by 20 percent (Trujillo 2017).




                   cigarette packs but requiring them on other tobacco products, such as roll-your-own,
                   would eliminate even more opportunities for the sale of contraband products.

                   Over the years, the production of excise stamps has increased in sophistication and
                   enforcement capabilities, making them increasingly harder to counterfeit. Some of these
                   stamping technologies include embedded threads and watermarks, special inks and
                   coatings, such as “invisible” inks, holograms and foils, and calculated or changeable
                   content. In the first decade that the state of California in the United States implemented
                   and upgraded its encrypted tax stamp, the state recovered an estimated $450 million in
                   additional tax revenue, well beyond implementation and enforcement costs (CDC 2016).
                   The market is currently heading toward stamps that allow for GPS tracking and can be
                   read by standard devices such as iPhones.65

                   Detection equipment at customs posts is uniquely capable of detecting contraband
                   merchandise. The most common tools are X-ray scanners that are available for small




                   65 Ecuador has implemented this type of excise stamp on alcohol and perfumes.



                                                                                                                      207
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




parcels, containers, trucks, and trains. Less sophisticated and less costly equipment can
include endoscopes, mirrors, night vision equipment, cameras, and automatic license
plate readers (IMF 2016). The initial motivation for the United Kingdom to invest in scanners
was for the detection of contraband cigarettes. However, they proved beneficial for the
detection of a variety of other illicit merchandise. While the cost of a scanner can seem
prohibitive especially for countries with limited resources, it is important to note that they
can often pay for themselves. In the late 1990s, the Netherlands purchased their first scanner
in the Port of Rotterdam. After only 6 months, the cost of the scanner was recovered
through the detection of contraband cigarettes alone, not even considering other illicit
merchandise. A far less expensive alternative is canine use. Dogs can be trained to detect
cigarettes and other organic products. Many countries use both scanners and canines to
detect contraband tobacco products.

Special physical control measures should also be applied in order to reduce contraband.
This includes the separation of processing operations from the sealed storage of taxed
and untaxed products. Physical and direct control by the officials of the excise authority
during a part or the whole operation can be applied (for example, physical escort of the
transit consignment from border to border by individual trucks or in a convoy, application
of radio or satellite tracking systems such as GPS-enabled devices to goods or convey-
ances/vehicles/containers).

Control at the border is essential and should include integrated technology and cooper-
ation with other agencies at the border station. Front-line officers should be supported
by appropriate intelligence, background support and service, guidance, and supervision
from management, and technical aids to enforcement.

Within the country, mobile excise control units are helpful in verifying the legality of
excisable goods as they are transported domestically. These units should be dispatched
to important transport corridors, communication centers, and areas of congestion such as
bridges, ferries, and passes. These operations require close coordination between police,
border guards, and other public services.

Lastly, penalties and sanctions have long been an underutilized tool. It is recommended
to apply them even more extensively than the Protocol suggests. Historically, countries
have assigned far less severe penalties for trading illicit tobacco products than for other
illicit goods such as narcotics. Deterrence would increase if fines and jail time were
increased. Stricter penalties are perhaps the easiest reform measure, since they require no
additional purchase of equipment or implementation costs. Currently, the most common
penalties are directed only to the smugglers themselves and include, in addition to fines,
imprisonment for the smuggler and the seizure and destruction of the illicit merchandise.
Penalties and sanctions should be also applied to the other actors in the supply and
logistics chain, such as the trucking companies66 and storage owners. In accordance


208 // Preventing and Controlling Illicit Tobacco Flows
with a “follow the money” approach, financing and possible money-laundering actors
should also be affected. For maximum impact, penalties and sanctions should be
applied in a timely fashion.

In addition to those enforcement and control options mentioned in the Protocol, two
other considerations have proven to be important in the fight to control the trade of
illicit tobacco.

Identifying and measuring incompliance. Before a government can appropriately
devise an illicit tobacco control reform plan, it is important to know: 1) the incompliance
rates, 2) where the illicit tobacco is produced, and 3) through what means it is transported
and distributed. Many customs offices already carry out tax evasion and contraband
studies, some specifically targeting tobacco incompliance, that are helping improve
outcomes. In 1993, Chile’s customs authorities carried out an illicit tobacco incompliance
study in conjunction with the national tobacco companies. The study included all forms
of the illegal tobacco trade. Using a survey-based approach, the study quantified the
size of the problem in terms of volume and foregone taxes by each method of evasion
found: smuggling operations, Free Trade Zones, diversion of local production, and illegal
counterfeit production. Results indicated that 13 percent of cigarette sales were contra-
band. The study found that the main supply source of illegal tobacco products was the
country’s Free Trade Zones that were diverting production back into the country. After
targeted reform efforts for just three years, contraband sales of tobacco products were
reduced to 3 percent. Incompliance studies can also be implemented as a comparison
between registered production and net imports versus consumption. The combination
of survey and production versus consumption methodologies gives authorities robust
data in order to set goals and monitor tax and customs administration performance.
Developed countries are best equipped to support less-developed countries in carrying
out these studies.

Application of the rule of law. While enforcement capacities increase in sophistication,
so too should the legal recourses tax and customs authorities have in enforcing compliance
and deterring incompliance. The application of sanctions should increase, as argued
above, yet they fail to be effective if not clear in their intent and legally sound. Customs
and tax authorities should monitor the implementation of sanctions to ensure timely
compliance. Legal codes should be up to date, including budget allocations to enforce
sanctions such as the destruction of confiscated tobacco.




66 For example, an effective sanction for a trucking company involved in the transportation of illicit cigarettes is the temporary seizure
of the trucks used in the contraband.




                                                                                                                                    209
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




CASE STUDIES
TURKEY
The smuggling of tobacco products has been a persistent national revenue, security, and
health problem for Turkey. In 2014, it was estimated that the tax loss caused by smuggled
cigarettes reached 520 million Turkish Lira. Much earlier, Turkish police had established a
strong link between smuggled tobacco products and financing for the PKK/CKC, labeled
a terrorist organization by Turkey, the European Union, and the United States. Eighty percent
of the seized smuggled cigarettes that cross into Turkey enter from the borders of the
East and Southeast regions, where the organization is known to collect the majority of its
revenues (KOM Presidency 2014). In terms of the effects on the country’s health, a recent
study by Nazmi Bilir, professor of public health at Ankara’s Haceteppe University, revealed
a sharp drop in acute health problems caused by tobacco use following anti-smoking
efforts. When compared to data from before the smoking ban went into effect, he found
a 10–12 percent decrease in these conditions (WHO 2012b).

In 2014, the most common methods by which cigarettes were smuggled into Turkey
were the following (KOM Presidency 2014):

   •	   Border violations by human couriers or vehicles;
   •	   Violation of the customs transit regime;
   •	   Abuse of the passenger exemption;
   •	   Stocking/hiding; and
   •	   Cargo delivery methods.

In late 2007, Turkey passed its first anti-smoking laws, following growing national and
international recognition of the health problems smoking causes. In 1991, then-President
Ozal vetoed broad reforms that would have raised excise taxes and improved control.
The proposed reforms were cancelled because of fears that higher taxes would result in
increased smuggling, and that the advertising ban included in the proposed legislation
went against free trade. In 1992, a revised tobacco control bill was defeated because the
Justice Commission found the health evidence inadequate. In 2003, President Erdoğan
assumed leadership and became a staunch anti-smoking activist with two clear mes-
sages — that smoking was killing Turkey’s population, and that the smuggling of tobacco
was financing the country’s most violent terrorist organizations. President Erdoğan
also garnered international support and cooperation for his tobacco-control program
at international forums such as NATO.

The experience in Turkey has been exemplary not only because it has drawn sup-
port from the highest levels of authority, but also for its inter-ministerial approach.
Toker Erguder, tobacco control program manager at the WHO Turkey country office,


210 // Preventing and Controlling Illicit Tobacco Flows
Figure 3: Incidents of Tobacco Products and Alcoholic Beverages Smuggled in Turkey
25,000


                                                                            20,779
20,000

                                                                                             15,744
                                                           16,492
 15,000
                                                                                                             14,889
                                         12,925
                  10,264
 10,000



  5,000


       0
                 2010             2011              2012             2013             2014            2015

Source: 2014 Turkish Report of Anti-Smuggling and Organized Crime, Ministry of Interior.




reported: “A key success of the policy on tobacco control is the whole-of-government
approach lead by Erdoğan and strong intersectoral collaboration by the health minister,
Recep Akdağ, to combat the tobacco epidemic. The head of parliament’s health com-
mission, Cevdet Erdöl, was instrumental in the preparation and adoption of the tobacco
control laws” (WHO 2012b). The Ministry of Interior Affairs, Ministry of Customs, Ministry
of Finance, and Ministry of Health all worked together to devise and implement the
broad-based reforms.


UNITED KINGDOM
In the early 2000s, the United Kingdom had one of the highest levels of illicit tobacco
trade in Western Europe. An estimated 22 percent of cigarette consumption and over
61 percent of roll-your-own tobacco consumption avoided or evaded taxes, costing
the government about 3.4 billion pounds in foregone taxes (HM Revenue and Customs
and Border Force 2015). The majority of this was accounted for by tax evasion through
tobacco smuggling, while a small portion stemmed from tax avoidance through individual
cross-border shopping.

In 2000, the British government deployed a comprehensive and adaptive reform strategy,
“Tackling Tobacco Smuggling.” The main elements of the strategy were the following:

   •	 Coordination of enforcement activities.
   •	 Enhanced penalties for those engaged in illicit tobacco trade, such as seizure of
       vehicles/vessels used in illicit trade, confiscation of assets, collection of lost taxes
       and jail sentences.


                                                                                                                211
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Figure 4: Estimated Number of Cigarettes Consumed by Duty-Paid, Illicit, and
Cross-Border Purchased Status, 2000–2001 to 2013–2014

           60

           50                                               UK duty paid


           40
Billions




           30

           20

           10        Cross-border purchased             Illicit market

           0
                00–01    02–03      04–05     06–07      08–09           10–11   12–13
                                                 Year
Source: HM Revenue and Customs and Border Force 2014.




       •	 Significantly increased resources for enforcement, including the initial addition
            of 1,000 new customs officers/investigators and acquisition of x-ray scanners and
            other equipment to improve detection of illicit products, as well as implementation
            of public awareness programs.
       •	 Introduction of pack markings with “UKDUTYPAID” printed on licit cigarette lacks
            and pouches of roll-your-own tobacco.
       •	 Negotiating with major tobacco manufacturers to enlist their help in addressing
            illicit trade.

By 2013/14, the illicit cigarette market share had been halved, to 10 percent, with an even
larger reduction in the absolute volume of illicit cigarettes. Figure 4 demonstrates the
drop in illicit sales.

Since this initial success, the United Kingdom has updated its strategy, as the illicit market
adapted to the new regulatory environment. Updates included new enforcement actions
and sanctions, the addition of covert security markings on cigarette packs and roll-your-
own pouches intended for sale in the U.K. market, and additional public education efforts.
The United Kingdom has also played an important role in furthering international cooperation
with other regional and global initiatives.




212 // Preventing and Controlling Illicit Tobacco Flows
CONCLUSIONS
 1.	 Enforcement and control mechanisms are proven to significantly increase the
    effectiveness of tobacco tax increases in the fight against illicit tobacco products.
 2.	 Political commitment from the government is important: starting at the highest
    levels and running through all relevant ministries.
 3.	 A global convergence toward common standards for the governance and imple-
    mentation of control and enforcement mechanisms would drive down costs and
    go a long way in facilitating the necessary cross-border cooperation by increasing
    interoperability between different national systems.
 4.	 The WHO Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products details enforcement
    mechanisms necessary for comprehensive control. It is recommended that countries
    go beyond what the Protocol requires in order to improve outcomes.
 5.	 In addition to a proper control regime, public education campaigns and a greater
    commitment of resources is necessary. Investments are often recovered within a
    few years through greater tax compliance.
 6.	 Recent experience demonstrates that curbing one form of illicit trade can cause
    positive overlapping effects. Since illicit networks are linked, reform efforts in
    one sector often reveal illicit activity in other sectors and act as a deterrent for all
    such activity.




                                                                                               213
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




REFERENCES
Alderman, J. 2012. Strategies to Combat Illicit Tobacco Trade. Tobacco Control Law Consortium.

Brady, B. 2013. “NY Cigarette-Smuggling Ring May Have Terror Link.” CNN.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2012. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report Vol. 61, No.
20, 25 May 2012.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Office on Smoking and Health. 2016. “Preventing and
Reducing Illicit Tobacco Trade in the United States.” Retrieved from:
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/stateandcommunity/pdfs/illicit-trade-report-121815-508tagged.pdf

Cetinkaya, Volkan. 2017. “Turkey’s Experience.” Presentation at the World Bank conference “Tobacco
Taxation: Win-Win for Public Health and Domestic Resources Mobilization.” April 19, 2017. World Bank
Headquarters, Washington, DC.

Centinkaya, Volkan and Patricio Marquez. 2017. “Tobacco Taxation in Turkey: An Overview of Policy
Measures and Results.” World Bank Group Discussion Brief. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Euromonitor International. 2015. Passport - tobacco. London, GB: Euromonitor International.

Euromonitor. 2016. Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products. Strategy Briefing. Available at: http://www.euromonitor.com/
illicit-trade-in-tobacco-products/report

HM Government. 2010. “A Smokefree Future: A Comprehensive Tobacco Control Strategy for England.”
Retrieved from: http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130107105354/http:/www.dh.gov.uk/prod_
consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/@dh/@en/@ps/documents/digitalasset/dh_111789.pdf

“Illicit Tobacco Trade in Canada — the Next Chapter.” 2016. Reconnaissance Tax Stamp News. July 2016
(Volume 8).

International Monetary Fund. 2016. “Fiscal Policy: How to Design and Enforce Tobacco Excises?” (Volume 3).

International Tax and Investment Center. 2011. “The Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products and How to Tackle It.”

Ireland Office of the Revenue Commissioners, IPSOS, MRBI, National Tobacco Control Office. 2017. Illegal
Tobacco Products Research Surveys 2016. Survey fieldwork conducted in October/November 2016,
results published April 2017. Available at: https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/documents/research/ille-
gal-tobacco-survey-2016.pdf

Ko, Shwe Zin. 2016. “Proposed Collective Action against Corruption: Myanmar’s Experience in Illicit Trade.”
2016 OECD Integrity Forum: Fighting the Hidden Tariff: Global Trade Without Corruption. Paris. Retrieved
from: https://www.oecd.org/cleangovbiz/Integrity-Forum-16-Shwe-Zin-Ko.pdf

KOM Presidency. 2014. Smuggling and Organized Crime 2014 Report. Ankara: KOM Publications.

KPMG LLP and GS1 UK. May 2014. “Track and Trace: Approaches in Tobacco.” Retrieved from: https://www.
gs1uk.org/~/media/documents/white-papers/gs1_uk_and_kpmg_track_and_trace_in_tobacco_may_2014.
pdf?la=en

Melzer, S. 2010. Counterfeit and Contraband Cigarette Smuggling: Opportunities, Actors, and Guardianship.
Washington, DC: American University.




214 // Preventing and Controlling Illicit Tobacco Flows
Nagy, Janos. 2012. “Tackling cigarette smuggling with enforcement: case studies reviewing the experience
in Hungary, Romania, and the United Kingdom.” World Customs Journal Vol. 6, No. 2.

National Research Council & Institute of Medicine. 2015. Understanding the U.S. Illicit Tobacco Market:
Characteristics, Policy Context, and Lessons from International Experiences. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press.

Ngeywo, Caxton Masudi. 2017. “Kenya’s Experience.” Presentation at the World Bank conference “Tobacco
Taxation: Win-Win for Public Health and Domestic Resources Mobilization.” April 19, 2017. World Bank
Headquarters, Washington, DC.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2016. Illicit Trade: Converging
Criminal Networks. OECD Reviews of Risk Management Policies. Paris: OECD Publishing. Retrieved from:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264251847en

Shelley, Louise. 2005. “The Unholy Trinity: Transnational Crime, Corruption, and Terrorism.” Brown Journal
of World Affairs. Vol. XI, Issue 2.

Times of Malta. 2016. “Illicit trade in tobacco rises by 28 percent, 10 million in lost revenue.” Times of
Malta. 19 September 2016. Retrieved from: http://www.timesofmalta.com/mobile/articles/view/20160919/
local/illicit-trade-in-tobacco-rises-by-28-per-cent-10m-in-lost-revenue.625477

Trujillo, Santiago. 2017. “Sistemas de Track and Tracing — consideraciones para su implementation. La
experiencia en Ecuador.” Presentation at the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). March 13, 2017.

World Bank. 1999. Curbing the Epidemic: Governments and the Economics of Tobacco Control. Washington,
DC: World Bank.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2005.“ The Role of Health Professionals in Tobacco Control.” Retrieved
from: http://www.who.int/tobacco/resources/publications/wntd/2005/bookletfinal_20april.pdf

World Health Organization. 2010. Technical Manual on Tobacco Tax Administration. Geneva, CH: World
Health Organization.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2012a. Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products. Geneva:
WHO.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2012b. “Turkey’s Transformation.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization.
Retrieved from: http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/90/6/12-030612/en/

World Health Organization (WHO). (n.d.) “Illicit trade in tobacco: a summary of the evidence and country
responses.” PowerPoint presentation available at: http://www.who.int/tobacco/economics/illicittrade.pdf




                                                                                                            215
TOBACCO USE
NOT ONLY KILLS
MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE EACH
YEAR BUT PLACES
A STAGGERING
POVERTY AND
ECONOMIC
BURDEN ON LOW
INCOME FAMILIE
 216 // Executive Summary
     CONCLUSION
     Tobacco presents a case of unique harm and unique opportunity. Tobacco, like carbon,
     requires special taxes, because both are so noxious. But, in addition, tobacco is the
     only common consumer product that kills when used as directed. Unlike most health
     interventions, its taxation can generate additional domestic resources. Tobacco taxes
     thus offer a unique policy proposition. They yield fast and measurable benefits — the
     higher the tax increases, the bigger the health and fiscal gains.

     The scientific evidence accumulated over five decades has provided a detailed understanding




S
     of how tobacco use imposes an unparalleled health and economic burden across countries. It
     has also shown the need for a sustained and multi-sectoral response. The World Bank Group,
     working closely with the World Health Organization (WHO) and other partners, supports
     countries in the implementation of the global tobacco control effort outlined in WHO’s
     Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC), with a focus on tobacco taxation.

     Tobacco taxation is one of the world’s top policy “best buys,” not just in public health but
     across all sectors. Tobacco tax reform aims to make tobacco products unaffordable (relative
     to rising per capita incomes), reduce consumption, and improve public health, while
     enhancing countries’ domestic resource mobilization. This multi-impact strategy takes on
     fresh importance under the 2015 Financing for Development Addis Ababa Action Agenda,
     which recognizes that, in low- and middle-income countries, domestic resources will
     increasingly fuel development. Evidence across a diversity of countries shows that revenue
     from tobacco excise taxes can contribute substantially to domestic resource mobilization.



     FROM EVIDENCE TO ACTION
     At today’s tobacco tax policy crossroads, renewed efforts must support countries to
     design, enact, implement, and monitor tobacco tax policy reforms. This work will cut
     across sectors to combine expertise in public health, macroeconomics, tax policy
     administration, customs systems, and governance. It will leverage access to ministries




W-
     of finance, revenue and tax administration authorities, ministries of health, customs and
     law enforcement agencies, and other government entities. This broad collaboration is
     needed to take tobacco taxation efforts to scale and to provide effective policy advice,
     technical assistance, and funding to support countries’ tobacco tax reforms, as well as
     to institutionalize tobacco taxation globally. For maximum effectiveness, this work
     must respect the specific epidemiological and institutional context of each country.




ES
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




This implies understanding the country-specific political economy of tobacco control
and its societal dimensions, in order to promote the adoption and implementation of
strong anti-tobacco measures.

Over the past decade, since entry into force of WHO’s FCTC, efforts to control tobacco
have intensified globally. More than 100 countries have made at least partial progress in
raising tobacco taxes. Notably, however, far fewer have implemented increases that are
both large (with major discrete increases complemented by interim smaller increases well
above the combined rate of growth of inflation and per capita income) and optimally
structured (to maximize health impact and prevent switching to cheaper brands). Country
experience shows wide differences in progress on policy and implementation, data
availability, and political economy.

The prime objective of tobacco taxes is improved health. Higher government revenues
are, however, an important positive “externality” of tobacco taxes. Fiscal benefits are not
only positive but, if countries act boldly, substantial. Some countries, such as Moldova,
Philippines, Turkey, and Ukraine, raise between 1 and 2 percent of GDP from tobacco
taxes. Significantly, net fiscal benefits are proving to be long lasting, even as tobacco
consumption gradually falls.

Aggressive increases in tobacco taxes are required to influence cigarette smokers to
stop or sharply cut back their tobacco consumption and to persuade young people
not to initiate this addictive habit. In addition, annual tax increases need to keep up with
or exceed affordability — i.e., per capita economic growth as well as inflation. Some
countries have well-established policy arrangements with indexing that serve to increase
tobacco taxes at or above the rate of inflation. Going too slowly or timidly on tax increases
or letting affordability increase should be recognized as condemning large numbers of
people to tobacco addiction. For half of them, the consequences will be fatal.

While some countries have made outstanding gains, much more can and must be
achieved. Countries and international agencies have embraced ambitious goals. WHO
recommends that taxes constitute at least 75 percent of the selling price of cigarettes in
all jurisdictions, and countries have committed to reduce premature deaths from non-
communicable diseases by 30 percent under the SDGs. Today, however, tobacco control
progress in most countries lags behind the pace needed to reach these targets. After
setting bold goals, even bolder action is needed.



SEIZING THE “WIN-WIN-WIN”
Specific excise taxes — taxing by the number of cigarettes, preferably at the same rate for
all cigarette lengths and prices — bring greater reductions in smoking than ad valorem



218 // Conclusion
excise taxes. Ad valorem taxes — taxing by the price of cigarettes — encourage down-
ward substitution to cheaper cigarettes instead of less smoking. They are more complex
to administer and are more subject to manipulation by the tobacco industry. While ad
valorem taxes have the advantage of de facto indexing for affordability, this advantage
can be offset by building automatic adjustments for affordability into excise laws excise
laws (such as the United Kingdom’s tobacco duty escalator). Interim measures should
include raising the ratio of specific to ad valorem excise taxes and reducing the number
of specific tax “tiers.” Tax policy also needs to take account of tax rates on other tobacco
products to reduce substitution.

Individual country circumstances are important, but all country experiences evidence
the win-win-win nature of tobacco taxation: good health outcomes, poverty reduction,
and fiscal gains. Tobacco taxes work. On the other hand, good tax policies don’t “just
happen.” Countries need to have a clear strategy that relies on solid analytical work,
identifies champions and leaders, and builds coalitions. They need to make tobacco
taxes simple (structure matters) and to stand up to the challenges that will be posed
by the tobacco industry. Three of the main arguments usually presented to oppose tax
increases relate to claimed tax regressivity, encouragement of illicit trade, and loss of
employment. The corresponding chapters of this volume have explored these topics and
brought out the critical lessons for policy design and political messaging.

Contrary to industry claims, it is smoking that is regressive, not tobacco taxes. Tobacco
taxes are in fact highly progressive on a net economic basis. Country studies show
consistently that the poor smoke more and are more price responsive and so get greater
health benefits than the rich. They receive a far higher share of resultant health benefits
than they pay in taxes, for example from 1.5 times to 10 times higher in data from five
Asian countries. Other important pro-poor benefits, each linked to one or more SDGs,
include freeing up scarce family income for higher-priority needs, higher productivity
and incomes, reducing the chances of catastrophic health events that drive families
into extreme poverty from medical costs and lost earnings, and reducing the risks of
second-hand smoking and of fire.

Countering criminal networks and strengthening customs and tax administration provide
another angle on the tobacco policy “win-win-win”: better health, more revenue, and
less tax avoidance. The risk of unintentionally reinforcing the illicit tobacco trade is one
of the main arguments raised by the tobacco industry against aggressive tax increases
on tobacco products. However, while high taxes may create incentives for illicit trade,
evidence indicates that other factors have a much bigger effect on illicit trade of tobacco
products. The main cause of cigarette smuggling is not tobacco taxes, but a range of
institutional issues that include: weak government enforcement capacity; overly complex
tax systems; organized crime and corruption; complicity of the tobacco industry; and lack



                                                                                               219
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




of sufficient regional and international cooperation. It is important to diagnose, prioritize,
and act on these issues as part of reform and modernization efforts of customs systems.
Country cases have shown clearly that higher tobacco taxes reduce consumption and
increase revenues even in the presence of moderate illicit flows.

Country studies also show that, since consumer funds not spent on tobacco will be freed
up for other uses, net employment across a country’s economy is unaffected and may
even increase when tobacco tax rates rise. Loss of employment in tobacco comes more
from automation and consolidation than reductions in demand, which is still growing in
developing countries. That said, it is important to establish programs to help workers
transition out of tobacco production, such as input credits for small tobacco farmers — all
the more so, because the tobacco industry often tries to make alleged job losses a political
issue when tobacco tax hikes are proposed.

Tobacco taxes are synergistic with other cost-effective elements of tobacco control
programs. These include complete bans on smoking in public places and on cigarette
advertising and promotion, as well as plain packaging regulations or prominent warning
labels that reduce the social acceptability of tobacco use.

Political commitment coupled with international support is required for the planning and
implementation of country strategies for tobacco control. Progress will accelerate through
knowledge sharing and solidarity among those working on tobacco taxes at global,
regional, and country levels. After all, what is accomplished at global level is significant only
to the extent that it makes a positive difference in country-level outcomes.



THE ROAD AHEAD
As we move into the third decade of the 21st century, the achievement of smoke-free
societies should be a critical marker of sustainable development. Advancing tobacco
taxation today requires intensified efforts in the following areas:

Demand-driven technical assistance to countries. In many low- and middle-income
countries, tobacco excise tax structures are weak and too complex, failing to maximize
feasible health or revenue benefits. Technical capacity on tobacco taxation remains
limited. Growing numbers of policy makers are requesting technical support to solve
these problems efficiently.

Effective country-based technical assistance requires sharing good practice experiences
and engaging high-level government officials from Ministries of Finance and Health,
together with multilateral and bilateral organizations and civil society. Support from inter-
national partners is required, particularly in low-income countries, to strengthen country
capacity for lining up and coordinating all parts of government, while engaging a wide


220 // Conclusion
set of stakeholders outside of government. Also, it is important to identify strategic entry
points for action on tobacco taxation at the country and regional or sub-regional levels
(such as customs and monetary unions). Higher and better-structured tobacco taxes should
be increasingly a default part of broader tax-system and fiscal reforms.

Country strategies for tobacco taxation should be integrated into comprehensive tobacco
control strategies and should establish both monitoring systems and targets to mobilize
political support and drive action. Targets may include reduction in smoking prevalence
by age-gender cohorts, tobacco-related deaths averted, and revenue generated. Partners
supporting country efforts should help in documenting and tracking successes and
challenges in tobacco control.

Capacity development and knowledge sharing. Countries that have successfully
raised tobacco taxes have gained valuable expertise and can share evidence and good
practices with others. The global community must also be ready to respond to country-
level demand for further capacity development. This should include capacity building
on the use of simulation models, which can assess fiscal and health implications of
alternative tax levels and structures.

Further strengthening the global evidence base. In addition to fostering knowledge
exchange between countries, the global tobacco-taxation evidence base should be
deliberately reinforced in the following areas:

   •	 Progressivity, employment, and poverty: Current evidence indicates that
      tobacco taxes are highly progressive on a net basis, given that the poor are more
      price responsive and so gain greater health benefits than the rich. To complete
      this picture, we need additional country-specific examples of the impacts of
      tobacco taxation on poverty, health, and employment.
   •	 Crop substitution: Additional country-specific studies examining good practices
      and economic impacts of crop substitution are needed, including evaluation of
      institutional and financial mechanisms to support farmers in transitioning away
      from dependence on tobacco.
   •	 Better economic surveillance: There is a need for global efforts to create rapidly
      accessible data on tobacco prices, illicit sales, and demand for tobacco products,
      along with better tracking of industry practices. This includes a much stronger
      information base concerning the response to non-price strategies, most specifically
      industry efforts to subvert bans on tobacco and advertising and efforts to lobby
      Ministries of Finance.
   •	 Illicit trade: Research as well as technical assistance is needed to strengthen
      countries’ institutional capacity in customs and related areas in order to curtail
      illicit tobacco trade. This should be incorporated within a broader package of
      public-sector modernization efforts

                                                                                           221
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development




Strengthening the global partnership. It is crucial to have a strengthened global
partnership to help support countries in their efforts to increase and better structure
their tobacco taxes and to achieve win-win-win results. An effective partnership is mostly
about action on policy and implementation, but this also requires generating robust
epidemiologic and economic evidence at the country level. Today, more and more countries
are joining the global tobacco-taxation partnership. A number of strongly committed
countries already report compelling results. But there is a need to do far more in order to
tap the potential of tobacco tax reform, which can save and improve the lives of many
millions of individuals and families, and reduce poverty. In so doing, it can be one of the
most powerful health and development catalysts for the 21st century.

Driving policy change nationally and globally. The point of delivering technical
support, expanding the global knowledge base, and reinforcing the global tobacco tax
alliance is ultimately to change policies. This report has identified national policy entry
points and shown how regional collaboration can also strengthen results. Global trea-
ties can provide additional leverage for change. One such treaty is the WHO Protocol
to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products, a supplementary agreement to the WHO
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. Forty formal country ratifications are needed
to make the Protocol binding international law, but the total has not yet been reached.
The Protocol’s entry into force will help provide every country with the legal, political,
and technical tools to beat illicit tobacco trafficking and get the most from tobacco tax
reforms. It is imperative that the international community encourage lawmakers from all
countries and across the political spectrum to ratify and implement the Protocol. Lives
and the social well-being of nations depend on it. This is just one example of how global
collaboration can support national policy action, while country-level choices (e.g., treaty
ratification) can empower global policy instruments for the common good. National and
global policy action reinforce each other.

World Bank role. The World Bank Group, working with the World Health Organization,
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the Bloomberg Foundation, and other global and
country partners, is committed to the joint effort to harness tobacco tax reform within
a comprehensive strategy to end the tobacco scourge. Along with its financing
instruments, the World Bank Group commits to use its technical assistance, research,
knowledge management, convening role, and policy dialogue to this end.




222 // Conclusion
TOBACCO USE
NOT ONLY KILLS
MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE EACH
YEAR BUT PLACE
A STAGGERING
POVERTY AND
ECONOMIC
BURDEN ON LOW
INCOME FAMILIE
Tobacco Tax Reform • At the Crossroads of Health and Development
