Liberia
                                                                                              SABER Country Report
TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                                                           2017




    Policy Dimensions                                                                            Status
     1. Vision for Tertiary Education
        Liberia adopted a vision for tertiary education in 2012, and recently adopted
        the Education Sector Plan “Getting to Best”. The challenge is now to
        implement this vision, to introduce relevant regulatory reforms, to increase
        capacity to implement, and to align the budget with strategic priorities.

     2. Regulatory Framework
        Some key regulation exists but it is outdated and not strictly enforced. There is
        no overall legislation for the tertiary education sector.

     3. Governance of system and institutions
        There is a diverse set of tertiary education institutions, but the differences are
        not clearly articulated in national policy. Institutions have significant academic,
        staffing, and financing autonomy, but have little influence over their own
        governance structures.

     4. Financing
        Public funding is not provided following transparent and competitive
        procedures. Moreover, there are no agreed performance targets linked to
        public funding.

     5. Quality Assurance
        There is no independent quality assurance agency. While some steps have
        been undertaken to establish an accreditation agency, the proposals do not
        seem to follow international best practice.

     6. Relevance for social and economic needs
        Few initiatives have been undertaken to improve the relevance of tertiary
        education. Steps are needed to strengthen the link with the labor market, to
        foster research development and innovation, and to improve sustainability.




                                                                                                     T
                                                                                                     TH
                                                                                                     THE
                                                                                                      HE WO
                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                         WORLD
                                                                                                           ORL
                                                                                                            RLD BANK
                                                                                                                BANK
                                                                                                                BA NK
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                               SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017



Foreword
Liberia’s youth has high expectations for tertiary education. They would like to learn skills that allow them
to find well-paying jobs, to gain access to an international network of universities, and to tackle the
challenges facing the country. Considering that youth makes up 75% of the country, these are a lot of
expectations to fulfill. Indeed, the government equally has high expectations in its vision for tertiary
education, as well as the recently adopted “Getting to Best” Education Sector Plan 2017-2021.

Can the universities and community colleges deliver the goods? One of the key questions is whether
tertiary education institutions offer value for money. The per student allocations for tertiary education
are much higher than in primary and secondary education. There are no performance targets set by the
government, and universities do not produce an annual report on how public funding was spent.
Standards throughout the sector are low, and there are reports of academic malpractice and corruption.
There is no quality control in the system, leading to low accountability of teaching staff.

Using an internationally agreed benchmark, this report hopes to identify policy areas that need attention.
It also provides an extensive overview of the laws and regulations in place, and the initiatives that have
been undertaken in the last few decades. The report does not give detailed recommendations on what
should be done. Rather, it aims to stimulate a dialogue between the government, stakeholders and donor
partners about what kind of reforms are desired.

Introduction
SABER-Tertiary Education is a diagnostic tool to assess how education systems perform and to identify
priorities for reforms at the national level. It is part of the World Bank’s Systems Approach for Better
Education Results (SABER), which aims to benchmark education systems at the country level.

SABER-TE focuses on six dimensions of tertiary education policy
                                                                      Six policy dimensions of successful
(see Box). The general idea is that a strong policy environment is
                                                                      tertiary education systems (World
a prerequisite to better performing tertiary education
                                                                      Bank, 2016):
institutions, including universities, polytechnics, and technical
                                                                        1. A strong vision for tertiary
and vocational institutes. The diagnostic tool aims to help
                                                                             education
countries assess best practices, and diagnose which policies need
                                                                        2. A clear regulatory
urgent attention. For some policy dimensions, countries are
                                                                             framework
scored on specific “policy levers” to help make concrete
                                                                        3. Modern governance and
recommendations for improvement.
                                                                             university autonomy
                                                                        4. Financing that promotes
Each of the six dimensions can contribute to the outcomes of
                                                                             performance and equity
tertiary education systems, although they work together in a
                                                                        5. Independent quality
holistic way. By matter of illustration: a vision without an
                                                                             assurance
effective governance structure is just a collection of ideas that
                                                                        6. Relevance to the country’s
will never be implemented; a well-designed governance
                                                                             social and economic needs
structure without a vision could be a meaningless bureaucracy.

The World Bank has identified best practices in each of these dimensions in a review of the world’s most
effective tertiary education systems (World Bank 2016). The overview of best practice indicators can be
found in Appendix 1. Countries are scored and then benchmarked on these policy dimensions with four
different scores:



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                               2
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017



1.   Latent: this topic has received too little attention;
2.   Emerging: there are some instances of good practice;
3.   Established: there is systemic good practice; and
4.   Advanced: the country follows international best practice and is an example for others.

SABER uses an extensive questionnaire to collect data on the policy environment for tertiary education.
The questionnaire is populated through an analysis of the most recent versions of relevant legislation,
policy documents and reports on the sector. The SABER team also carried out fieldwork in Liberia between
15-27 January, 2017 with visits to several universities, government agencies, and other stakeholders. After
data collection is complete, the policy dimensions are scored on a rubric. Both the answers to the
questionnaire and the rubric scores are available upon request from the SABER website
(http://saber.worldbank.org).

This report proceeds as follows. First, we will describe the context of the tertiary education system in
Sierra Leone. We will then proceed with a summary of the considerations when scoring the six policy
dimensions. Finally, we will conclude with a few general observations about tertiary education in the
country.

Context: Recent Developments in Tertiary Education in Liberia
Tertiary education in Liberia is vulnerable to shocks in the broader social and political environment. Liberia
has a fragile political system and an uncertain economic future. The country is currently ranked 177 out
of 188 on the Human Development Index (2016 data) and is recovering from a long and brutal civil war
between 1989 and 2003 and the more recent Ebola outbreak in 2014 (Hettinger et al 2017). This has
resulted in extensive physical damage to tertiary education infrastructure, with dilapidated buildings and
broken-down laboratories. However, the country’s human capital stock is perhaps even more severely
affected. Up-to-date data on higher education in Liberia is scarce, but according to the latest available
sources, in the academic year 2011/2012 only 40 out of the 428 full-time academic faculty members in
Liberia’s master’s granting institutions held a PhD, while 124 full-time faculty members had only a
bachelor’s degree (NCHE 2012a). Liberia does not offer any PhD programs, and this situation is unlikely to
change in the near future. As the demand for faculty members surpasses the supply (Sumaworo 2015),
universities are not able to hold professors to account for lack of standards. This raises concerns about
the general quality of university teaching in the country (Gbollie & David 2014) as well as about the
potential for abuse and unethical behavior (USAID 2014). One university leader put this succinctly: “when
the qualified were no longer available, the available became the qualified.”

Problems in the broader social and political environment translate into low quality standards and poor
learning outcomes. In recent years, these issues have become evident during the entrance exams for
tertiary education. In 2016, after the university admissions system was reformed with the aim of
eradicating cheating, not a single student out of 25,000 examinees passed the entrance examination at
the University of Liberia (Ministry of Education 2016a). Two years later, the university put 10,000 of its
students on probation, meaning that, on average, around half of its students scored lower than a passing
grade (Yenby 2013). Instances of corruption within the school and the higher education system and cases
of K-12 teachers with fake qualifications have been reported (Ministry of Education 2016a).

The regulatory framework governing tertiary education offers minimal guidance on licensing, and
accreditation. While policy documents have been produced, few of their recommendations have been
implemented, including those in the 2012 Higher Education Strategic Plan (NCHE 2016b). Also, there is



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                               3
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


little quality assurance of higher education. In theory, those institutions that do not receive a license from
the National Commission of Higher Education (NCHE)—the key agency in the country focused on tertiary
education—are unable to operate in the country. However, the licensing procedure is minimal and is not
accompanied by any subsequent accreditation or quality assurance procedures. Licensing is voluntary for
private institutions, as mentioned in the Getting to Best: Education Sector Plan 2017-2021 (Ministry of
Education 2016b). Degrees from non-accredited institutions are not recognized for public sector
employment, and their students are not eligible for scholarships.

Despite these considerable challenges, Liberia’s tertiary education system is growing in terms of both
demand and intake. Since 75 percent of the Liberian population is under the age of 35, the importance
of tertiary education cannot be overstated. Student numbers in higher education roughly doubled from
27,954 to 55,000 between 2008 and 2015 (Ministry of Education 2016b). The percentage of the youth
population that has some higher education is now 10.4 percent (data from the 2014 Household Income
and Expenditure Survey) and has continuously grown since the end of the civil war. While the main public
university, the University of Liberia, enrolls about half of all students, new universities are entering the
market. Faith-based and private universities, in particular, are expanding to meet the new demand. Out
of the 33 higher education institutions that were licensed as of 2014, 9 institutions were public, 5 were
private, and 19 were faith-based (NCHE 2014). Unfortunately, little information is available to track the
tertiary education market in more detail.

Within this context, the following sections will discuss the main policy dimensions of the tertiary education
landscape in Liberia, starting with the government’s vision for tertiary education.

Policy Dimension 1: Vision for Tertiary Education
Establishedzzz|
Liberia adopted a vision for tertiary education in 2012, and recently adopted the Education Sector Plan
“Getting to Best” 2017-2021. The challenge is to implement this vision, to introduce relevant regulatory
reforms, to increase capacity to implement, and to align the budget with strategic priorities.

The relevant question for this report is whether the government has a vision and a plan for the tertiary
education sector, to what extent this vision is shared between stakeholders and what actions are being
taken to implement the vision. The SABER-TE diagnostic tool assesses these issues using two distinct “best
practice indicators”, one that evaluates the existence of a recent vision or strategy for tertiary education
and another that evaluates the extent to which this vision is being translated into policy actions. The
assessment of the SABER-TE team is that the vision for tertiary education in Liberia is established. A
vision is in place, and it addresses some key concerns raised by stakeholders. Nevertheless, some
important questions remain about whether this vision will be implemented.

The main strategic documents relevant to the government’s vision for tertiary education in Liberia are the
Higher Education Strategic Plan (NCHE 2012b) and the Diagnostic Paper for Higher Education in Liberia
(NCHE 2012c). These documents were drafted by the NCHE in 2012 after intensive consultations with the
main stakeholders in the tertiary education sector. The Higher Education Strategic Plan was endorsed by
the Association of Liberian Universities. It explicitly addresses the geopolitical, economic, and social issues
faced by the country but does not consider any demographic, technological, feasibility, or sustainability
challenges. The document adopts a broad vision for the system as “a higher education system producing




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                4
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                               SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


intellectual and human resources focusing on national, social, political, and economic development”
(NCHE 2012c, p.4).

The strategic plan then sets out a mission and core values for the tertiary education sector. Its main goals
are to: (1) deliver high quality and relevant higher education programs; (2) advance relevant research,
innovation, and enterprise development; (3) ensure the sustainability of the higher education system; (4)
promote equitable access to high quality programs; and (5) meet national and international standards.
The plan translates each of these broad goals into operational priorities and actions. For instance, to
improve quality, the strategic plan suggests reviewing curricula, pursuing programs for staff development,
and developing international partnerships.

In November 2017, the Government approved the “Getting to Best” Education Sector Plan 2017-2021 (see
Appendix). The sector plan sets three main priorities for tertiary education: (1) to increase the quality of
higher education, (2) to improve equity and efficiency, and (3) to draft a new Higher Education Act. It
represents a more focused strategy, and the education budget is being aligned to match these priorities.
It also provides a detailed analysis of enrolment patterns and budgetary trends in the sector.

Tertiary education leaders claim that no action has been taken to implement the vision of the government
since 2012. They mentioned several reasons for this lack of action. First, the Government budget has not
been reformed to create relevant mechanisms or incentives for the institutions. Indeed, the financial
bottleneck is not the lack of available resources but the misalignment between the budget and the
strategic plan. It is also notable that external financing has been limited to some programs in only a few
institutions; mostly at the University of Liberia.

Second, neither the Ministry of Education nor the NCHE has allocated any staff or organized any activities
to implement the strategic plan. The Ministry has not assigned staff to oversee or to monitor the sector.
Up until this year (2017), the Education Management Information System did not include any data
collection on higher education institutions. NCHE has no capacity, mandate or resources to coordinate the
implementation of the Plan. For these two reasons, the current deadline for its implementation, in 2023,
seems unlikely to be met.

Policy Dimension 2: Regulatory Framework
Emergingzz||
Some key regulation exists but it is outdated and not strictly enforced. There is no overall legislation for
the tertiary education sector.

SABER-TE measures whether tertiary education is based on an appropriate regulatory framework that
supports the work of tertiary education providers to the benefit of students and the public. This policy
dimension encompasses seven distinct best practice indicators assessing the regulatory framework,
including what types of higher education provision are supported, whether regulatory agencies have the
appropriate resources, and whether the regulation is grounded in key principles. The assessment of the
SABER-TE team is that, in Liberia, the regulatory environment is emerging. While the legislation covers
the main aspects of the tertiary education system (public and private universities and community
colleges), it lacks specificity.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                             5
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


The main regulations are the 1989 Act Establishing a National Commission of Higher Education
complemented by the Education Reform Act of 2011. Universities are established by charters, which form
another major source of regulation (see below). In recent months, a bill has been drafted to amend the
Act of 1989 to introduce an additional buffer body—the National Accreditation Center—designed
specifically to address accreditation and quality assurance concerns.

The market entry and operation of public and private higher education institutions is governed by a
licensing procedure. All tertiary education institutions—public, faith-based, and private—must have
charters approved by the Liberian Parliament. The charter gives the universities the legal status to
operate, a broad mission, and the power to award degrees and sets out the structure of the university.
While the country seems to be open to different types of educational providers and institutions, the
language of relevant legislation is often not very specific. Because of this, certain types of institutions
seem not to be covered by regulation at all, such as teacher training institutions and community colleges
(Ministry of Education 2016a).

The main regulatory agency in Liberian higher education is the National Commission for Higher Education
(NCHE). This agency is accountable to the Ministry of Education and to the legislature, although it is
unclear if its activity is actually monitored by the government. The 1989 act grants autonomy to
universities, while delegating regulatory powers to the NCHE. This agency has drafted the Higher
Education Strategic Plan (NCHE 2012b) and the Diagnostic Paper for Higher Education in Liberia (NCHE
2012c).

The regulations contain various references the key principles relevant to tertiary education. The 2012
Higher Education Strategic Plan mentions the need for equitable access, educational quality, and the
promotion of relevant research. However, several other key principles such as sustainability,
accountability, transparency, and institutional autonomy are harder to find in official policy and legal
documents.

There are several problems in the laws and regulation. First, neither the university charters nor the NCHE
Act 1989 have been updated since they were initially adopted. The vision behind the provision of higher
education in Liberia needs to be strengthened in the legislation. The country has fundamentally changed
over the last few decades as has the provision of higher education so a nationwide law to support and
regulate the tertiary education system is needed to reflect these changes. A second problem is that the
outdated legislation leaves some loopholes in terms of the accountability of universities. For instance,
there are no clear standards governing university finances, and it is unclear whether public universities
even have a clear budget. In the case of private universities, it is unclear what quality of service they are
providing in return for their fees. This is partly due to the non-specific language in the various policies and
laws currently in place and partly due to the non-binding legal status of the private universities. While the
NCHE has substantial legal authority over tertiary education institutions, it is unclear to whom it is
accountable itself. The licensing and accreditation procedures are underdeveloped, and it is unclear how
institutions could appeal decisions made by the NCHE. In sum, there is regulatory regime in place but it is
outdated and is open to the risk of mismanagement and academic malpractice.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                6
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Policy Dimension 3: Governance of System and Institutions
Emergingzz||
There is a diverse set of tertiary education institutions, but the differences are not clearly articulated in
national policy. Institutions have significant academic, staffing, and financing autonomy, but have little
influence over their own governance structures.

The goal of this policy dimension is to discover if the tertiary education system has adequate structures,
policies, and processes in place that enable tertiary education institutions to operate efficiently and
effectively. The tool can be used to find out whether the main tertiary education authority at the central
level has sufficient staff and resources to guide, support, and monitor tertiary education institutions. This
dimension is comprised of two distinct policy levers: (1) articulation and (2) institutional autonomy. The
assessment of the SABER-TE team is that, in Liberia, the governance dimension of tertiary education is
emerging. While Liberia offers a considerable degree of autonomy to tertiary education institutions, there
is no clear governance structure to facilitate the coherent management of its diversified tertiary education
system.

Policy Lever: Articulation
The first policy lever included in this dimension relates to articulation, which is the formal relationship
between all higher education institutions across the country in terms of the academic requirements and
coursework that they require of students [check]. The lever evaluates whether the legislative framework
supports the development of different kinds of higher education institutions [check], enables these
different types of institutions with different missions to coexist and collaborate as well as strengthening
their missions, and facilitate student mobility within the system. On this policy lever, Liberia is considered
to be latent.

The legislative framework in Liberia differentiates between universities and non-university institutions.
This differentiation is not made in the 1989 legislation, but it is specified in the subsequent Education
Reform Act of 2011, which distinguishes between junior colleges and other post-secondary education
institutions, colleges, and universities and intermediary institutions (including teacher education colleges
and seminaries). University and non-university institutions differ in their teaching functions and in the
types of degrees that they each award. Teacher education is offered by non-universities and is regulated
by the Bureau of Teaching Education (Ministry of Education 2011, p.15). Also, there are differences
between individual institutions that are enshrined in their Parliament-approved university charters.

There are also no clear governance structures or incentives designed to facilitate collaboration between
tertiary education institutions, enable students to transfer between institutions, or facilitate collaboration
between the tertiary sector and other education sectors. For instance, there is lack of clarity surrounding
regulation of community colleges. While the President of Liberia has stated that community colleges will
be brought under the University of Liberia 1, no concrete action has been taken to this effect.

Policy Lever: Institutional Autonomy
Tertiary education institutions require autonomy to fulfill their missions. The aim of this policy lever is to
find out how different types of autonomy manifest within the system. The types of institutional autonomy
assessed by the SABER-TE tool for both public and private institutions are the ability to negotiate
1
 President of the Republic of Liberia, Her Excellency Ellen Johnson Sirleaf (2017). Annual Message to the Sixth Session of the 53rd National
Legislature of the Republic of Liberia. Retrieved from http://www.emansion.gov.lr/doc/ANNUAL.pdf




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                             7
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                               SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


performance standards, academic autonomy, staffing autonomy, governance autonomy, and financial
autonomy including the freedom to diversify funding sources. Institutional autonomy is established in
Liberia.

Often, governments around the world establish performance standards and targets for their tertiary
education institutions through quality assurance procedures and funding schemes. By granting
institutions the ability to negotiate some of these performance standards in a transparent manner,
governments ensure that the diverging needs of individual institutions are taken into account. In Liberia,
however, neither public nor private institutions can negotiate performance standards, because these
simply do not exist.

Academic autonomy is ensured for both public and private institutions in Liberia. Institutions can design
their own curricula, introduce and cancel degrees, determine internal academic structures, decide on the
number of students to admit, determine admission criteria and procedures, evaluate programs, learning
outcomes, and teaching methodologies, conduct research on topics of interest, award degrees, titles, and
certificates, and include practical training and internships in their curricula.

Similarly, staffing autonomy in the country is advanced, as both public and private institutions can hire,
promote, and fire academic and non-academic staff, offer performance-based salaries and tenure, and
create new academic and non-academic positions.

In contrast, the governance autonomy is less developed. Public, faith-based, and private institutions in
Liberia are unable to appoint or elect their leadership, terminate the positions of current leaders, design
or change the process through which institutional leaders are selected, or involve internal and external
stakeholders as part of their leadership structures. In addition, tertiary education institutions have no
autonomy to change their mission without the permission of the NCHE (Ministry of Education 2016a, p.
235). Each university is headed by a President, while a Provost or Vice-President oversees academic
affairs. All universities are governed by a Board of Trustees, typically composed of 15 members. This board
includes both permanent members (politicians or eminent figures, including the Minister of Education ex
officio) and non-permanent members. While the university’s President is typically appointed by the Board
of Trustees, the President of Liberia has an important say in the appointment procedure, even for private
and faith-based institutions.

Both public and private institutions in Liberia are able to set and charge their own student fees (NCHE
2016c, p.40) and are also allowed to diversify their sources of funding (Ministry of Education 2016a, p.245)
including donations and real estate income (NCHE 2016a) as tertiary education institutions tend to own
property and land.

Policy Dimension 4: Financing
Latentz|||
Public funding is not provided following transparent and competitive procedures. Moreover, there are no
agreed performance targets linked to public funding. There is no funding to increase equitable access to
tertiary education.

SABER-TE measures whether public financing is used to steer tertiary education toward established
system-wide goals. The dimension is comprised of three distinct policy levers: (1) coverage of resource




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                             8
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


allocation, (2) resource allocation, and (3) how resources are used. The assessment of the SABER-TE team
is that, in Liberia, the financing of tertiary education is latent. The process by which public funds are
allocated is not transparent, the allocations are not linked to institutions’ performance, and auditing
standards are unclear.

Policy Lever: Coverage of Resource Allocation
This policy lever aims to map what types of expenditure (recurrent, capital, and research) are supported
by public funding allocations to both public and private tertiary education institutions. On this policy lever,
Liberia is scored as emerging.

The 2014 National Policy on Higher Education in Liberia stipulates that accredited private institutions are
eligible to apply for public funding (NCHE, 2014). In 2012, government subsidies constituted 7 percent of
the total budget of private institutions (NCHE 2016a, p.31). Government subsidies can be appropriated
for both recurrent and capital spending. In the year 2007/2008, 1 percent of appropriated public funds
were allocated for capital expenses, while the rest covered recurrent expenses such as salaries. However,
public funds are not allocated for research purposes to either public nor private institutions in Liberia.

Policy Lever: Resource Allocation
This policy lever aims to map the process through which public funds are allocated to tertiary education
institutions and to evaluate the transparency with which funding is allocated and the criteria used for this
process. On this policy lever, Liberia is scored as latent.

The allocation of public funding towards tertiary education institutions in Liberia is not always transparent.
There are significant variations from one year to the next in the level of appropriations depending on the
electoral cycle and the extent of lobbying done by the institutions (Ministry of Education 2016a, p.248).
There is no publicly known formula to allocate funds, nor is there a transparent procedure of negotiations.
In addition, performance-based funding is not used, so no data are collected to monitor how institutions
perform.

It should be noted that the Getting to Best Education Sector Plan 2017-2021 recommends introducing
performance-based funding for tertiary education institutions (see Appendix). While Liberia doesn’t have
a national funding scheme aimed at promoting innovation to meet national priorities, the government
does support students in pursuing developmental-focused graduate-level studies abroad under the
condition that recipients return to Liberia following their graduation (Ministry of Education 2016a, p.249).

Policy Lever: Use of Resources
With this lever, SABER-TE aims to discover the extent to which public funding is being used to advance a
country’s equity goals. Use of resources in Liberia is latent. There are no effective initiatives to increase
equitable access to tertiary education.

Liberia used to have a public program providing financial aid to students, but it was terminated in 2012
(Ministry of Education 2016a, p.249). The program awarded scholarships based on achievement, not
minority status (NCHE 2012c, p.38). Liberia has no financial cost-sharing mechanisms in place to help
students to pay for their tertiary education nor does it provide any incentives to encourage tertiary
education institutions to meet the country’s equity goals despite the country’s substantial gender and
economic inequalities (Ministry of Education 2016a, p.39).




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                9
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Policy Dimension 5: Quality Assurance
Latentz|||
There is no independent quality assurance agency. While some steps have been undertaken to establish
an accreditation agency, the proposals do not seem to follow international best practice.

This policy dimension attempts to map the state of quality assurance. Two policy levers are included as
part of this dimension: (1) accreditation and institutional quality standards and (2) a tertiary education
management information system (TEMIS).

Policy Lever: Accreditation and Institutional Quality Assurance Standards
This policy lever evaluates the key actors involved in the quality assurance process, their independence,
the jurisdiction of their activity, and how the quality assurance process is implemented. Accreditation and
institutional quality assurance are latent in Liberia.

The main quality assurance and accreditation functions are delegated to the National Commission for
Higher Education (NCHE). The NCHE is tasked with regulating and licensing tertiary education institutions.
The commission consists of between 9 and 17 members, which include leaders of the main universities,
representatives of key ministries, Parliament, and professional associations, a representative of the
teachers’ union, and a student. The commission is divided into two groups: permanent members with a
mandate of six years and non-permanent members with a mandate of two years. The act gives the NCHE
the power to institute “punitive measures” against institutions that violate NCHE guidelines. At the same
time, because its mandated composition includes representatives of the Ministry of Education and
Parliament as well as representatives of universities, the NCHE has only limited independence from either
the government or the tertiary education institutions (Government of Liberia 1989, p.2).

It could be argued that the NCHE already operates a nascent accreditation system, even if it is not formally
a quality assurance agency. The 2014 National Policy on Higher Education in Liberia states that every
institution must obtain written permission from the NCHE to operate. The NCHE issues the permit after
undertaking a site visit, although there is no stipulated methodology for such a site visit. Based on its
licensing procedure, the NCHE holds a list of “recognized and accredited institutions,” which currently
consists of 33 tertiary education institutions. The policy also sets out a minimal procedure for the
accreditation of institutions. The NCHE receives a yearly budget allocation from the government and has
its own staff and building.

The NCHE has national jurisdiction. While its regulation of cross-border providers is unclear, institutions
in Liberia need to obtain permission from the NCHE before cooperating with institutions located outside
the country (NCHE 2014). The jurisdiction of the NCHE extends to non-universities and universities, as well
as full-time, part-time, and distance programs.

The NCHE does not have any Institutional Quality Assurance Standards 2 nor Program Quality Standards. 3
In addition, no incentives exist for tertiary education institutions to create management information
systems, 4 and the NCHE’s licensing processes do not include key stakeholders such as students. Lastly,

2
  Institutional Quality Assurance Standards measure the desired characteristics of an institution against a reference point..
3
  Program Quality Standards measure the desired characteristics of an academic program against a reference point.
4
  An organized group of information and documentation services that collects, stores, processes, analyzes, and disseminates information on
tertiary education institutions that can be used for planning and management.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                         10
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                               SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


there are no practical consequences for academic programs that do not meet the NCHE’s accreditation
standards.

In sum, Liberia does not currently have an institutional accreditation agency or a quality assurance agency.
In addition, it is not clear whether its tertiary education system is ready or able to implement an
independent accreditation process (NCHE 2012c, p.14). However, some actions have been taken towards
establishing an autonomous buffer body solely devoted to quality assurance. National discussions in this
direction started in 2011 (Ministry of Education 2011, p.20) when the creation of the Center for
Educational Accreditation was proposed. To date, this proposal has not made it into law. A recently
drafted bill that would create this center is currently pending in the executive.

Policy Lever: Tertiary Education Management Information System
A tertiary education management information system (TEMIS) is a management tool for tracking data on
tertiary education. It can be used to disseminate information about tertiary education to the public, to
plan budgetary allocations, or to evaluate the effectiveness of policy reforms. This policy lever aims to
measure the extent to which in any given country there are formal procedures for systematically collecting
data on the tertiary education system in the form of a single system-wide TEMIS. Liberia does not
currently have a TEMIS and, as such, this dimension is latent.

The government plans to include tertiary education institutions in the broader Education Management
Information System (EMIS). Indeed, only this year (2017) specific questions on tertiary education
institutions were included in the EMIS data collection effort. In the future, a full and separate TEMIS could
collect data on students, institutional and student financing, academic performance, graduate outcomes,
and the relevance of institutions to the country’s broader development goals.

Policy Dimension 6: Relevance to A Country’s Social and Economic Needs
Latentz|||
Few initiatives have been undertaken to improve the relevance of tertiary education. Steps are needed to
strengthen the link with the labor market, to foster research development and innovation, and to improve
sustainability.

This policy dimension aims to find out if a given country’s tertiary education institutions are incentivized
to conduct research and development activities that respond to local conditions, resources, and needs
and are oriented towards social development. This dimension consists of three distinct policy levers: (1)
economic development, (2) fostering research development and innovation (RDI), and (3) fostering social
and cultural development and environmental protection and sustainability. Understandably, the
immediate challenges facing the tertiary education system in Liberia make focusing on strategic areas for
development a secondary policy priority. The assessment is that this policy dimension in Liberia is latent.

Policy Lever: Economic Development
This policy lever aims to discover the extent to which there is a system-wide or sector-specific policy
mandate to strengthen the role of tertiary education in enhancing economic development in Liberia. On
this policy lever, Liberia is assessed as emerging.

While little attention has so far been given to using tertiary education to advance Liberia’s economic
development, the Getting to Best Education Sector Plan 2017-2021 recommends strengthening and



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                             11
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


diversifying the tertiary education curriculum to increase its market relevance. This could be achieved by
establishing partnerships between higher education and local businesses and industry. The document also
recommends pursuing program accreditation for selected universities and fields of study, including those
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), aligned with Liberia’s strategic and
economic development priorities (Ministry of Education 2016b, p.209). In addition, several other official
documents refer to the relevance of tertiary education for economic development (Ministry of Education
2016a). To date, these plans are not sufficiently operationalized, and no steps have been taken to
implement these plans. University leaders are not aware of any recent steps to increase the labor market
relevance of their programs, except for individual initiatives by universities.

Policy Lever: Fostering Research, Development and Innovation
This policy lever evaluates the support provided to research, development, and innovation (RDI) activities.
It also asks whether there a system-wide strengthen RDI and whether there are any financial incentives
or specific programs aimed at encouraging this. Fostering RDI is in a latent state.

The goal to “advance relevant research, innovation, and enterprise development” is set out in the 2012
National Education Strategic Plan for Liberia (NCHE 2021d, p.7). 5 However, this aspect of the plan has not
been implemented. As described above in the section on financing, no public funding is currently allocated
for research activities in Liberia, and no government-led financial incentives or specific programs exist to
foster RDI either at the national or local level. The only RDI programs that do exist are supported by the
United States Agency for International Development (USAID), which has funded a project aimed to “build
regionally recognized and competitive academic Centers of Excellence that produce graduates who
become leading professionals and entrepreneurs in the fields of engineering and agriculture in Liberia”
(USAID 2014). These fields (agriculture and engineering) are also mentioned in the Education Sector Plan
“Getting to Best” as promising areas for development.

Policy Lever: Fostering Social and Cultural Development and Environmental Protection and
Sustainability
The purpose of this policy lever is to assess policies to increase social and cultural development,
environmental protection and sustainability. On this policy lever, Liberia is rated as latent, as there are
no specific programs to advance these goals.


Conclusion and Recommendations
Liberia has established a strong vision for tertiary education, and has made a recent step forward by
adopting the Getting to Best Education Sector Plan 2017-2021. However, it seems that little has been
done to translate the vision into action since its adoption in 2012; the Getting to Best plan is still too recent
to be implemented. Few actions have been taken to improve the regulatory framework, the governance
system, or the financing system. The main challenge for the country is thus to deliver on these promises,
by increasing capacity for implementation, aligning the budget to strategic priorities, and to update the
regulation.

The main policy recommendation that the SABER-TE team would like to make to the government is to
work on the financing, quality assurance, and relevance of tertiary education. Liberia is currently
considered to be latent in these three dimensions, and some easily implementable policy actions could
improve this standing. Financing rules could be made more transparent, and universities could be made




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                 12
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                               SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


more accountable for their use of public funding. Quality assurance could be strengthened by making it
more independent from the influence of both policymakers and tertiary education institutions and by
systematically collecting data on tertiary educations in the EMIS. The relevance of tertiary education could
be increased by directing research funds and donor investments to productive sectors such as agriculture
and engineering.

While Liberia has a challenging social and political environment, this cannot be an excuse to stall
implementing the country’s vision for tertiary education. There is a sense of urgency, as demand for
tertiary education continues to grow and students have high expectations. There is also a clear societal
need. Universities and colleges set the standards for the professions in which they educate their students.
The tertiary education system trains future leaders, doctors, engineers, and teachers who are desperately
needed in Liberia. If standards for tertiary education remain low, it is hard to imagine that the broader
development goals of the Liberian government will be met.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                            13
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Acknowledgements
The SABER-Tertiary Education team would like to thank the Minister of Education, George Werner, for
inviting the Bank to implement this project. We would also like to thank Dr. Michael Slawon at the National
Commission for Higher Education for his support during the data collection process. We would also like to
help all the interviewees that we spoke to, including the university leaders, government officers, and
donor partners.

Within the World Bank, we would like to thank Peter Darvas, the Task Team Leader, for taking the initiative
to implement the SABER-Tertiary Education project in Liberia. Koen Geven collected data, while Ghazala
Mehmood played a key role in developing the questionnaire, and Georgiana Mihut helped draft the
report. We would also like to thank the broader team working on Liberia, David Balwanz, Rich Jones, Kirsty
Mclaren, Kabira Namit, Yijun Shen, and Yinan Zhang for all their support for the data collection and
validation exercises.


Acronyms
 EMIS          Education management information system
 NCHE          National Commission for Higher Education
 SABER         Systems Approach for Better Education Results
 STEM          Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
 TE            Tertiary education
 TEMIS         Tertiary education management information system
 TVET          Technical and vocational education and training
 USAID         United States Agency for International Development
 RDI           Research, Development and Innovation


References
Government of Liberia. 1989. Act Establishing a National Commission of Higher Education. Monrovia,
    Republic of Liberia
Gbollie, C. & David, N.M.. 2014. “Aligning Expansion and Quality in Higher Education: An Imperative to
    Liberia’s Economic Growth and Development.” Journal of Education and Practice, 5(12), p 139-150.
Hettinger, P., M. Sichei, & S. Kamara. 2017. Liberia. Retrieved from
    http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/en/country-notes/liberia
Ministry of Education. 2016a. Liberia Education Sector Analysis. Monrovia, Republic of Liberia.
Ministry of Education. 2016b. Getting to Best Education Sector Plan 2017-2021. Monrovia, Republic of
    Liberia.
Ministry of Education. 2011. Education Reform Act. Monrovia, Republic of Liberia.
NCHE. 2014. Recognized and Accredited Higher Education institutions in Liberia 2014. National
    Commission for Higher Education, Monrovia, Republic of Liberia.
NCHE. 2012a. Status of Higher Education Census Survey of Institutions. National Commission for Higher
    Education, Monrovia, Republic of Liberia
NCHE. 2012b. Higher Education Strategic Plan. National Commission for Higher Education, Monrovia,
    Republic of Liberia.



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                           14
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                            SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


NCHE. 2012c. Diagnostic Paper for Higher Education in Liberia. National Commission for Higher Education,
     Monrovia, Republic of Liberia.
NCHE. 2012d. National Education Strategic Plan for Liberia. National Commission for Higher Education,
     Monrovia, Republic of Liberia.
NCHE. 2014. National Policy on Higher Education in Liberia. Monrovia, Republic of Liberia.
Sirleaf, Her Excellency Ellen Johnson. 2017. President of the Republic of Liberia, Annual Message to the
     Sixth Session of the 53rd National Legislature of the Republic of Liberia. Retrieved from
     http://www.emansion.gov.lr/doc/ANNUAL.pdf
Sumaworo, M.D.A.. 2015. “Challenges of Tertiary Education in Liberia and Possible Solutions.” European
     Scientific Journal, p. 273-285.
USAID. 2014. Mid-term Assessment of the Excellence in Higher Education Liberian Development (EHELD)
     Project.
     Retrieved from http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00JTQN.pdf
World Bank. 2016. What Matters in Tertiary Education. A Framework Paper. World Bank, Washington DC.
Yenbey, V.A.. 2013. Mapping of Corruption Risks in the Education Sector in Liberia. Monrovia: UNDP &
     LACC.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                        15
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Appendix 1: Best Practice Indicators included in SABER-TE

                                                    1. Vision
                           1.1                                                  1.2
 The country/state has a fully developed              The creation of the tertiary education
 vision/strategic plan for tertiary education that    vision/strategic plan is relevant and representative,
 serves as a guide for steering the system            and includes input from key stakeholders and
                                                      considers key societal factors


                                       2. Regulatory Environment
            2.1                         2.2                     2.3                          2.4
 The country has an          The regulatory           The regulatory            The regulatory framework
 explicitly stated           framework includes       framework includes        includes provisions to
 tertiary education law      provisions to            provisions to             adequately regulate the
 for steering the            adequately regulate      adequately regulate       market entry and
 system towards              the market entry and     the market entry and      operation of non-
 optimal performance.        operation of public      operation of private      university institutions.
                             tertiary education       tertiary education
                             providers.               providers.

           2.5                         2.6                      2.7
 The regulatory              The regulatory           The regulatory
 framework includes          framework includes       framework embeds
 provisions to               provisions to            key guiding principles.
 adequately regulate         adequately regulate
 the distance and            the independent
 online education.           agencies and buffer
                             bodies.


                                              3. Governance
           3.1                          3.2                      3.3                         3.4
 The regulatory              The regulatory           The tertiary system       The tertiary system has an
 framework                   framework provides       has an enabling           enabling governance
 establishes distinct        incentives to            governance structure      structure that facilitates
 functions for               strengthen the unique    that facilitates          student transfer across
 university and non-         mission of different     collaboration             institutions.
 university institutions     institutions.            between institutions.
 in contributing to
 system-wide goals.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                             16
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


            3.5                     3.6                     3.7                         3.8
 The tertiary system     Public TEIs are able to   The governance            The governance
 has an enabling         negotiate at least        framework for public      framework for public TEIs
 governance structure    some performance          TEIs supports their       supports their staffing
 that facilitates        targets with stake-       academic autonomy.        autonomy.
 collaboration and/or    holders, such as the
 communication with      government or
 other educational       tertiary education
 sectors (e.g.           agencies (TEAs).
 secondary education).

          3.9                     3.10                       3.11                       3.12
 The regulatory          The governance            Private TEIs are able     The governance
 framework for public    framework grants          to negotiate at least     framework for private TEIs
 TEIs supports their     public TEIs significant   some performance          supports their academic
 governance              freedom to diversify      targets with              autonomy.
 autonomy.               their sources of          stakeholders, such as
                         funding.                  the government or
                                                   TEAs.
           3.13                   3.14                       3.15
 The governance          The regulatory            Private TEIs enjoy
 framework for private   framework for private     significant freedom to
 TEIs supports their     TEIs supports their       diversify their sources
 staffing autonomy.      governance                of funding.
                         autonomy.


                                              4. Financing
           4.1                     4.2                       4.3                         4.4
 Public funds are        Public funds allocated    Public funds allocated    Public funds are allocated
 allocated to            to public TEIs cover      to public TEIs cover      to private TEIs to cover
 accredited public and   recurrent expenditure     research expenditure.     research expenditure.
 private TEIs.           and capital
                         expenditure.

           4.5                     4.6                       4.7                         4.8
 Public funds are        There is a publicly       The stakeholders that     Performance-based
 allocated to TEIs       known or publicly         contribute to             funding is used as part of
 through a stable and    accessible formula for    determining the           the funding allocation
 transparent process     the allocation of         different parts of the    mechanism.
 and using a block       public funds for TEIs,    funding allocation
 grant budget system.    which specifies the       mechanism are clearly
                         amounts disbursed as      identified.
                         fixed and variable
                         funding.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                             17
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017



           4.9                       4.10                      4.11                           4.12
 There is a mechanism      There is at least one      There are public            The financial cost-sharing
 which involves data       competitive line of        programs in place to        mechanisms available
 collection for            funding accessible to      provide financial aid       effectively serve the
 monitoring the            TEIs aimed at              to students from            needs of targeted
 progress of               promoting innovation       disadvantaged               beneficiaries.
 institutions toward       or to address national     backgrounds with the
 performance targets.      priorities.                goal of advancing
                                                      equity goals in access
                                                      and retention.

           4.13                      4.14
 The outcomes of           There are financial
 financial aid programs    incentives to reward
 for students are          institutions that meet
 adequately                equity goals.
 monitored.


                                           5. Quality Assurance
           5.1                       5.2                        5.3                            5.4
 There is at least one     The IAA(s) or QAA(s)       The IAA(s) or QAA(s)        The IAA(s)'s or QAA(s)'s
 institutional             is/are independent         is/are independent          jurisdiction is nationwide.
 accreditation agency      agency/agencies from       agency/agencies from
 (IAA) or quality          government.                TEIs.
 assurance agency
 (QAA) that oversees
 the quality of
 individual institutions
 in the country.

           5.5                       5.6                        5.7                             5.8
 The IAA(s)'s or           The IAA(s)'s or            The IAA(s)'s or             The IAA(s) or QAA(s)
 QAA(s)'s jurisdiction     QAA(s)'s jurisdiction      QAA(s)'s jurisdiction       has/have developed
 includes both public      includes both              includes full time, part    Institutional Quality
 and private TEIs.         university and non-        time, on-site and           Standards (IQAs) to apply
                           university institutions.   online programs.            in its/their evaluations.

            5.9                      5.10                       5.11                         5.12
 The IAA(s) or QAA(s)      The IAA(s) or QAA(s)       The IAA(s) or QAA(s)        There are practical
 has/have developed        provides incentives for    involve TEI                 consequences for
 Program Quality           TEIs to create             stakeholders,               programs/TEIs that do not
 Standards (PQAs) to       Management                 including students, as      meet the evaluation/
 apply in its/their        Information Systems        part of their activities.   accreditation standards.
 evaluations.              (MIS) through IQAs or
                           PQAs.



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                   18
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017



          5.13                      5.14                      5.15                       5.16
 There is at least one    The TEMIS collects        The TEMIS collects        The TEMIS collects data
 national or regional     data on student           data on tuition levels,   on students' academic
 TEMIS in operation.      enrollment,               financial aid, grants,    readiness.
                          retention/dropout         scholarships, and
                          rates, graduation         student loans.
                          rates, and student
                          transfer rates.

          5.17                      5.18                     5.19                         5.20
 The TEMIS collects       The TEMIS collects        The TEMIS collects        The TEMIS collects data
 data on graduated        data on institutional     data on institutional     on faculty related
 outcomes.                contributions to local    RDI indicators.           indicators.
                          economic, social or
                          cultural development.

          5.21
 The TEMIS is used
 extensively for
 system evaluation
 and reform.


                          6. Relevance for Social and Economic Needs
           6.1                       6.2                      6.3                           6.4
 There is a system        There is a system-wide    There are financial       There are programs
 wide or sector-          or sector-specific        incentives to foster      and/or incentives to
 specific policy man-     policy mandate to         RDI activity across       enhance the capacity of
 date to strengthen       strengthen RDI activity   different tertiary sub-   local and regional actors
 the role of tertiary     in tertiary education.    systems.                  to contribute to RDI
 education to enhance                                                         activities in tertiary
 economic                                                                     institutions.
 development.

           6.5                      6.6
 There is a system-       There is a system-wide
 wide policy mandate      policy mandate or
 or decree to             decree to strengthen
 strengthen the role of   the role of tertiary
 tertiary education in    education in fostering
 fostering social and     environmental
 cultural development.    protection and
                          sustainability.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                             19
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                           SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Appendix 2: Extract from Getting to Best Education Sector Plan
Chapter 13: Higher Education Program
13.1 Summary

 G2B impact              Young people have the necessary skills for livelihoods and employment

 G2B priority            Young people have the necessary skills for livelihoods and employment

 Challenges                    x   The demand for higher skills and degrees are not appropriately
                                   linked with the supply of higher education study programs.
                               x   Quality of higher education programs is not internationally
                                   validated.
                               x   Resources are not distributed based on performance, public
                                   priorities (e.g. AfT) or equity considerations and are not used
                                   efficiently or cost-effectively.
                               x   Higher education courses are not affordable for most of the
                                   population.
 SDG targets             4.3 By 2030, ensure equal access for all women and men to affordable
                         and quality technical, vocational and tertiary education, including
                         university
                         4.4 By 2030, substantially increase the number of youth and adults
                         who have relevant skills, including technical and vocational skills, for
                         employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship
 Strategy                Leverage regional and international partnerships and expertise, target
                         market demand for critical skills, and increase the efficiency of
                         education expenditure to drive quality improvement and increase
                         equitable access in Liberian higher education.

 Program name            Higher Education Program

 Responsible officer     Director General, National Commission on Higher Education

 Components              1. Increase quality and relevance     Director General, National
                         in Higher Education                   Commission on Higher Education

                         2. Improve equity and efficiency in   Director General, National
                         higher education finance              Commission on Higher Education

                         3. Higher Education Act               Director General, National
                                                               Commission on Higher Education




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                        20
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


13.2 Introduction

Liberia’s industries, particularly those that depend on natural resources, have expanded quickly in the
post-conflict period. Whereas firms in these high demand sectors are able to easily recruit low-skilled
labor, it is very difficult to hire Liberian professionals with advanced skills. Producing reliable and
productive human capital is important if the country is to fully benefit from its natural resources and
effectively develop the economy.
Liberia’s civil wars took a heavy toll on the country’s higher education system. The most qualified faculty
and administrators in universities moved abroad in a massive brain drain, and institutions had to be closed
intermittently due to war and student unrest. Infrastructure (including equipment, facilities, libraries,
laboratories, and buildings) was severely damaged, looted, and, in some cases, destroyed 6. In the current
context, challenges to rebuilding the sector stem not only from the legacy of war, but also from poor
learning outcomes in earlier levels of education.
13.2.1 The Higher Education Sector
In 2014, the National Commission on Higher Education (NCHE) recognized and accredited 33 higher
education institutions (HEI), an increase on the 30 HEIs accredited in in 2012. Nineteen of these HEIs are
located in Montserrado County, with the majority concentrated in Monrovia. Remaining HEIs are located
in Bong, Bomi, Maryland, Margabi, Nimba, Grand Bassa, Grand Gedeh and Lofa Counties. Only nine
counties can claim the physical presence of at least one HEI. The majority of institutions are small, with
only ten institutions – namely the University of Liberia, African Methodist Episcopal University, United
Methodist University, African Methodist Episcopal Zion University College, Cuttington University, Smythe
Institute of Management and Technology, Grand Bassa Community College, William V.S. Tubman
University, Nimba Community College and Stella Maris Polytechnic – enrolling more than students in
2012. 7
13.2.2 Enrolment
In 2012, 43,843 students were enrolled in higher education in Liberia, with the University of Liberia
accounting for 54.4 percent of total enrolment (NCHE 2012). Only 16,258 female students were enrolled
in higher education compared to 27,585 male students resulting in a Gender Parity Index (GPI) of 0.59.
However, GPI vary significantly across institutions, and a number of private institutions enroll many more
female than male students. Smythe Institute of Management and Technology, for example demonstrates
a GPI of 5.44 and Morris Community College of Airline Studies with GPI at 4.76. Most institutions
demonstrate increasing enrolment.
13.2.3 Courses
Between 2009/10 and 2011/12, the most popular major in higher education was Business/Management,
with the lowest number of students opting to enroll in Education Studies (Table 13-1). Overall, enrolment
of students increased across all majors for the period being reviewed. The number of male students
enrolled in the Humanity/Art major decreased, and increased substantially in Education Studies. Female
enrolment increased across all majors, with the largest growth in the Agriculture/Forestry major.




6
    World Bank. (2012). Diagnostic Paper for Higher Education in Liberia. Washington DC: World Bank.
7
    National Commission on Higher Education (NCHE). (2012). Status of Higher Education: Census Survey of Institutions.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                               21
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Table 13-1 Student enrolment by major, 2009/10 to 2011/12.


                                             2009/10                                   2011/12

                                                                                                                    Male    Female
                                  Male        Female          Total         Male        Female         Total      growth % growth %

Business/
management                         10,544         5,381        15,925       11,443          7,532       18,975              9%    40%

Hum/art                             5,679         3,325         9,004         5,152         4,216         9,368             -9%   27%

Science                             2,024            633        2,657         2,638            967        3,605             30%   53%

Engineering                         1,218              92       1,310         2,317            256        2,573             90%   178%

Agr/Forestry                        1,202            128        1,330         2,275            566        2,841             89%   342%

Med/Nursing                            837        1,694         2,531            910        2,600         3,510             9%    53%

Ed Studies                             508           205           713        1,314            581        1,895         159%      183%

Total                              22,012        11,458        33,470       26,049        16,718        42,767              18%   46%

Source: National Commission on Higher Education (NCHE). (2012). Status of Higher Education: Census Survey of Institutions




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                       22
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


13.2.4 Faculty
Student to faculty ratios vary widely across institutions, with a shortage of senior faculty positions evident
in some areas (Table 13-2).
Table 13-2 Student-Faculty Ratio, higher education institutions with more than 500 students, 2012


                                                                                Total student
           Institution                          Ownership                                                    Student-Faculty Ratio
                                                                                  numbers

 University of Liberia                             Public                            23,837                                 33

 African Methodist
                                               Faith-based                            3,370                                 30.1
 Episcopal University

 United Methodist
                                               Faith-based                            3,290                                 12.3
 University


 African Methodist
 Episcopal Zion University                     Faith-based                            2,836                                 19.2
 College


 Cuttington University                         Faith-based                            2,565                                 17

 Smythe Institute of
 Management and                                   Private                             1,707                                 32
 Technology

 Grand Bassa Community
                                                   Public                             1,290                                 21
 College

 William V.S Tubman
                                                   Public                              757                                  17.6
 University

 Nimba Community
                                                   Public                              722                                  23
 College

 Stella Maris Polytechnic                      Faith-based                             555                         Not reported

Source: National Commission on Higher Education (NCHE). (2012). Status of Higher Education: Census Survey of Institutions




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                      23
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


13.2.5 Funding
Higher education institutions receive funding through direct transfers (also known as subsidies) from the
central government, with the amount of the subsidy determined by the national budget. Some additional
institutions receive budget allocation through the MoE, but the total amount of these transfers is much
smaller when compared to those receiving direct transfers through the national budget. In the 2015/16
budget, only USD 150,000 of funding was channeled to HEIs through the MoE budget, while over USD 30
million was directly transferred to HEIs through the national budget (Figure 13-1).
Figure 13-1 Transfers to HEIs 2013-2016, USD

  35,000,000

  30,000,000
                       2,648,490                                                                           2,865,155

  25,000,000
                                                                                    1,853,854
                                               2,373,775       1,938,717
  20,000,000

  15,000,000
                       26,651,596                                                                         27,206,218
                                                                                    22,388,903
  10,000,000                                  19,714,281       19,238,320

   5,000,000

            -          337,500                 212,470           80,000              79,988                150,000
                    2013-14 budget          2013-14 actual   2014-15 budget       2014-15 actual        2015-16 budget

                  Colleges and universities under MoE              Colleges and universities getting direct transfer
                  Teacher training                                 Total


Source: National budget 2013/14, 14/15 and 15/16

The University of Liberia receives the largest share of transfers. Since 2010, the annual transfer to the
University of Liberia has exceeded USD 10m, and in 2014/15 the university over-executed their budget at
a rate of 129 percent. In 2015/16, funding to University of Liberia increased by USD 4m over the previous
year. Salaries at the University of Liberia have increased over the last few years from approximately USD
125/month to almost USD 1,400/month for senior faculty, and from approximately USD 45/month to USD
780/month for more junior faculty.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                            24
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                                           SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Figure 13-2 University of Liberia funding, 2013-16, USD

     16,000,000                                                                             15,150,000

     14,000,000                                                            13,000,000

     12,000,000
                       10,573,956       10,327,805        10,100,000
     10,000,000

      8,000,000

      6,000,000

      4,000,000

      2,000,000

               -
                        2013/14       2013/14 Actual       2014/15          2014/15           2015/16
                         Budget                             Budget          Actual*            Budget


Source: National Budget, 2013/14, 14/15. Note: Actual* is GoL projection

Additional financial support to the sector is derived from oil and mining concessional contracts, with
prescribed allocations to higher education in important development areas. These funds have been
directed for use in the improvement of teaching of engineering and mathematics 8.
13.2.6 Scholarships
The MoE has tightened the focus of scholarship provision to support study in line with development
priorities (reducing the number of local scholarships from 5,000 to just over 1,000, and limiting public
support for study abroad to the graduate level only). Notwithstanding these changes, scholarships
continue to account for a substantial share of the budget, with foreign scholarships alone consuming an
average of USD 2.1 million per annum, equivalent to 2.8 percent of the total budget for the education
sector.
Recipients of foreign scholarships are required to sign a Memorandum of Understanding including a
commitment to return to Liberia and work for the government for two years. The program prioritizes
certain strategic areas of study such as science, agriculture and education. Advertisements for scholarship
applications are published in newspapers, broadcast on the radio, and posted to the MoE website to
encourage students to apply. Interviews, in addition to a written test, are conducted to assess applicants.
Students supported by government scholarships are subject to academic reporting every semester. The
value of scholarships varies based on the destination country.
There is a significant gender imbalance with regard to students receiving international scholarship, and to
date no specific interventions have focused on this problem.
Local scholarships cover both undergraduate and graduate study, but this program was halted in 2012.
No new students have been selected for scholarship supported study in local HEIs, with support limited
to existing students who were previously enrolled in the program. The majority of supported students’
focus their studies in STEM subjects.


8
    World Bank. (2012). Diagnostic Paper for Higher Education in Liberia. Washington DC: World Bank.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                 25
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Local scholarships cover eighteen credits per student, with costs per credit differing by HEI. On average,
one higher education credit costs USD 25, for a total of USD 450 per student. The scholarship does not
include social subsidies. In 2014/15, USD 500,000 was provided to students benefiting from the program.
However, there was a funding gap of USD 1.5million to cover tuition for all students.
13.3 Legal and Policy Context
In 1989, the Act on Higher Education was passed to provide legal guidance on the development of higher
education. The National Commission on Higher Education (NCHE) was established by the Act with
responsibility for monitoring, evaluating and accrediting all HEIs. The NCHE coordinates activities related
to strategy development and is the primary implementation agency for oversight of strategy and policy
recommendations (Diagnostic Paper for Higher Education in Liberia, 2012).
The NCHE is also assigned with responsibility for licensing and accreditation of HEIs. Before a university
can become accredited, it must be licensed by the NCHE. Accreditation is voluntary, but all public
institutions must be accredited. Private institutions that are not accredited cannot receive government
subsidies, and their students are not eligible for government scholarships or any other form of
government financial aid.
Currently only colleges and universities are subject to regulation and oversight on the part of the NCHE.
Other institutions, such as RTTIs and TVET institutions, fall under the authority of the MoE, reporting to
the Deputy Minister for Instruction (World Bank 2012).
13.4 Achievements
        x    The first comprehensive census of HEIs was completed in June, 2010, resulting in the publication
             of the report ‘A Transformative Higher Education for Sustainable Development: 2009/10
             Statistical Report on Tertiary Institutions in Liberia’.
        x    A second census was completed in 2012, with a corresponding report entitled ‘The Status of
             Higher Education: Census Survey of Institutions’ (NCHE 2012).
        x    Stakeholders have been convened for consultation regarding the amending of the Higher
             Education Act.
13.5 Challenges
13.5.1 Recruitment and retention of quality faculty staff
Years of conflict has resulted in a relatively small pool of academic talent. Poor salaries for lecturers and
professors at many institutions results in many teaching staff holding more than one job to support their
livelihoods (although in recent years there have been substantial salary increases at the University of
Liberia). In light of the fact that over two-thirds of HEIs are located in Montserrado County, and that most
do not have more than 1,000 students, many institutions share faculty for common courses with negative
implications for student-faculty contact time (World Bank 2012).
13.5.2 Poor infrastructure, equipment and curricula
Liberian libraries and laboratories are generally poorly equipped. Sumaworo documented poorly
equipped classrooms at the University of Liberia accommodating more than 100 students. 9 Many
institutions are too small to achieve economies of scale, increasing costs and compromising quality. There
is no national quality assurance or accreditation system, or process for international or national peer
review.

9
    Sumaworo, M. D. (2015). Challenges of Tertiary Education in Liberia and Possible Solutions.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                            26
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


13.5.3 Students lack foundational skills
Due to poor learning outcomes in lower levels of education, high school graduates are generally incapable
of handling the advanced educational programs in HEIs. In 2013, nearly 25,000 school-leavers failed the
admission test at the University of Liberia. As a result, graduates from HEIs can be very poor, and much
effort must be expended in remedial programs.
13.5.4 Inadequate funding mechanism
Funding allocations are generally based on precedent from previous years and the lobbying power of
institutions. Funding allocations can be volatile due to political or economic change, or poor planning. As
a result, the execution rates for higher education transfers varies widely: for example, in 2013/14
execution was 75 percent compared to 114 percent the following year. Once approved in the national
budget, funding allocations to HEIs is general, and can be assigned to support any expenditure line item
within an HEI.
13.5.5 Inequity in access
Large numbers of young people cannot access higher education due to long distances between their
homes and institutions, poor infrastructure, cultural norms and poverty. According to the 2014/15 Liberia
Household Income and Expenditure survey, the GER for tertiary education is 3.14 percent. Students from
the richest quintile of households account for 57.14 percent of higher education enrolment, while
students from the poorest quintile account for only 0.71 percent of enrolment. Current mechanisms for
the assignation of scholarships does not adequately address equity concerns.
Figure 13-3 Tertiary gross enrolment ratio by quintile, 2014/15

 2.00%
                                                                          1.79%
 1.80%
 1.60%
 1.40%
 1.20%
 1.00%
 0.80%                                                            0.63%
 0.60%
                                                     0.40%
 0.40%                            0.29%
 0.20%
                0.02%
 0.00%
                  1st               2nd               3rd          4th     5th

                                                  Series1


Source: Liberia Household Income and Expenditure Survey 2014/15




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                           27
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


13.6 Higher Education Program
Component 1: Higher Education quality and relevance through partnerships and accreditation
Program accreditation
    1. Identify three diploma or degree programs at three universities in fields that align with Liberia’s
       strategic and economic development priorities, including science, technology, engineering and
       mathematics (STEM), to initiate program accreditation activities.
    2. Create a program accreditation task team for each of the three selected programs to design and
       implement accreditation processes.
    3. Integrate accreditation with regional/international partnership activities.
Curriculum strengthening and diversification for market relevance
   1. Conduct a labor market survey, with a focus on existing fields of study and skills gaps. Draw on
       the experience of major formal employers and informal industries to identify mismatches
       between community college programs and labor market needs/employment projections.
   2. Establish partnerships between employers and higher education programs or institutions.
   3. Convene a Community College Labor Market Relevance Task Force (CC-LMRTF) to review survey
       findings and recommend the development of new programs, with an emphasis on short-cycle
       and non-degree programs focused on responding to survey findings.
Regional and international partnerships for quality strengthening
    1. Build on existing university partnership arrangements to ‘pair’ universities with regional and
       international HEIs (for example the relationship between ALU and the University of Ibadan).
    2. Partnership arrangements should be designed to focus on quality improvement activities,
       including (i) the peer review of selected STEM and Agenda for Transformation (AfT) priority
       programs and (ii) support for academic and student exchange.
    3. Partnership arrangements should be designed to provide an institutional foundation and policy
       framework for the further development of an institutional accreditation system. Partnership
       arrangements will allow for the exchange of common standards and practices for accreditation.
    4. Universities and colleges will develop strategic plans and institute annual reporting exercises.
Component 2: Realign financing of higher education to improve efficiency and equity
Driving efficiency in higher education finance
    1. Compare unit costs and the cost-effectiveness of study for three to five priority diploma and
       degree programs, each of which must be offered at no less than three HEIs.
    2. Introduce monitoring indicators for programs and performance monitoring (including indicators
       for enrolment, admission, graduation, equity, the quality and efficiency of services, job
       placement and earnings upon graduation) and include all HEIs in the annual school census.
    3. Realign the higher education subsidy policy to improve equity in the distribution of public funds
       across HEIs with a focus on increasing value for money, and the alignment of financing with GoL
       developmental priorities. Reduce transfers to HEIs by at least USD 1m annually.
    4. Gradually introduce performance financing to HEIs, commencing with the introduction of
       demand driven grant financing for innovation in teaching and learning.
Improving equity in higher education finance
    1. Continue the reform of international and national scholarship programs to increase the share of
       enrolment of students from low income households. Reduce total expenditure on scholarships
       to USD 1.5m annually.



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                           28
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                             SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


   2. Explore options to support the increased generation of second and third income streams for
      HEIs and pilot programs designed to generate new revenue, including the levying of pro-poor
      user fees. Best practices could be identified from leading regional and international universities.
Component 3: Update the Higher Education Act
   1. Revise the 1989 Higher Education Act with support and engagement from key stakeholders, and
      in alignment with relevant national, regional and international priorities.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                          29
LIBERIA ۣ TERTIARY EDUCATION                                                                            SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017

                                                                                www.worldbank.org/education/saber




       The Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER)
       initiative collects data on the policies and institutions of education
       systems around the world and benchmarks them against practices
       associated with student learning. SABER aims to give all parties
       with a stake in educational results—from students, administrators,
       teachers, and parents to policymakers and business people—an
       accessible, detailed, objective snapshot of how well the policies of
       their country's education system are oriented toward ensuring that
       all children and youth learn.

       This report focuses specifically on policies in the Tertiary
       Education sector. It analyzes tertiary education in Sierra Leone on
       six policy dimensions: (1) the strength of the government’s vision,
       (2) the regulatory environment, (3) governance of the sector, (4)
       the use of innovative financing arrangements, (5) quality
       assurance, and (6) relevance to the labor market and the broader
       socio-economic development of the country.



This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in
this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The World
Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown
on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                      30
