                     USER GUIDE



      CONDUCTING
CLASSROOM OBSERVATIONS:
   Stallings Classroom Snapshot Observation
         System for an Electronic Tablet




            World Bank Education Global Practice
                         July 2017
This manual was prepared by Barbara Bruns, Center for Global Development and World Bank,
Audrey Schuh-Moore, Mathematica and FHI 360, and Elizabeth Adelman, Harvard University
and AED. It was edited by Aliza Marcus. The World Bank’s Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund
supported this work.
Table of Contents




1. Why Observe Classrooms Using the Stallings Method?.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 5
2. Observer Protocol .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .                             7
3. Using the Tablet .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10
4. Using the Stallings Method.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 12
5. Classroom Materials and Group Size. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6. Classroom Activities .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  18
7. Analyzing Stallings Data.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 43
8. Coding Practice Examples. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Appendix 1: Sample School Director Questionnaire.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  45
Appendix 2: Classroom Background Data.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 49
Appendix 3: Original Stallings Coding Grid.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  50
Appendix 4: Coding Worksheet.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 51




TABLE OF CONTENTS 	                                                                                                                                         3
Why Observe Classrooms
Using the Stallings Method?




The Stallings Classroom Snapshot instrument, technically called the “Stanford Research Insti-
tute Classroom Observation System was developed by Professor Jane Stallings for research on
the efficiency and quality of basic education teachers in the United States in the 1970s. (Stallings
1977; Stallings and Mohlman 1988). The Stallings instrument generates robust quantitative data
on the interaction of teachers and students in the classroom, with a high degree of inter-rater re-
liability (0.8 or higher) among observers with relatively limited training, which makes it suitable
for large-scale samples in developing country settings. (Jukes 2006; Abadzi 2007; DeStefano et
2010; Schuh-Moore et 2010). The instrument is language- and curriculum-neutral, so results are
directly comparable across different types of schools and country contexts, and a growing body of
comparative country data from the United States and developing countries is available.

The Stallings instrument generates quantitative measures—at the classroom, school, and school
system level—of four main variables:
  •	 Teachers’ use of instructional time
  •	 Teachers’ use of materials, including Information Communication Technology
  •	 Core pedagogical practices
  •	 Teachers’ ability to keep students engaged

Key features of the Stallings instrument make it well-suited to large-scale use in developing coun-
try contexts. However, several factors need to be borne in mind when interpreting its results.
First, there is a clear potential for Hawthorne effects, as teachers are aware of the observer (and
sometimes pair of observers) physically present in the classroom—unlike observation methods
that place a video camera in the classroom for extended periods so as to minimize these effects.
One operating assumption, therefore, is that Stallings observations capture teachers’ performing
at their very best—or production possibility frontier—which is in fact useful to measure.

A second issue is the potential noisiness of the variables being measured; if the same teacher were
observed on different days or with different student sections on the same day or with a differ-


WHY OBSERVE CLASSROOMS USING THE STALLINGS METHOD? 	                                                   5
     ent cohort of students the following year, how consistent would the measured performance be?
     Initial studies in the United States called for visits to each classroom on two different days. To
     lower costs, the protocol followed by the World Bank prioritizes observing large cross-sections of
     classrooms—on average, five different classrooms in each school over the course of a single school
     day—rather than repeat visits to the same schools and classrooms. Results are not assumed to be
     valid for individual teachers, and the World Bank research protocol preserves the anonymity of
     individual teachers. But the method generates robust, representative results at the school, region,
     and school system level.

     A third issue is the non-random assignment of teachers to classes in most of the school systems
     observed. Even when students are not explicitly ability-tracked, classroom assignment rules may
     de facto result in some teachers facing much more gifted or docile students than others. Thus,
     when we evaluate the correlations between teacher practices and student learning, we cannot be
     sure of the direction of causality. Are students learning more because their teachers are managing
     the classroom better? Or are teachers able to manage the classroom better because their students
     are more motivated?

     Finally, what makes the Stallings instrument versatile and robust across different grades, subjects,
     languages, and countries is that it does not try to measure the content of what is being taught—ei-
     ther the depth or sophistication of the curriculum content itself or the teacher’s mastery of that
     content. Two sixth grade classrooms in different countries could appear identical in terms of the
     classroom dynamics measured by the Stallings instrument, even though one is teaching a much
     higher level of science content than the other. Similarly, a teacher’s practice may look highly in-
     teractive, while he or she is making factual errors that are not captured in the Stallings data.
     Therefore, it is clear that the dimensions of classroom practice captured by the Stallings instru-
     ment are not a complete measure of the quality of teacher-student interaction and cannot be ex-
     pected to explain all of the variance in teacher effectiveness (whether measured as value-added
     learning gains or average student learning performance) across different classrooms. However,
     studies using the Stallings instrument to date have established that the four main dimensions of
     teacher practice that are captured show relatively consistent correlations with student learning
     results, both in cross-sectional and value-added learning analysis (Bruns and Luque 2014).

     The simplicity and robustness of the data generated by Stallings classroom observation studies
     have contributed to its influence with policymakers. Several Latin American countries have insti-
     tutionalized annual Stallings observations in a representative sample of schools in order to track
     progress in raising teachers’ classroom effectiveness; the Stallings approach has had an impact
     on the design of in-service training programs for teachers and school directors in virtually every
     country that has carried these observations out; it has stimulated changes in the way teachers are
     screened pre-employment in some systems; and it is increasingly being used in impact evalua-
     tions of programs and policies aimed at raising teacher effectiveness.

     Use of the Stallings instrument in more than seven countries in the Latin America and the Carib-
     bean region in recent years has generated a global database of more than 20,000 different class-
     room observations in more than 3,600 schools. A public use online database is being created on
     the World Bank/SIEF (Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund) website. These data provide valuable
     reference benchmarks for any country or education system that uses the Stallings instrument
     following the protocol outlined in this guide.




6	                                                               User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
Observer Protocol




1.	 Introduction to the School Director. On arrival at the school, you should contact the school
    principal, introduce yourself, and give a brief explanation of the study. You should empha-
    size that the observations are for research only. There are no consequences for any teacher
    or school that is observed. Teachers remain anonymous; neither their names nor any other
    identifying characteristics are noted. The ultimate objective is to identify effective teaching
    practices that can be shared across classrooms and schools.

2.	 Director’s Questionnaire. It is useful to collect complementary information about the school
    from the school director. A paper questionnaire may be left with the director to fill out while
    you are observing classes. But it is usually preferable to fill out the questionnaire (wheth-
    er paper or tablet-based) yourself in a separate interview. Specific questions for directors
    should be identified by the research team before the school visits, but an example of a Direc-
    tor's survey is included in Appendix 1.

3.	 Schedule of Classes and Substitute Classes. Observers or observer teams typically spend
    at least one full day at each school, to observe a maximum number of different teachers. An
    hourly schedule of classes to be observed should be provided to each observer in advance of
    the visit. Classes should be identified by subject, grade, section, class code (if available), and
    room number. For each class hour, there should be 1 to 2 acceptable substitute classrooms
    identified, in case the scheduled class is not operating normally (for example, a test is being
    administered) or the regular teacher is absent. It is preferable to concentrate observations on
    the school’s regular teachers.

4.	 Arrival in the classroom. You should arrive in the classroom you are scheduled to observe
    before the scheduled class time. Introduce yourself quickly to the teacher and inform hime
    or her that this observation is part of a research study on classroom dynamics in a randomly
    selected sample of schools and not an evaluation or monitoring of the teacher’s performance.
    Assure teachers that the classrooms to be observed have all been selected randomly and indi-
    vidual teachers will remain anonymous. Finish the conversation with the teacher before the
    official class starting time.




OBSERVER PROTOCOL 	                                                                                      7
     5.	 Preparatory work: Record the exact observation times and school background informa-
         tion. Come prepared with your tablet fully charged and one blank worksheet for each classroom
         you will observe. Find a seat at the back of the classroom where you can have a good view of the
         entire classroom without disturbing the students. There are two things that are helpful to pre-
         pare before you begin your observations, and in advance of arriving in the classroom if possible.

         First, in the boxes in the upper right corner of your worksheet, fill in the exact times at which
         you will make your observations in that class, based on the official class start time. How to do
         this is explained in more detail in Section 4 of this manual. Second, fill in basic information
         about the school and class that is requested on the first five screens. How to do this is ex-
         plained in more detail in Section 3 of this manual. You will find it is helpful to fill in as much
         of this information as possible before arriving at your first classroom!

     6.	 First observation. Allow three minutes to pass after the bell rings (or the official start time
         of the class) before you make your first observation. Then, scan the classroom for 15 seconds,
         starting with the teacher. How to do this is explained in more detail in Section 4.

     7.	 Write notes on your paper worksheet first. This will be a backup in case you have any trou-
         ble with the tablet. It will also help you in answering the questions on the tablet.

     8.	 Coding your observation. When you start coding your observation on the tablet, the screens
         will guide you through six or seven different questions about what you saw the teacher and
         students doing during the 15 seconds of your observation. Answer all the questions on the
         tablet. You must fill in all blanks or you cannot advance to the next screen.

     9.	 After you have answered all the questions (which means that the observation has been ful-
         ly coded), you reach a screen that asks you to write on the tablet (in words) what you saw
         at the moment of observation. This keeps an electronic record of what you wrote on your
         worksheet—which makes it more efficient to store this information. Use the keyboard on the
         tablet to write what you saw. Normally, you will have enough time to complete this before the
         next observation. If you cannot finish, you can leave this section incomplete on the tablet and
         come back to it later. (Note: you must enter at least some text in this section, such as “xxx,” or
         the tablet will not let you advance to the next screen.)

     10.	 Your highest priority is to make each observation at the exact, correct time. Do not wor-
          ry if you have not finished entering a word description of what you saw on the tablet if it is
          time for the next observation. Continue onto the next observation. If you have filled out your
          worksheet correctly, you will always be able to go back later and enter the short description
          (usually a maximum of 1-2 sentences) of what you saw.

     11.	 Description of the Classroom. While you are getting settled in the classroom and making
          observations, pay attention to the facilities and classroom materials. What kinds of equip-
          ment does the classroom have? (For example, blackboard, whiteboard, digital projectors, lap-
          tops, etc.) What is on the walls? (For example, posters, art work, maps) What are the students
          wearing? (Do they all have uniforms? Shoes? Backpacks?) What learning materials do the
          students have? (Do they all have textbooks? Workbooks? Pens and pencils? Tablets? Calcu-
          lators?) This kind of descriptive information can provide useful correlates of the classroom
          dynamics data.

     12.	 Since you will not have much time before your first observation, you will be asked to answer


8	                                                                User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
   these classroom description questions at the END of the class—after you have completed
   your 10 observations—when you will have more time. You will also be asked to make a final
   count of the number of students in the classroom, to make sure that students who arrived late
   are counted. See Appendix 2 for the specific questions asked.

13.	 Thank the teacher. After you have finished your coding and the class period has ended,
     quickly thank the teacher and proceed to the next classroom you are to observe.




OBSERVER PROTOCOL 	                                                                                9
      Using the Tablet




      1.	 Turn on the tablet.

      2.	 Touch the ODK Collect icon on the home page.

      3.	 Choose the first option Fill Blank Form.

      4.	Choose Stallings Observation System.

      5.	 The first page you will see is the Observer Protocol, as a reminder.

      6.	 The next page is Background Data. It is helpful if you can have this information filled in
          BEFORE you arrive at your first classroom. This information includes:
          a.	 NAME OF OBSERVER
          b.	 OBSERVER CODE
          c.	 DATE OF OBSERVATION
          d.	 SCHOOL NAME
          e.	 SCHOOL CODE
          f.	 CLASSROOM CODE
          g.	 SHIFT OBSERVED: Morning or Afternoon
          h.	 WAS THE REGULAR TEACHER PRESENT? Yes/No
          	 i. IF THE REGULAR TEACHER WAS ABSENT, WAS THERE A SUBSTITUTE
                TEACHER? Yes/No
          j.	 GRADE (1-8)
          k.	 SUBJECT (Language, Math, Science, … Other)
          l.	 NUMBER OF STUDENTS: It will ask you to count the boys and girls separately.

      7.	 The next screen is Schedule. You are asked to note the official start time and end time of the
          class. Please use military notation for this (as in 0000 to 2400 for showing time).

      8.	 The next screen is Level: Pre-school/Primary/Secondary

      9.	 The next screen is Grade: 1-8




10	                                                              User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
10.	 The next screen is Subject Matter: Language/Math/Biology/Physics/Chemistry/History/
     Geography/Other

11.	 How many students are present in the classroom? Count the Boys and Girls separately.

12.	 The next screen is: Observation 1.
     a.	 Class time: Use military notation to note the exact time of your first observation.
         (This time should already be written in the top right corner of your worksheet.)
     b.	 Starting with the teacher, please observe the classroom for 15 seconds, then record
         your observation.

13.	 Follow the same process for all 10 observations.

14.	 Description of the Classroom. After you complete the 10 observations, fill in the questions
     about a description of the classroom. These are:
     a.	 Is there student work on the walls? Yes/No/NA
     b.	 How many students have a textbook or workbook? Entire class/More than half/Less
         than half/No one/NA
     c.	 How many students have a notebook, pencil, pen, or other writing material? Entire
         class/More than half/Less than half/No one/NA
     d.	 How many students are wearing uniforms? Entire class/More than half/Less than half/
         No one/NA

15.	 Materials
     a.	 Does the teacher have the following materials? (You may select more than one option.)
         Blackboard/whiteboard; Chalk/markers; Textbook; Teaching guide; Laptop; Digital
         whiteboard; LCD projector; Television; Audio equipment
     b.	 Are the following materials available for children in the classroom? (You may select
         more than one option.) Science equipment; Maps; Blocks; Toys; Games; None of the
         above




USING THE TABLET 	                                                                                 11
      Using the Stallings Method



      1.	 What does the classroom snapshot method do?
      	 The classroom snapshot records the activities of the teacher and students, and the materials
          being used in the classroom, at 10 separate instances throughout a class period.

      2. 	 Why is it called the classroom snapshot?
      	 The method makes a record of the people and activities in a classroom at a single moment in
           time as if they were being photographed, hence the word “snapshot." Each “snapshot” obser-
           vation lasts for 15 seconds.

      3. 	 What is recording or coding an observation?
      	 Recording (or coding) an observation is the process of observing the classroom and answer-
           ing a series of detailed questions on the tablet about what you saw. You respond to each ques-
           tion by selecting one of the multiple-choice options and filling in the circle in front of that
           option. When you have answered all the questions about what you saw during that observa-
           tion, you will have recorded or coded the observation. It will generally take you less than one
           minute to complete all the questions for each “snapshot,” or to complete the coding for that
           observation.



      Timing The Observations

         DURATION OF
          THE CLASS            1       2       3      4       5        6        7        8       9        10
          (MINUTES)


               30              3       4       7      10      13       16       19      22       25       28

               40              3       7      11      15      19       23      27       31       35       39

               50              3       8      13      18      23       28      33       38       43       48

               60              3       9      15      21      27       33      39       45       51       57

               70              3       10     17      24      31       38      45       52       59       66

               80              3       11     19      27      35       43       51      59       67       75

               90              3       12     21      30      39       48      57       66       75       84

               120             3       15     27      39      51       64      75       87       99       111




12	                                                                User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
4.	 The strength of the Stallings method is that it is a way of converting the qualitative activ-
    ities and interactions among a teacher and students that occur during a class into robust
    quantitative data on teachers’ instructional practice and students’ engagement. Since all
    Stallings variables are expressed as a share of class time, it is very important to keep close
    track of time and to complete your observations at exact intervals. To determine the exact
    time for each observation, divide the total class time by 10. For example, in a 50-minute class,
    you will take a snapshot every 5 minutes for a total of 10 snapshots. In a 90-minute class, your
    observations will be 9 minutes apart, etc.

Step 1: To help you in coding on the tablet, you will have a one page paper worksheet where you
can make brief written notes about what you observe at the exact moment of each observation.
Each worksheet is divided into 10 sections, to provide a few lines of space for notes about each of
your 10 observations. In each of these 10 sections, there is a box in the upper right corner for you
to write the time of each observation.

Step 2: Use the table above to determine the exact time at which you will make each observation.
For example, for a 50-minute class that starts at 9:00 AM, your observations will be at 9:03, 9:08,
9:13, 9:18, 9:23, etc. Write these times in the boxes in the upper right corner of each of the 10 sec-
tions of your worksheet. This will help you keep track of the time.

Step 3: You make the first observation exactly three minutes after the official start time of the
class. Note that this is the procedure no matter how long the class is. Note also that you must
make an observation at this time, even if the teacher and students are not yet in the room or the
teacher has not yet started to teach.

Step 4: Write on your worksheet first. Immediately after you finish your observation, write a
few lines of notes on your worksheet about what you saw.

Step 5: Code the observation on your tablet. When you have completed your notes, begin an-
swering the questions on the tablet about that observation. There are six to eight different ques-
tions about each observation (depending on what the teacher and students are doing). You will
have plenty of time to answer all of them.

After you have answered the questions, the tablet asks you to copy the notes you wrote on your
worksheet in electronic form on the tablet. This makes it possible to store this information long
term. It is sometimes frustrating to type on the tablet keyboard. Do not worry if you cannot finish
transcribing your notes before it is time for your next observation—you will have time to com-
plete this later. The priority must be to go on to your next observation at the correct time.

Step 6: Continue to make observations at the appropriate times until you complete and code all
10 observations. (Note: The interval between your final observation and the end of the class will
be shorter than the other intervals.)

Step 7: After you have completed all 10 observations, complete Description of the Classroom
questions. The tablet also asks you for a final count of the number of girls and boys in the class-
room. Answer these questions as quickly as you can, so that you are ready to move to the next
classroom.




USING THE STALLINGS METHOD 	                                                                             13
      How to Record an Observation
      When it is time to start your observation, first locate the teacher, and then scan the classroom
      going clockwise around the room. Remember always to begin by locating the teacher. Then
      continue scanning the room and observing the activities and materials of all students until you
      have observed the entire classroom. In many cases, some groups of students will be engaged in
      activities that are different from the activity the teacher is leading. Be careful to note all these on
      your worksheet.

                                                     The classroom “snapshot”
                                                     Observing a classroom:
                                                      •	 Divide the total class time by 10 to determine
                                                          the interval between observations. For a 50-
                                                          minute class 50/10 = 5, meaning an observa-
                                                          tion every 5 minutes.
                                                      •	 Wait 3 minutes after the official start time of
                                                          the class for the first observation.
                                                      •	 Starting with the teacher, scan the classroom
                                                          in a circular direction to note what activity
                                                          the teacher is leading and what the students
                                                          are doing,
                                                      •	 After 15 seconds, write what you observed
                                                          on your worksheet and then code it on the
                                                          tablet.
                                                      •	 Repeat this 10 times during the class at regu-
                                                          lar intervals,




      After 15 seconds, make your notes on the worksheet about what you saw. Immediately after writ-
      ing your notes, begin answering the questions on the tablet.

      The first screen asks: What is the teacher doing? Select ONE of the activities on the list. You
      must select one. At any given moment, the teacher can only be doing one activity.

      The second screen asks: What material is the teacher using for the activity? Select ONE of the
      materials on the list provided.

      The second screen also asks: How many students are engaged in the activity with the teacher?
      Select ONE of the options: One; a Small group (5 or fewer students); a Large group (6 or more
      students); All

      The third screen asks: For students NOT engaged with the teacher, what are they doing?
      (Choose all that apply.) You may select more than one answer here, as there can be multiple small
      or large groups of students involved in distinct activities, such as texting, doing homework, read-
      ing, chatting with other students, looking out the window, or sleeping.




14	                                                                User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
For each activity that you observed students engaged in, there will be subsequent screens asking:
What materials are students using in the activity? (choose all that apply) and How many stu-
dents are using material (xx) in activity (xx)? Here again the options are: One; a Small group;
a Large group; and All

Make sure that you code only what happened at the exact moment of the observation. For
example, if after 6 seconds, the teacher changes the activity, you will not change what you coded
before. Never forget that the first step is to locate the teacher and the first seconds of the obser-
vation focus on what the teacher is doing at that instant.

The following sections of this manual discuss the different coding options in more detail, and
provide practice in making important distinctions about the activities going on in the classroom
and the materials being used.




USING THE STALLINGS METHOD 	                                                                            15
Classroom Materials
and Group Size
Descriptions of the materials used in the classroom snapshot
1.	 No Material: No material of any kind is being used in the classroom at that moment.

2. 	 Textbook: This category refers to any printed materials that students do not write in directly.
     This category includes textbooks, reading books, and magazines. This can also include pho-
     tocopies or newspapers.

3. 	 Notebook and writing implements: This category refers to any materials that students work
     with and write in. For example: notebooks, workbooks, worksheets, journals, slates, or blank
     sheets of paper on which students work on problems, write answers, or write essays and sto-
     ries. This category also includes writing materials such as pencils, crayons, or erasers.

4. 	 Blackboard/whiteboard: Blackboard, chalkboard, or whiteboard.

5. 	 Learning aids: This category includes all kinds of visual aids and manipulatives that teachers
     use to help students understand. Learning aids include maps, charts, photos, posters, and
     flipcharts. Manipulatives include materials used in science experiments, rulers, compasses,
     currency, calculators, blocks, flash cards, sticks, or human bodies. Note that electronic calcu-
     lators are coded as learning aids and not ICT.

6. 	 ICT: This category includes electronic learning aids such as digital whiteboards, projectors,
     radios, televisions, videos, computers, laptops, tablets, and smart phones being used for in-
     structional purposes. Note that digital whiteboards are coded as ICT, even if teachers use
     them exactly the way they would use a traditional blackboard. Note that smart phones are
     only considered ICT if the TEACHER is using them for instruction—not if the students are
     texting or playing games.

7. 	 Cooperative activity and shared materials: The Stallings method gives priority to measur-
     ing teachers’ use of cooperative, or group, learning activities. A cooperative activity is one
     where a pair of students or a group of students is working together, and there is only one
     product of their work—a group product: for example, a map they all help fill in, or a single re-
     port that they write and present together. In this case, you should code “cooperative activity
     and shared materials” as the material used. If “cooperative” is recorded, no other material
     should be noted. Note: If students are sitting in groups, but they are each working on individ-
     ual worksheets, it is not considered a cooperative activity.



Definitions of group size
1. 	 Small group: Five or fewer students
 2. 	 Large group: Six or more students


CLASSROOM MATERIALS AND GROUP SIZE 	                                                                    17
      Classroom Activities

      Activities 1-6 represent instructional activities.


      ACTIVITY 1: READING OUT LOUD
       The teacher or one or more students are reading aloud. They may be reading from a textbook,
      the blackboard, their own writing, or a handout. The teacher or student may be reading out loud
      while the remaining students follow along in their own books.

      Question: What is the teacher doing? Choose Reading out loud if:
       •	 The teacher is reading out loud.
       •	 A student is reading out loud.
       •	 A group of students is reading in unison.
       •	 ALL the students in the class are reading in unison .

      Example
      The teacher is reading the class a story from a picture book. She is pointing to the pictures as she
      reads. All of the students are listening intently.

       	 What is the teacher doing? Reading out loud




18	                                                               User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
  	 What material is the teacher using for the activity? Textbooks
  	 How many students are engaged in the activity with the teacher? All




 ACTIVITY 2: DEMONSTRATION/LECTURE
 The teacher, radio, television, or some other form of media is informing, explaining, or demon-
 strating academic content to the students. Generally, this category is used when the teacher is
 presenting new academic content to the students (i.e. the activity is teacher-led)—although a stu-
 dent or group of students making a presentation to the class would also fall into this category.

 Question: What is the teacher doing? Choose Demonstration/Lecture if:
  •	 The teacher is lecturing to the class.
  •	 The teacher is demonstrating something—a science experiment, a math problem, how to
      pronounce a word.
  •	 The teacher is singing a new song.
  •	 The teacher is reviewing material that was taught in a previous class.
  •	 A student or group of students is making a presentation and the teacher is listening. (In
      this case, the teacher is considered to be leading the activity and the students are coded as
      engaged with the teacher.)
  •	 A student or group of students is making a presentation and taking the role of the teach-
      er, but the teacher is not present. (In this case, select Teacher Out of Classroom and code
      what the students are doing in the next series of questions.)

 Example
 The teacher is explaining a history lesson to a class of 40 students. She is using a map to point to
 regions as she describes them. The entire class is listening to her explanation.


CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	19
      	 What is the teacher doing? Locate the teacher. She is presenting a history lesson to the
        students and using the map as an aid. Choose: Demonstration/Lecture




      	 What material is the teacher using? She is using the map. Choose: Learning aids
      	 How many students are engaged in the activity with the teacher? All students are listening to
        the teacher. Choose: All




20	                                                            User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
 ACTIVITY 3: QUESTION AND ANSWER/DISCUSSION
 The teacher is asking or answering questions or exchanging ideas with the students about an
 academic topic.

 Question: What is the teacher doing? Choose Question and Answer/Discussion if:
  •	 The teacher is asking the students questions.
  •	 A student is asking the teacher a question.
  •	 A student is asking another student a question (or responding to another student’s ques-
      tion).
  •	 The students are debating a topic suggested by the teacher.
  •	 The teacher is exchanging ideas with the students.

 DO NOT code this if:
  •	 The students are asking questions about a non-academic subject (such as the date that
     homework papers are due, or what will be served for lunch).
  •	 Questions that do not relate to the academic topic being studied are coded under Class-
     room Management or Social interaction as discussed later.

 Example
 The class is divided into six groups of five students each. The groups are working on a group
 assignment to create a map of the countries in Latin America. Students are exchanging ideas on
 what to include, but the product will be one map per group. The teacher is in one corner of the
 room discussing a math problem with one student at his desk who is not involved in any of the
 groups. They are looking at the student’s notebook.

  	 What is the teacher doing? Locate the teacher. She is in the corner, working with a single stu-
    dent, asking the student questions about a math problem. Choose: Question and Answer/
    Discussion




CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	21
       	 What material is the teacher using? She is using the student’s notebook. Choose: Notebook/
         writing implement
       	 How many students are engaged in the activity the teacher is leading? Only one student is
         working directly with the teacher at that moment. Choose: One




      Note that your scan of the classroom has also observed the other students in the room engaged in
      a different academic activity. This must also be recorded, as it is part of the overall class learning
      activities.
       	 For students NOT engaged with the teacher, what are they doing? (Choose all that apply.)
         The other students, working in groups, are also engaged in question and answer/discussion.
         Choose: Question and Answer/Discussion




22	                                                                User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
  	 What materials are these students using? The students are working in small groups on an ac-
    tivity with a joint (group) product. This is a cooperative learning activity. Choose: Cooperative
    activity and shared materials




  	 How many students are cooperative in the Question and Answer/Discussion activity? A large
    group (6 or more students). Choose: Large group




 ACTIVITY 4: PRACTICE AND DRILLING
 Practice and drilling include activities that are undertaken with the objective of memorizing ma-
 terial such as multiplication tables, vocabulary, spelling words, poems, or songs. The activities
 involve repetition with the main goal being to simply memorize the information.

 Question: What is the teacher doing? Choose Practice and Drilling if:
  •	 The teacher is leading practice—calling out multiplication problems or vocabulary and
      having the students repeat it.
  •	 Two or more students are practicing addition facts, spellings words, the alphabet, or any
      other rote learning activity.
  •	 Students are singing a song they already know.


CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	23
        •	   Pay close attention to whether the students are repeating or reading. If the students are
             repeating after the teacher, code this as practice/drill; if they are reading along with the
             teacher, code this as Reading Out Loud.
        •	   Keep in mind that this activity is about memorizing information—it is a rote activity. If a
             student is actually solving a multiplication problem, it should be coded as Question and
             Answer. If students are simply memorizing and repeating multiplication tables, code that
             as Practice and Drilling.
        •	   If students stand at their desks to do a routine physical activity, such as stretching their
             arms or jumping up and down, code this as Practice and Drilling.

      Example
      The teacher is in the front of the class and she is pointing to the blackboard. She is reading out
      loud the multiplication table for the number 2 and asking the class to repeat the table multiple
      times. The entire class repeats after her.

       	 What is the teacher doing? She is in front of the class and leading the repetition of the times
         table for two that is written on the blackboard. Choose: Practice and Drilling




       	 What material is the teacher using? She is using the blackboard. Choose: Blackboard/
         whiteboard

       	 How many students are engaged in the activity with the teacher? The whole class is chanting
         the drill in unison. Choose: All




24	                                                               User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
 ACTIVITY 5: ASSIGNMENT/CLASS WORK
 One or more students are writing papers, solving problems on the blackboard, reading silently at
 their desks, or working on a test or a quiz.

 Question: What is the teacher doing? Code Assignment/Class Work if:
  •	 The teacher has assigned the students to work on an exercise in their workbooks.
  •	 The teacher has asked the students to solve several math problems written on the black-
      board.
  •	 The teacher is moving around the room monitoring the students as they write an essay.
  •	 The students are taking a written test or quiz. Please note in your written comments if a
      test or quiz was administered.

 DO NOT code the following activities as Assignment/Class Work if:
  •	 A student is reading a comic book under his desk while other students work on problems
     in their workbook.
  •	 A student is texting while other students are working on a worksheet.

 Example
 The teacher is watching a student solve a math problem on the blackboard. The other students
 are all observing the student at the blackboard.




CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	25
      	 What is the teacher doing? The teacher is monitoring the student solving the problem on the
        board. Choose: Assignment/Class Work




      	 What material is the teacher using for this activity? Choose: Blackboard/whiteboard

      	 How many students is the teacher engaging in this activity? Even though only one student is
        actively solving the problem at the blackboard, all the other students are watching this student
        and therefore engaged in the same learning activity. Choose: All




26	                                                             User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
 ACTIVITY 6: COPYING
 Students are copying from the blackboard. The primary purpose of the activity is to transfer the
 text on the board verbatim to the students’ notebooks or paper.

 Question: What is the teacher doing? Code Copying if:
  •	 The teacher is copying something onto the blackboard (from a teachers’ manual, text-
      book, or other material) that the students are expected to copy.
  •	 Students are copying something that the teacher has written on the blackboard or copy-
      ing something from a book or handout. (Note that even though the students are doing the
      copying, the teacher is leading the activity the students are engaged in.)
  •	 The teacher is dictating a passage and the students are copying down what they hear.
  •	 The teacher is monitoring students while they are copying from the blackboard.
  •	 If some students have finished copying math problems or questions from the blackboard
      and are beginning to solve the problems or answer the questions, code these students as
      engaged in Activity 5 Assignment/Class Work. If other students are continuing to copy
      the material from the blackboard, code these students as Copying. In this situation, you
      need to make a judgment about which activity the teacher is leading: At the exact moment
      you began the observation, was the teacher more engaged in monitoring the students who
      are beginning to solve the problems or was the teacher continuing to monitor those stu-
      dents who are still copying? That will determine how you code the teacher.
  •	 Always code the material used by the teacher to teach the lesson. For example, if the
      teacher is writing a text on the blackboard while the students are copying in their note-
      books, code the teacher as copying and the blackboard as the material being used (since it
      is what the teacher is using in the process of teaching the students). If the teacher is copy-
      ing material from her own notes or manual onto the blackboard, still select the blackboard
      as the material being used, because it is what the teacher is using to teach the students.

 DO NOT code Copying if:
  •	 The instructions or information the teacher is writing on the blackboard are not related to
     academic work (for example, the date and time of the school play). In this case, the teach-
     er is engaged in Classroom Management (described in a later section). Use Copying for
     the teacher only if the teacher is writing lesson-related material on the board, or monitor-
     ing the students while they copy lesson-related material.

 Example
 The teacher monitors the students as they copy a text from the blackboard into their notebooks.

  	 What is the teacher doing? She is monitoring the class, in the activity of copying.
    Choose: Copying




CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	27
      	 What material is the teacher using? Choose: Blackboard/whiteboard

      	 How many students is the teacher engaging in this activity? Choose: All




28	                                                           User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
 Activites 7-10 are not considered instructional activities. They are classroom
 management.


 ACTIVITY 7: VERBAL INSTRUCTION
 You can ignore this category. It is no longer used.



 ACTIVITY 8: DISCIPLINE
 One or more students are being reprimanded for their behavior, being sent out of the room for
 disciplinary reasons, or otherwise being punished for their behavior.

 Question: What is the teacher doing? Code Discipline if:
  •	 The teacher is reprimanding one or more students: “Marina, stop talking to your partner”,
      or “Roberto, you are late for class again.”
  •	 The teacher is giving behavioral commands or reprimands to the whole class such as:
      “Everyone sit down and be quiet now!” or “I don’t want to see anyone with their phone on
      their desk,” or “One at a time, as you line up for lunch.”
  •	 The teacher is sending a student out of the room or to sit in a corner, as punishment for
      bad behavior.
  •	 The teacher hits or slaps a student as discipline (corporal punishment). If this occurs,
      please describe it in your written notes.

 NOTE: This code does not require identifying any material used by the teacher.

 Example
 The teacher is reprimanding the entire class for not learning their French homework. The stu-
 dents are all sitting sullenly with their heads bowed in shame.

  	 What is the teacher doing? He is reprimanding the class. Choose: Discipline




CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	29
       	 How many students are engaged in the activity with the teacher? Choose: All




      ACTIVITY 9: CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT WITH STUDENTS
      The teacher and students are engaged in activities of an organizational or management nature:
      taking attendance, passing out papers, preparing to leave.

      Question: What is the teacher doing? Choose Classroom management with Students if:
       •	 The teacher is engaged in an administrative activity and one or more students are also
           involved.
       •	 The teacher is taking attendance and the students are responding as their names are
           called.
       •	 The teacher is handing out papers that the students are helping to distribute.
       •	 The teacher is giving instructions on HOW a homework assignment should be completed
           or the due date. (Note: The teacher is not answering questions about the substance of the
           assignment.)
       •	 The teacher asks two students to put away the textbooks.
       •	 The teacher asks a student to clean off the blackboard.
       •	 The teacher is out of the classroom, but the students are passing out papers or collecting
           books. In this case, the teacher will be coded as out of the classroom, and the next prompt
           will be “For students not engaged with the teacher, what are they doing?” The response is:
           Classroom Management with Students. This is the activity the teacher launched with the
           students, even though he or she is not there.

      NOTE: This activity does not require identifying which material the teacher is using.

      Example
      The teacher is passing out papers and the students are helping.




30	                                                               User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
  	 What is the teacher doing? She is distributing papers with the students. Choose: Classroom
    Management with Students




  	 How many students are engaged in the activity with the teacher? Choose: All




CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	31
      ACTIVITY 10: CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT ALONE
      The teacher alone is involved in classroom management: passing out papers, changing activities,
      putting away materials, preparing to leave.

      Question: What is the teacher doing? Choose Classroom Management Alone if:
       •	 The teacher is engaged in an administrative activity and the students are not involved.
       •	 The teacher is writing the date and lesson title on the board (but not academic material)
           while the students sit and wait.
       •	 The teacher is cleaning the blackboard.
       •	 The teacher is sitting at a desk grading papers, while the students work on an assignment.
       •	 The teacher is setting up an LCD projector, turning on a computer, or turning off and
           putting away equipment.

      Example
      The teacher is putting away science materials in a cabinet in the corner of the room. The students
      are all chatting amongst themselves. One girl is looking out the window.

       	 What is the teacher doing? She is putting away the science materials by herself.
      Choose: Classroom Management Alone




32	                                                             User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
 Note: Since the students are not engaged in the activity the teacher is leading, the next question
 will be:
  	 For students NOT engaged with the teacher, what are they doing? (Choose all that apply)
 	 Most of the students are talking amongst themselves, but one girl is looking out the window.
     Choose: Social Interaction and Students Not Engaged




 ➢	
   	 How many students are engaged in social interaction? Choose: Large group




  	 How many students are not engaged? Choose: One




CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	33
      Activities 11, 12, and 13 are neither instructional activities nor classroom
      management. They are considered “Off-task” activities for teachers.



      ACTIVITY 11: TEACHER IN SOCIAL INTERACTION WITH STUDENTS
      Two or more students are talking or laughing about non-academic activities. Both verbal and
      non-verbal (students passing notes to each other, or looking at a magazine together) interactions
      are included in this category. This category also covers disruptive activities such as students mov-
      ing around the classroom, shouting, shoving, etc.

      What is essential is that there is a non-academic interaction between at least two students.
      If the students are discussing a class assignment, do not code this as Social Interaction. Code this
      as Question and Answer/Discussion.

      If the teacher is interacting socially with the students, use this code. If this happens during class
      time, it is considered “off-task” behavior for the teacher.

      Question: What is the teacher doing? Choose Social Interaction between Teacher and
      Students if:
        •	 The teacher is chatting with the students about non-academic topics.
        •	 The teacher is listening to the students chat about non-academic topics.

      Example
      It is near the end of class and the teacher has finished describing the homework assignment for
      the next day. The students, who know that she is going to be married soon, begin asking questions
      about the wedding plans. The teacher spends a few minutes describing the plans. The students
      are listening and chatting.

       	 What is the teacher doing? She is chatting with the students about a non-academic matter.
         Choose Social Interaction between Teacher and Students.




34	                                                               User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
  	 How many students are engaged with the teacher in this activity? Choose All




 ACTIVITY 12: TEACHER IN SOCIAL INTERACTION WITH ANOTHER
 ADULT OR TEACHER NOT INVOLVED
 The teacher and another person (parents/visitor/community members/another teacher) are in-
 teracting. The teacher is in the classroom but not involved in any academic activity and is not
 engaged with the students.

 Question: What is the teacher doing? Choose Social Interaction with another adult or
 Teacher Not Involved if:
   •	 The teacher is not working with or talking to any of the students.
   •	 The teacher is not engaged in any visible classroom management activities (such as grad-
      ing papers, preparing a lesson).
   •	 The teacher is looking out the window, using a cell phone, or reading from a book.



CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	35
        •	   The teacher is talking to a visitor at the door of the classroom (Note: Even if the teacher
             is talking to a parent about the academic performance of a student in the class or talking
             to another teacher about an academic topic, such as the correct answer to a test question,
             code the teacher as in Social Interaction with another adult or Teacher Not Involved
             because the teacher is not engaged with any of his students at that moment.)

      Example
      The teacher is at the door of the classroom talking with the school secretary about a meeting with
      the newly appointed school director. The students are copying the day’s lesson from the black-
      board in their notebooks.

       	 What is the teacher doing? She is talking with another adult about a subject not related to the
         class. Choose Social Interaction with another adult or Teacher Not Involved




      Because the teacher is not involved with any students, the next question will be:

       	 For students not engaged with the teacher, what are they doing? Choose Copying




36	                                                              User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
  	 What materials are students using in the copying activity? Choose Notebooks




  	 How many students are engaged in copying with their notebooks? Choose All




CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	37
      ACTIVITY 13: TEACHER OUT OF THE CLASSROOM
      The teacher is not present in the room at the moment of your observation.

      Question: What is the teacher doing? Choose Teacher out of the classroom if:
       •	 The teacher has not yet arrived, but the official class hour has begun and there are stu-
           dents in the classroom.
       •	 The teacher has left the room to go get materials.
       •	 The teacher has dismissed the class early and left the room, although the official class
           time is not over.
       •	 The teacher has stepped into the hall to talk to the principal or a parent (and is out of the
           classroom and out of view).

      Example
      The teacher left the room to go get some chalk. The students are all chatting amongst themselves.

       	 What is the teacher doing? He left the classroom to get materials. Choose Teacher Out of
         Classroom




38	                                                              User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
  	 For students NOT engaged with the teacher, what are they doing? Choose Social Interaction




  	 How many students are engaged in Social Interaction? Choose: All




 ACTIVITY 14: STUDENT(S) NOT ENGAGED
 This category is used when one or more students are visibly not engaged in activity with the
 teacher or with other students. For example, if a student is staring out the window, resting his
 or her head on the desk, sleeping, or doodling on a piece of paper, he or she is uninvolved. This
 category may also be used when students are sitting quietly and waiting for the teacher to begin
 the lesson, or waiting for instructions about what to do next. Students who are walking in or out
 of the classroom for reasons that are unclear should be coded as Student Not Engaged. Students
 who are sent out of the room by the teacher for disciplinary reasons are coded under Discipline.

 NOTE: This category is used for students only. By definition, the teacher will be engaged in another
 activity.

 Example
 The teacher is leading the class in a foreign language drill conjugating verbs. She states the verb
 forms and then asks the class to repeat. The students listen to the teacher’s words and repeat after
 her. Three students walk into the classroom late during the activity.


CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	39
      	 What is the teacher doing? She is leading a drill. The class is repeating after the teacher. Choose
        Practice and Drilling




      	 What material is the teacher using? Choose: No Materials
      	 How many students are engaged in the activity with the teacher? Choose: Large group




40	                                                               User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
	 For students NOT engaged with the teacher, what are they doing? (Choose all that apply.) Three
  students entered the classroom late. Choose: Students Not Engaged




	 How many students are not engaged? Three students. Choose: Small group




CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES 	41
       Analyzing Stallings Data




      In analyzing Stallings data, activities are grouped into four categories: a) Learning Activities b)
      Classroom Management c) Teacher Off-Task and d) Student(s) Off-Task.

      a) Learning Activities:
      	 1.	 Reading Out Loud
      	 2.	Demonstration/Lecture
      	 3.	 Question and Answer/Discussion
      	 4.	 Practice and Drilling
      	 5.	 Assignment/Class Work
      	 6.	Copying

      b) Classroom Management:
      	 7.	 Verbal Instruction (not used)
      	 8.	Discipline
      	 9. 	 Classroom Management with Students
      	 10. 	 Classroom Management Alone

      c) Teacher Off-Task:
      	 11. 	 Social Interaction between Teacher and Students
      	 12. 	 Social Interaction with another Adult/Teacher not Involved
      	 13. 	 Teacher Out of Classroom

      d) Students Off-Task:
      	 14. Discipline
      	 15. Social Interaction
      	 16. Students Not Engaged




42	                                                                      User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
  Coding Practice Examples




  1.	 The teacher gives directions to a group of five pupils. Twenty pupils are idle, and three play
      with their chairs.

  2.	 A group of four students is solving a math problem on the blackboard. The teacher is watch-
      ing them. The rest of the class is solving the same problem on their slates.

  3.	 All students are singing an "alphabet song." The teacher is singing with them.

  4.	 In a science class, the teacher is using a large picture chart to talk about snakes. The entire
      class is listening to the teacher except two students who appear to be looking out the window.

  5.	 The teacher is at her desk and appears to be grading papers. Students are sitting in groups of
      four to five. There are five groups in all. Two groups are working on an assignment at their
      desks; the other three groups are talking and laughing.

  6.	 In a class of 20 students, almost everyone is repeating verb conjugations from the blackboard
      as the teacher points to the writing. One student is staring at you, the observer.

  7.	 The teacher is in front of the class and is giving instructions to students on what to do next.
      All the students are listening to her.

  8.	 Class has begun (according to the time in the class schedule) but the teacher is nowhere in
      sight.

  9.	 The teacher is writing on the blackboard.

  10.	 The teacher is listening to one student, who is standing, read from the blackboard. The other
       students are listening to the student as well.




CODING PRACTICE EXAMPLES 	43
      11.	 The teacher is writing on the blackboard. Fifteen pupils copy in the exercise book and five
           students are not copying because they do not seem to have a pencil.

      12.	 The teacher is explaining to the students the political system of Brazil. He is using a big post-
           er which shows the pictures of different government officials. The majority of the students
           are listening to him. Three students are looking at comic books and four others are talking
           amongst themselves.

      13.	 The teacher is writing a math lesson on the blackboard. Eight students are playing cards in
           one corner. Thirty students are waiting for her to finish writing the lesson.

      14.	 The students are writing an essay in their notebooks. The teacher is reprimanding two stu-
           dents who are not doing their work. One student enters the class late.

      15.	 The teacher is asking a question and pointing to a student to give an answer. The student is
           standing and responding to the question. The rest of the class is listening.

      16.	 In the back of the class, the teacher is speaking with a school administrator about a party.
           Twenty-six students are reading silently. Two students are looking out the window and 11
           students are talking or laughing amongst themselves.

      17.	 The teacher and the school director are talking about the exam. Most of the students are
           reading in their seats. Three students have finished their work and are erasing the black-
           board.

      18.	 The teacher is helping several students do their assignments on worksheets. The rest of the
           students are reading at their seats.

      19.	 The teacher is explaining a math problem. She is using little stones to demonstrate how to do
           addition. All the students are watching her.

      20.	 The teacher is using bottles and water to show how a water filter works. All the students are
           listening except two who are talking to each other.




44	                                                                        User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
Appendix 1: Sample School Director Questionnaire


		                                                PRINCIPAL'S	QUESTIONNAIRE	-	JAMAICA	                                                               		
		                                                   Stallings	Classroom	Observations	                                                               		
		   Dear	Principal,	We	would	like	to	take	the	opportunity	of	this	school	visit	to	solicit	feedback	from	you	about	sector	policies	             		
		   that	affect	your	school.		The	questionnaire	also	includes	several	items	that	are	part	of	an	international	research	effort	to	              		
		   collect	data	on	trust	and	teamwork	at	the	school	level	in	different	countries.		Please	kindly	complete	this	questionnaire	and	             		
		   return	it	to	the	visiting	observer(s)	before	the	end	of	the	school	day.		We	emphasize	that	this	information,	as	well	as	the	               		
     classroom	observation	data,	are	completely	confidential.	Thank	you	for	your	collaboration.		
		                                                                                                                                              		
		                                                                                                                                              		
		 		    		   		     		   		   		   		   		   		   		   		   		   		   		   		   		      		   		   		 		     		 		 		 		    		 		 		      		 		 		
		 School	Name:	 		          		 		     		  		   		 		     		 		      		  		      		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		  		 		 		   		 		 		         		
		 		     		   		    		 		   		 		     		  		   		 		     		 		      		  		      		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		  		 		 		   		 		 		         		
		    School	Code:	     		   		 		     		  		   		 		     		 		      		  		      		      		   		   Date	of	Visit:	   		  		 		 		   		 		 		         		
		 		    		   		    		  		   		 		     		  		   		 		     		 		      		  		      		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		  		 		 		   		 		 		         		
		 1.	How	many	years	have	you	been	the	principal	of	this	school?	                             		   		 		    		 		    		  		 		 		   		 		 		         		
		 		    		   		    		  		   		 		     		  		   		 		     		 		      		  		      		       		  		   		 		    		 		    		  		 		 		   		 		 		         		
		                                                                                     Totally	      Disagree	          Agree	       Totally	        		
   Please	mark	only	one	answer.	                                                      disagree	      more	than	       more	than	      agree	
		                                                                                                     agree	          disagree	                     		
		 2.	My	school’s	results	have	improved	in	the	last	two	years.	                  		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		                                                                               a.	     		   		   		 b.	 		 		      		 c.	 		 		   d.	   		    		   		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 3.	The	tests	in	grades	4,	6,	and	9	are	well	designed	to	reflect	student	      		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 learning.	                                                                    a.	     		   		   		 b.	 		 		      		 c.	 		 		   d.	   		    		   		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 4.	Bonus	pay	for	teachers	based	on	annual	student	learning	would	             		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 stimulate	stronger	effort	from	teachers	and	better	school	results.	           		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		                                                                               a.	     		   		   		 b.	 		 		      		 c.	 		 		   d.	   		    		   		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 5.	Bonus	pay	for	teachers	based	on	student	learning	would	not	be	             		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 fair	because	some	schools	have	better	students	than	others.	                  		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		                                                                               a.	     		   		   		 b.	 		 		      		 c.	 		 		   d.	   		    		   		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
   6.The	new	teacher	licensing	standards	will	improve	the	quality	of	
		                                                                               a.	     		   		   		 b.	 		 		      		 c.	 		 		   d.	   		    		   		
   education.		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 7.		The	new	teacher	licensing	standards	will	not	achieve	much	unless	         		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 salary	levels	also	improve.		                                                 a.	     		   		   		 b.	 		 		      		 c.	 		 		   d.	   		    		   		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 8.		The	proposed	decentralized	structure	will	give	you	more	support	          		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 in	managing	your	school	and	will	improve	school	results.			                   		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		                                                                               a.	     		   		   		 b.	 		 		      		 c.	 		 		   d.	   		    		   		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 9.	I	have	the	resources	and	tools	I	need	to	deal	with	teachers	whose	         		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 performance	is	weak.	                                                         a.	     		   		   		 b.	 		 		      		 c.	 		 		   d.	   		    		   		
		                                                                               		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 10.	If	I	could	reward	my	best	teachers	with	higher	pay,	my	school’s	          		      		   		   		 		    		 		    		 		 		 		    		    		    		   		
		 results	would	improve.	                                                       a.	     		   		   		 b.	 		 		      		 c.	 		 		   d.	   		    		   		

         ANNEXES 	                                                                                                                             45
      11. If	I	could	remove	my	worst	teachers,	my	school’s	results	would
      improve.                                                               a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	

      12. The	emphasis	on	accountability	and	target	setting	by	the
      Ministry	of	Education	will	result	in	improved	school	performance.
                                                                             a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	


      13. Inspection	of	schools	is	the	missing	critical	element	to	support
      improved	school	performance.                                           a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	

      14. The	instructional	approach	used	by	most	teachers	motivates
      learning.                                                              a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	

      15. The	teachers	in	this	school	are	equally	effective.
                                                                             a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	

      16. Approach	to	student	discipline	is	influenced	by	the	poor
      behavior	of	a	few.                                                     a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	

      17. Student	behaviour	reduces	the	impact	of	teaching	&	learning	in
      this	school.                                                           a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	

      18. Students	are	not	driven	to	perform.
                                                                             a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	

      19. Parents	in	this	community	are	very	involved	in	the	school.
                                                                             a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	

      20. Teacher	tardiness	and	absence	are	serious	issues	at	this	school.
                                                                             a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	

      21. Lack	of	learning	materials	is	a	serious	issue	at	this	school.
                                                                             a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	

      22. Crime	in	our	community	is	a	serious	issue	for	our	school.
                                                                             a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	




                                                                                Totally	        Disagree	        Agree	            Totally	
      The	most	serious	constraints	to	improved	results	for	my	school	are:	     disagree	        more	than	      more	than	         agree	
                                                                                                 agree	         disagree	
      23. Lack	of	financial	resources.
                                                                             a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.	

      24. Lack	of	time	for	planning.
                                                                             a.	                  b.	              c.	         d.




46	                                                                                User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
25. Lack	of	time	for	teachers	to	work	together	to	share	lesson	plans,
ideas,	etc.                                                             a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	

26. Lack	of	time	for	me	to	observe	teachers’	practice.
                                                                        a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	


27. Lack	of	support	from	the	community.                                 a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	

28. Lack	of	performance	information	and	feedback.
                                                                        a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	

29. Lack	of	effective	training	opportunities	for	me	and	my	staff.
                                                                        a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	

30. Other	issues	not	mentioned	here. (Please note these in the
final comments section, if you'd like.)                                 a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	


                                                                           Totally	   Disagree	     Agree	      Totally	
The	majority	of	my	time	is	spent	on:	                                     disagree	   more	than	   more	than	   agree	
                                                                                       agree	      disagree	
31. Administrative	tasks	and	reporting.
                                                                        a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	

32. Observing	teachers	in	the	classroom.
                                                                        a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	

33. Dealing	with	parents	and	the	community.
                                                                        a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	

34. Trying	to	raise	additional	resources	for	the	school.
                                                                        a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	


35. Strategic	planning.                                                 a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	

36. Dealing	with	other	issues	not	mentioned	here. (Please note
these in the final section if you'd like.)                              a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	


                                                                           Totally	   Disagree	     Agree	      Totally	
      Social	Capital	Questions	-	Please	mark	only	one	answer.	            disagree	   more	than	   more	than	   agree	
                                                                                       agree	      disagree	

37. Staff	at	this	school	are	willing	to	help	their	colleagues.          a.	            b.	           c.	        d.	


38. Staff	at	this	school	have	the	same	opinions	about	what	is	right
                                                                        a.	            b.	           c.	        d.
and	wrong.




 ANNEXES 	                                                                                                                 47
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   39.	Staff	at	this	school	are	people	whom	I	can	trust.	                       a.	    		   		   		   b.	   		   		   		   c.	   		   		   d.	   		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
               40.	If	I	needed	to	borrow	$	1,000	in	an	emergency,	I	might	ask	a	
          		                                                                                a.	    		   		   		   b.	   		   		   		   c.	   		   		   d.	   		   		   		
               coworker	at	this	school.	
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   41.	I	am	a	person	whom	others	can	trust.	                                    a.	    		   		   		   b.	   		   		   		   c.	   		   		   d.	   		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
               42.	If	an	employee	of	this	school	needed	to	borrow	$	1,000	in	an	
          		                                                                                a.	    		   		   		   b.	   		   		   		   c.	   		   		   d.	   		   		   		
               emergency,	he(she)	could	ask	me.		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   43.	I	trust	most	people	in	my	community.	                                    		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		                                                                                a.	    		   		   		   b.	   		   		   		   c.	   		   		   d.	   		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   44.	I	trust	most	of	the	employees	in	my	school.	                             a.	    		   		   		   b.	   		   		   		   c.	   		   		   d.	   		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   45.	Most	of	the	people	in	my	school	would	try	to	take	advantage	of	          		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   me	if	they	had	the	chance.	                                                  a.	    		   		   		   b.	   		   		   		   c.	   		   		   d.	   		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   46.	Most	of	the	time	people	are	preoccupied	with	themselves.	                a.	    		   		   		   b.	   		   		   		   c.	   		   		   d.	   		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
               47.	I	can	achieve	success	by	myself,	without	help	from	those	around	
          		                                                                                a.	    		   		   		   b.	   		   		   		   c.	   		   		   d.	   		   		   		
               me.	
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   48.	Money	is	important	for	happiness.	                                       a.	    		   		   		   b.	   		   		   		   c.	   		   		   d.	   		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
               49.	People	who	work	hard	usually	end	up	in	a	better	situation	than	
          		                                                                                a.	    		   		   		   b.	   		   		   		   c.	   		   		   d.	   		   		   		
               those	who	do	not.	
          		                                                                                		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   		   		   		   		 		 		      		   		   		   		     		    		   		   		   		   		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   50.	Additional	Comments:	         		   		   		     		    		   		   		   		   		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   		   		   		   		 		 		      		   		   		   		     		    		   		   		   		   		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   		   		   		   		 		 		      		   		   		   		     		    		   		   		   		   		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
          		   		   		   		   		 		 		      		   		   		   		     		    		   		   		   		   		     		   		   		   		    		   		   		   		    		   		   		    		   		   		
	




    48	                                                                                           User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
                                                                                                       Classroom Observation Manual



    APPENDIX II:
Appendix 2: Classroom Background Data
    CLASSROOM BACKGROUND DATA


  CLASSROOM BACKGROUND DATA
                                                              day                month             year
  1. Date of Observation




  2. School Name___________________________________________________________________________

  ___________________________________________________3. School Code


  4. Location (Name of City/Town/Village)___________________5. Location Code

  6. Observer Name ____________________________________7. Observer Code




  8. Grade Observed (circle grade)        Grade:   1   2      3        4    5        6   7     8   9      10

  9.Subject(s) Observed _____________________________________________________________________

                                                           hour                 minute
  14. Official start time of class                                          :

  15. Time class started                                                    :

  12. Official end time of class                                            :

  13. Time class ended                                                      :

  14. How many students are present in the classroom

    After the first observation - Total       GIRLS           BOYS
    Before the last observation- Total        GIRLS           BOYS

  15. Blackboard/whiteboard in the classroom?                                   no       yes           not applicable

  16. Display of charts, pictures, maps on the wall?       no              yes           not applicable

  17. Textbooks/Other book available?
  entire class        more than half         less than half          very few                nobody        not applicable
  18. Notebooks/Paper and writing utensils?
  entire class        more than half         less than half          very few                nobody        not applicable
  19. School Uniforms?
  entire class      more than half           less than half          very few                nobody        not applicable


  23. Comments




                                                                  44




     ANNEXES 	                                                                                                                        49
                                                                                             Classroom Observation Manual

Appendix 3: Stallings Classroom Snapshot Coding Grid
      APPENDIX III: STALLINGS CLASSROOM SNAPSHOT CODING GRID

      NO.:                    EXACT TIME OF OBSERVATION:


                                             CLASSROOM OBSERVATION SNAPSHOT

                                                                      MATERIAL

                                NO                                    BLACK          LEARNING
                                            TEXTBOOK       NOTEBOOK                                 ICT          COOPERATIVE
                                MATERIAL                              BOARD          AIDES
      ACTIVITY

                          T     1 S L E     1 S L E        1 S L E    1 S L E        1 S L E        1 S L E      S L E
      1. READING ALOUD
                          I     1 S L       1 S L          1 S L      1 S L          1 S L          1 S L        S L
                                CHECK IF CHORAL READING
      2.DEMONSTRATION/
                          T     1 S L E     1 S L E        1 S L E    1 S L E         1 S L E       1 S L E      S L E
      LECTURE

                          I     1 S L       1 S L          1 S L      1 S L           1 S L         1 S L        S L
      3.DISCUSSION/
      DEBATE/QUESTIONS    T     1 S L E     1 S L E        1 S L E    1 S L E         1 S L E       1 S L E      S L E
      AND ANSWERS

                          I     1 S L       1 S L          1 S L      1 S L           1 S L         1 S L        S L
      4. PRACTICE
                          T     1 S L E     1 S L E        1 S L E    1 S L E         1 S L E       1 S L E      S L E
      & DRILL
                          I     1 S L       1 S L          1 S L      1 S L           1 S L         1 S L        S L
      5. ASSIGNMENT/
                          T     1 S L E     1 S L E        1 S L E    1 S L E         1 S L E       1 S L E      S L E
      CLASS WORK

                          I     1 S L       1 S L          1 S L      1 S L           1 S L         1 S L        S L

      6. COPYING          T     1 S L E     1 S L E        1 S L E    1 S L E         1 S L E       1 S L E      S L E

                          I     1 S L       1 S L          1 S L      1 S L           1 S L         1 S L        S L

      7. VERBAL
                          T     1 S L E     1 S L E        1 S L E    1 S L E         1 S L E       1 S L E      S L E
      INSTRUCTION

                          I     1 S L       1 S L          1 S L      1 S L           1 S L         1 S L        S L
      8. SOCIAL
      INTERACTION
                          T     1 S L E                    Grade/subject being observed:
                                                           Notes:
                          I     1 S L
      9. STUDENT(S)
                          I     1 S L
      UNINVOLVED

      10. DISCIPLINE      T     1 S L E
      11. CLASSROOM
                          T     1 S L E
      MANAGEMENT

                          I     1 S L

      12. CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT ALONE                                       T
      13. TEACHER SOCIAL INTERACTION OR TEACHER UNINVOLVED                 T
      14. TEACHER OUT OF THE ROOM                                          T




                                                             46




50	                                                                            User Guide: Conducting Classroom Observations
Appendix 4: Coding Worksheet

      School	Name	             Observer	Name	   Grade	   Subject	   Date	



      1	                                                            	   	   	   	
      	


      2	                                                            	   	   	   	
      	


      3	                                                            	   	   	   	
      	


      4	                                                            	   	   	   	
      	


      5	                                                            	   	   	   	
      	



      6	                                                            	   	   	   	



      	



      7	                                                            	   	   	   	



      	



      8	                                                            	   	   	   	



      	



      9	                                                            	   	   	   	



      	



      10	                                                           	   	   	   	



      	




     ANNEXES 	                                                                      51
