                                      Access to Information 2016
                                         Written Comments
Question 3: Please indicate your affiliation (select the one most relevant to you):
  #     Other (please specify)
  1     Researcher PHD
  2     Emerging Women Social Entrepreneur
  3     My grandfather worked for the World Bank around 40 years ago.

Question 6: Which of the following topic(s) relate(s) to the information that you requested? (Please
select all that apply).
    #     Other (please specify)
    1     Dispute Resolution (ICSID)
    2     History of reforms in various emerging market economies
    3     World fund aid to irrigation project in india
    4     World Bank Trust Funds Financial Statements
    5     IEG
    6     Debt restructuring
    7     Tourism data
    8     CIADI origins
    9     Access to information
   10     Enterprise Survey
   11     Investment
   12     bank's internal organization
   13     Books
   14     DFI spend by the World bank
   15     Leadership
   16     procurement
   17     Project outcomes
   18     Loan Agreement
   19     leadership
   20     World Bank Projects
   21     Infrastructure
   22     Chernobyl topic
   23     Bank's employment stats
   24     History
   25     I was interested to see if there was anything relating to my grandfather
   26     Project appraisal, monitoring and evaluation; OED/IEG
   27     history




                                                                                              Page 1 of 7
                                    Access to Information 2016
                                       Written Comments
Q7: We are interested in knowing the impact of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy. Please
tell us how you used the information obtained from the World Bank.
    #     Other (please specify)
    1     National forestry programme
    2     Background Information
    3     Counterparty credit risk.
    4     I never received the information I requested.
    5     Assessing adequacy of WB Programme Management
    6     Never received my requested documents
    7     Social Impact Assessment Study
    8     I wasn't allowed to get the information I needed
    9     procurement
   10     I didn't get the information that i need
   11     My request was (very disappointingly) never answered.
   12     advocacy
          I did not use it because I was not granted access. I requested the I2D2 dataset which is not
   13
          authorised for release.
   14     BOOK WRİTİNG
   15     Personal interest

Q8: In which of the following World Bank search engines did you search for information before
submitting your AI request:
   #    Other (please specify)
   1    Archives
   2    Indicators
   3    World Bank data
   4    Both of the above
   5    info request
   6    I used both equally
   7    none?
   8    Book
   9    Both of the above
  10    None because I knew what I wanted before using the site.
  11    World development indicator
  12    Both
  13    I can't remember




                                                                                            Page 2 of 7
                                      Access to Information 2016
                                         Written Comments
Q18: If your request for information was denied by the World Bank, and you chose not to file an appeal,
please tell us why.
   #     Response Text
   1     Request not denied
   2     N/A
         My PhD work was on world bank and power sector. So, i wanted to know about the file/document
   3     about the minutes of meeting between world bank officials and borrower countries. I had request but
         could not get document due to some confidential and management policy. So i did not file again.
   4     Too much trouble
   5     Lack of time
   6     I have no answer to my complaints
   7     It just said document is unavailable.
   8     I never recieved a notice or reaosn
   9     Since the information policy was clear enough to give up an appeal.
  10 N/A
         My research team request was denied, clearly for no go reasons given that a multitude of research
         papers have been published using the data sets we have been requesting (i.e. CPIA from 1991 to
         2011). However, these papers using the denied data were published by people with World Bank
         "special connections" it appears; for instance this paper by Sebastian Galiani, Stephen Knack, Ben
  11
         Zou, Lixin Colin Xu (2016) The Effect of Aid on Growth: Evidence from a Quasi-Experiment"
         NBER Working Paper No. 22164 Issued in April 2016 which uses the CPIA data we have been
         requesting for more than 1 year. So we are very disappointed with these privileges given to some
         researchers and that the World Bank engagement to support Access to Information is not respected.
  12 I thought my appeal would not change the result.
  13 Gave up, no time
         I probably to it to mean the implementing agency in country X had not submitted it - I'm usually
  14
         looking for procurement plans
         I was told the information requested was too difficult to gather, since many offices needed to be
  15
         contacted.
  16 Assumed that the document cited in the website actually does not exist.
         I requested information about the projetct for a hydro power plant in Brazil. This would be used to
  17
         be presented in a college seminar, but I got the answer for my request after seminar's deadline.
  18 Did not want to spend time filing an appeal.
  19 Disbelief
  20 no
  21 -
  22 Not applicable
  23 Because i will reduce time wastage.
  24 N/A
         I haven't heard/read anything about my request, I don't know what's the status or why they didn't
  25 send me the Information. I had to keep on working with other sources and, honestly, I forgot that I
         made an Information request.
  26 I received an email. I could not find what I have requested. or maybe it is not easy to use that page
  27 Request overtaken by events
  28 Until now I have appealed in all the cases.
  29 N/A
         The denied material was not central to my research. That said, the denial itself seemed fairly
  30
         nonsensical as the material appeared to be non-controversial.


Q19: Please share your views on the quality of the World Bank’s service in supporting your information
request.

                                                                                                Page 3 of 7
                                   Access to Information 2016
                                      Written Comments
#    Response Text
     It went very smoothly and I never had to actually communicate directly with WB officials in order to
1
     obtain what I was looking for.
     The webpage was not easy to handle,
     I also did not understand why the communication was all stored on a specific webpage.
2    But your archival staff was really great, well informed and always helpful, in advance looking for
     files and then when I used the archive (which should be much better known among historians).

3    Good service
4    Quality of service is satisfactory
     Very slow service. When I was referred to the person in charge it took them a month to reply and it
5
     was too late (I needed this information for my thesis research).
6    Good- supplied me with the data that I required
7    Quality in terms of services is very high therefore I can't complain on this one
     I hope that anyone can access the table of contents before asking the report that the World Bank
8
     published.
     Concerning above issues, I think the Bank should reavel all minutes of meeting. So that citizen of
9    lender and borrower can know the actual process and deliberations meeting. By knowing these, tax
     payer actually can know the using of funds.
10   It was prompt.
     Very satisfactory especially for studies lead by the world bank. The transparency is highly
11
     appreciated
12   generally good, but time-consuming
     I have submitted a request and did not receive any response in the last two years.
13
     once I requested for information on Bangladesh; I received information about an African country. I
     emailed back and received no response. this is not a professional way of doing business.
14   Not satisfactory
15   Good
16   good
17   The service itself is effective as it keeps one updated.
18   ok
     The World Bank does not have information on whether the projects they fund are actually in
19
     operation.
20   Well
21   N/A
     While the response was helpful and my experience at the archives was positive overall, the search
22
     capabilities for documents and even topics could be improved.
     The world's bank service was effective, the problem was that the world bank no longer had the
23
     information I was requesting.
24   satisfied
     There are lots of overlapping zones which needs to workout in the search engine. And data window
25
     needs be more simplified or some orientation programme should be there.
     I got information for a student, it took a while to get the information he needed, but overall he was
26
     pleased.
27   I found the service efficient and the colleagues of the WB very helpful




                                                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                                       Access to Information 2016
                                          Written Comments
Q19: Please share your views on the quality of the World Bank’s service in supporting your information
request. Continued
   #    Response Text
        It would be great if we asked about the reports and documents, specific links were given, not the web
  28
        site
  29 It was uneven, sometimes great; other times less so.
  30 Bad
  31 ...
        Good effort has been made to make all queries addressed. Greatly appreciate the availability of
  32
        reports both recent and past
  33 I am generally satisfied and encouraged with the increasing access to micro-level data
        For a foreign research persona, could be quite unclear the process that follows a request. Besides, the
  34
        answer take too much time to arrive, so in some way is very hard to schedule a trip for a research.
  35 Very fine. However, the contact mail case system seems a bit difficult.
  36 It is very helpful
  37 I think that the service is fast and in general you answer correctly what I asked for
  38 -
  39 It was good
  40 N/A
  41 I think the WB has to be a little bit more user-friendly title wise with relation to Hydro Power
  42 None
  43 The service was of very adequate
        It was an effective response of a very serious process. I decided no to go further for time issues. It
  44
        sounded it would take a long time.
  45 Excellent and please keep it up
        The bank is extremely cautious in providing information about itself. This may be an institutional
  46
        characteristic.
  47 I was very pleased with the helpfulness of the staff in the archives.
        I never received all of the data I requested because I was told that the older, more complete data set
  48
        (that was still listed on the World Bank web site) was no longer available.
  49 Extremely limited and cumbersome
  50 Great global markets indicator on which countries have the best tax write offs ;)
        Different WGI factors contains the same questionnaire. For example, different data sources ask
        about 'red tape' in their questionnaire, but the outcome of one source is allocated for corruption
        factor, while the other is allocated to calculate rule of law or regulatory quality. It means that one
  51
        WGI indicator is not fully reflecting available data sources.

        WGI should weight on questionnaire basis, not data source basis.
  52    --
  53    Highly professional and impressive.
  54    Information and documents must be more user friendly.
  55    Rapid answer
  56    Generally OK
  57    Can't find enough micro data
  58    Did not hear back for months.



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 7
                                       Access to Information 2016
                                          Written Comments
Q19: Please share your views on the quality of the World Bank’s service in supporting your information
request. Continued
   #    Response Text
        the quality was good but I can not acces the information because I live in other country an they tell
  59
        me if I want have access to the information I must go to USA Head office.
        The request was handled quickly but after further investigation, I found a much easier way to get the
  60
        data from the website which was not disclosed by the respondent
        didn't want to create and clarify a detailed response to my questions and rather attempted to redirect
  61
        me to inconclusively detailed pages
  62 Very responsive
  63 While it was quite informative some information was not up to date
  64 Too complicated!
  65 Obtaining information from the web site is hard work putting me off using it
  66 Good
        In terms of the content of the response and communication, the service was good. It just took very
  67
        long to get a final decision (and the requested materials).
  68 very easy to use and most of the time they are able to help
        I received part of the information requested. For rest of information I did not received, there was not
  69
        option where to choose; the information just was not available at that moment.
  70 .
  71 Generally satisfied.
        The quality of service is good; the online communication tool, once requests have been made, is
  72
        terrible
  73 Neutral, did not have any direct contact
  74 have nothing more to add
        I had to wait for a long time for the information i requested. I understand that there must be a lot of
  75 inquiries coming in all the time but if you commit to providing information within 20 days you
        should be able to keep this promise.
  76 Helpful, but a bit slowly.
  77 great
  78 ---
  79 Okay.
  80 Full of complexities. Not worth believing.
  81 x
  82 excellent
  83 X
        I got the document I requested within 20 days. My only complaint would be that it was a bit hard to
  84
        find how to request the information.
  85 -
  86 Very high quality.
  87 detail of GDP for each country
        Extremely poor. My request never came through nor was it denied. I am still uncertain what
  88 happened as I do know they received it and 'were working on it' (it has now been over 1 year since I
        filed the request).
  89 N/A
        The service was really helpful. However, sometimes the documents provided from World Bank is
  90
        not the requested document.

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 7
                                       Access to Information 2016
                                          Written Comments
Q19: Please share your views on the quality of the World Bank’s service in supporting your information
request. Continued
   #    Response Text
  91 Needs to be simplified
  92 Everything was clear. No complaints.
  93 Bad and slow quality. I waited couple weeks till I received the first response.
  94 Does just enough to satisfy its own internal audit for customer care. Did not satisfy me.
  95 Not applicable
  96 Very kind staff and friendly user resources
  97 A reasonable start
        The response was slow (more than 4 weeks) and consequently, I did not use the document in the
        report that I generated. However, it was still useful in my understanding of the work. A timeline
  98
        approximating distribution of material would be helpful and if provided up front (if possible) could
        reduce the number of requests to the Bank for information that is never used.
        Many informations are still not completed and scanty. E.g Informaton on health expenditure from
  99
        1970's- 2015
  100 Poor.
        Much too slow process. By the time it was approved, I had already gotten the needed information
  101
        elsewhere
  102 I didn't have any update vía email or anything, so.. i'll have to check what's the answer to my request.
  103 It has been vdery good
  104 Weak
        The information was very relevant to what I was researching on. It was key to finishing my
  105
        assignment.
        Can be improved in terms of responsiveness after a request is made. It is a critical service since the
  106 World Bank is ubiquitous. There is no one physical stop center in every country where you can go in
        and get information. This service is it.
        It took longer than expected and I was not able to use the information for the primary purpose. But
  107
        they were useful and I was somewhat satisfied by how they address my request.
  108 Excellent
  109 /
  110 I used other websites to find what I've requested
  111 Need to make it more responsive and give feedback
  112 I will rate it medium to low.
        I love the world bank and I was able to see something my grandfather wrote when he died in the
        1980s. That is amazing and the most important thing to me. If you want honest feedback on the
  113
        system I used.... Well, the web front-end felt very dated, slow and difficult to navigate. It felt like a
        system that has not had sufficient funding in a long time.
  114 First-rate. The staff in the Archives could not be more helpful, or better motivated.
        The World Bank, in my opinion, how has one of the best run and most accessible of all the main
  115
        international organizations.




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 7
