  Vietnam: Enhancing Enterprise
Competitiveness and SME Linkages
  Lessons from international and national experience




          Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice
                  The World Bank Group




                                                       1
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements                                                                                          4

Executive Summary                                                                                         6

Chapter 1: Introduction                                                                                  12

  Objective and Background                                                                               12
  Relevance to GoV’s Policy Priorities and Programs                                                      14
  Country Context                                                                                        15
  Conceptual Approach and Scope                                                                          18

Chapter 2: Enterprise Productivity and Investment Climate Analysis                                       21

  Productivity Analysis                                                                                  21
  Innovation                                                                                             28
  Constraints to backward linkages                                                                       32
  Concluding Summary                                                                                     39

Chapter 3: Developing Linkages through Supplier Development Programs                                     40

  Introduction                                                                                           40
  Conceptual Linkage process                                                                             41
  Electronics and Automotive Sectors in Vietnam                                                          43
  Supply-side Constraints                                                                                45
  Demand-side Constraints                                                                                47
  Institutional and Governance Constraints                                                               52
  International Experience in Linkages Programs                                                          54
  Concluding Summary                                                                                     63

Chapter 4: Review of Policies and Institutions for Supporting Enterprise Competitiveness and Linkages    64

  Alignment of SME support programs                                                                      65
  Design elements of the programs                                                                        71
  Implementing SME support programs: Stakeholder Involvement, Achieved Results, and Challenges           78
  Concluding Summary                                                                                     84

Chapter 5: Roadmap for Implementing the Supporting Industries Program and Strengthening SME
Competitiveness                                                                                          86

  Recommendations                                                                                        87
    Part I: Operationalizing the SI linkage policy framework in Vietnam                                  87
    Part II: Objective: Strengthening Enabling environment for private sector competitiveness            91

References                                                                                               94

Annex 1.1. Summary of recent studies about the competitiveness of the Vietnamese private sector          97

Annex 2.1. Logistic regression of product innovation                                                    101

Annex 2.2. Econometric analysis of linkages: linkage determinants                                       102


                                                                                                          2
Annex 3.1. International experience in developing linkage programs – summary highlights from Czech
Republic, Malaysia, Chile and Costa Rica                                                             104

Annex 4.1. Vietnam: Mapping institutional landscape for Supporting Industries (SI) lead agency & SME
support agencies                                                                                    106




                                                                                                       3
Acknowledgements
This study was prepared by the East Asia Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice of the World
Bank Group. The work was led by Asya Akhlaque, with support from a core team from the World
Bank and International Financial Corporation (IFC), and external researchers. The report was
written by Asya Akhlaque, Anne Ong Lopez and Antoine Coste. Valuable contributions were
received from Lien Anh Pham, Smita Kuriakose, George Clarke, Wim Douw, Aref Adamali, Erik
von Uexkull, and Yifan Wei (consultant) in the preparation of the study. A background note
reviewing Government programs to support SMEs in Vietnam was prepared by Phan Duc Hieu
(CIEM). Sector case studies on Thanh Long Electronics Production Company and Tam Hop
Company were jointly prepared by the World Bank and the Ministry of Industry and Trade, as an
input to this work. The team would like to acknowledge the critical administrative and logistics
support of Lien Thi Dao. Overall guidance was provided by Mona Haddad (Practice Manager,
Trade and Competitiveness, EAP Region) and Ousmane Dione (Country Director, Vietnam). Peer
reviewers for the study included Mary C. Hallward-Driemeier, Charles Schneider and Richard
Record.
During the preparation of the report, consultations were held with key representatives from the
Government and private sector, as well as with researchers and development partners. In this
context, two workshops were held: at concept stage in October 2016 in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh
City to validate the scope of the study, and in May 2017 in Hanoi to seek feedback on the findings
and recommendations emerging from the work.
The World Bank is grateful for the partnership and guidance provided by the Ministry of Industry
(MoIT), particularly by Mr. Truong Thanh Hoai (Head of Industry Agency), in the preparation of
this report, and for jointly hosting the May workshop. The team would also like to acknowledge
the support provided by the Agency for Enterprise Development (AED) under the Ministry of
Planning and Industry (MPI).




                                                                                                4
                         Private Sector Competitiveness and Linkages in Vietnam
                            Moving support towards operationalization

•   How does this report contribute? The aim of this report is to move the private sector development
    (PSD) and foreign direct investment (FDI) linkage agenda from analytics towards
    operationalization. It draws on a rich knowledge base on Vietnam’s private sector. In particular,
    recent reports such as “Vietnam 2035” (World Bank and MPI 2016), and “Vietnam at a crossroads:
    engaging in the next generation of global value chains” (World Bank 2016) analyzed in-depth the
    challenges and opportunities related to firm productivity, global value chains (GVCs) and
    innovation. This report builds on this previous work with a focus on concrete obstacles to linkages
    and the design of programs that could reduce them. Additionally, three new pieces of analytics
    were undertaken as inputs to the present report, including: (i) Enterprise Survey (2015) data analysis
    on investment climate issues in Vietnam; (ii) a review of SME programs under implementation in
    the country; and (iii) sectoral case studies on linkages in the auto and electronics firms in Vietnam.

•   Relevance to Government Policy Priorities and Programs: This work is fully aligned with
    the Government’s strategic priorities regarding private sector development, as outlined in Vietnam’s
    Socio-Economic Development Strategy 2011-2020 and Vietnam Vision 2035 Report. It is also
    consistent with the WBG’s 2016 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Vietnam, which
    underlined the need for strengthening competitiveness, particularly for the domestic private sector.
    It also represents one of the strategic focus areas of the WBG’s engagement in Vietnam, as laid out
    in the Country Partnership Framework for the FY18-22 period.

•   Programmatic and integrated approach for supporting PSD and linkages: This study
    complements and dovetails the on-going activities in the area of trade and competitiveness in
    Vietnam. An on-going IFC private sector project aims to improve the regulatory and business
    environment and enhance the ability of domestic suppliers to participate in value chains in targeted
    sectors. The objective of this WB report is to examine key business environment constraints that
    hinder competitiveness of the domestic private sector and to facilitate FDI spillovers and linkages,
    with a focus on the manufacturing sector. Follow-up work will be undertaken as part of the Phase
    II of the Australia-World Bank Strategic Partnership in Vietnam (ABP2) that focuses on
    strengthening capacity of GoV to facilitate private sector development, in particular domestic
    private firms to take advantage of the opportunities provided by international trade and integration
    in moving up the value chains.

•   Leverage IFC and WBG partnership: The joint WB and IFC work is designed to support and
    leverage potential IFC investments. IFC and WB teams in Vietnam are designing a value chain
    financing program to build commercial banks’ capacity to provide financing to SMEs building on
    the relationship and transaction flows with other stakeholders in the value chains in a structured
    manner. IFC has already successfully introduced a financial instrument through its Global Trade
    Supplier Finance Program – GTSF that supports suppliers in GVCs such as in textiles and garment
    by providing early payments to help eliminate buyer risks, enhance their financial strength as well
    as efficiently manage working capital flows.




                                                                                                             5
Executive Summary
1. Boosting productivity growth, especially that of the domestic private sector, is a key priority
   of Vietnam. The country has been successful in attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) and
   entering global value chains (GVCs). Most local firms, however, are small and only serve the
   domestic markets. FDI has brought enormous gains to Vietnam in terms of growth, exports
   and jobs, but has been less stellar in developing linkages with the domestic economy. This is
   reflected in low domestic value addition and a weak supplier base in Vietnam. With increasing
   global competition, and its ambition to move up the value chain, Vietnam has a unique
   window of opportunity to exploit its current position in GVCs.
2. Recognizing this challenge and opportunity, the Government has put in place a Supporting
   Industries (SI) policy framework that aims to upgrade the capabilities and technology of local
   enterprises to facilitate supplier linkages with FDI, as well as enable them to enter foreign
   markets. The Government is in the process of implementing the SI program, as well as
   revisiting its SME policy for strengthening the domestic private sector. The roll out and
   implementation details of these new programs and policies still need to be worked out, and
   the objective of this report is thus to contribute to these on-going efforts to enhance the
   competitiveness of the domestic private sector and to facilitate FDI spillovers and linkages.
3. Several key dimensions determine the potential for linkages and spillovers from FDI. This
   report draws on the conceptual framework presented by Farole and Winkler (2014), which
   analyzes this potential by considering three mediating factors: (i) the spillover potential of
   foreign companies, (ii) the absorptive capacities of domestic firms, and (iii) host country
   factors and institutional framework. While this framework considers several transmission
   channels for spillovers, including labor turnover and market restructuring, this study focuses
   on supply chains as the main channel and underlines the market failures and constraints that
   may deter the linkage process in Vietnam.
4. A rich knowledge base about the Vietnamese private sector was established in recent years.
   Several of these important firm-level studies have presented a consistent view of enterprise
   level competitiveness challenges and the nature of FDI linkages in Vietnam. Building on these
   earlier diagnostics, this report provides new analysis focused on obstacles to linkages and
   focuses on the operationalization of the FDI linkage development agenda in Vietnam. It does
   so by reviewing both international and domestic experiences, and offering recommendations
   to strengthen policies and programs to support enterprise competitiveness and linkages in
   Vietnam.




                                                                                                6
Key Findings and Recommendations
5. The latest data confirms earlier findings regarding weaknesses of the Vietnamese private
   sector. To complement the existing knowledge base by focusing on key issues related to
   linkages, the analysis of recent Enterprise Survey data in chapter 2 examines enterprise level
   productivity and innovation in Vietnam, as well as firm characteristics and investment climate
   constraints are the most binding for linkages with foreign-owned companies. The analysis
   finds that while domestic firms’ productivity may not be excessively low compared to other
   Asian countries, there are some indications that larger companies, which are generally seen
   as having more potential to become suppliers for foreign-owned firms, are lagging. Also,
   while Vietnamese firms do innovate, innovation appears to rarely relate to new products or
   technologies, suggesting scope to incentivize firms to dedicate more resources to innovation
   activities.
6. Further, findings confirm that the creation of backward linkages between MNEs/lead firms
   and the local SME sector in Vietnam is influenced by the absorptive capabilities of local firms,
   the key binding constraints in the enabling environment, and the spillover potential of FDI.
   The analysis suggests that targeted support for larger domestic firms’ innovation activities
   can be more relevant for backward linkages, as well as supporting joint ventures to boost
   innovation. Also, programs aiming at fostering backward linkages could target market-
   seeking FDI and promote joint ventures, and should encourage SMEs to focus on product
   quality, access to foreign inputs, the provision of training to workers, innovation efforts and
   use of ICT by domestic firms.
7. A mix of supply and demand side constraints continue to undermine the establishment of
   linkages between foreign-owned firms and domestic companies. Chapter 3 identifies the key
   demand-side and supply-side constraints that deter linkages from occurring in Vietnam, with
   a focus on the electronics and automotive sectors. The chapter suggests that dearth of skills,
   information gaps on FDI sourcing strategies, and on quality, cost and delivery (QCD) standard
   requirements are binding constraints for becoming suppliers. Across the manufacturing
   sector, Vietnamese firms are also disadvantaged due to weak management skills; Vietnamese
   management scores ranked quite low when compared to other surveyed countries, such as
   Mexico and Chile. Lack of management skills also topped the list when surveyed firms were
   asked about what skills are difficult to find (compared to other skillsets like IT, non-IT,
   writing, and interpersonal skills). Lastly, access to finance appears to be a binding sectoral
   concern for nascent firms in the electronics/ICT software sector. Financial access is
   particularly restrictive for firms aiming to make a breakthrough to become suppliers.
8. The lack of workforce skills is hindering SMEs to link and secure business with FDIs. This
   constraint cuts across sectors, although there may be specific skill-sets demanded by
   individual sectors. For instance, in the electronics/ICT sector, complaints relate to the lack of
   workers with skills related to foreign language, management and technical skills. Information
   asymmetry is a critical constraint faced by domestic suppliers. Without formal information
   channels to obtain information on FDI sourcing strategies, potential domestic suppliers with

                                                                                                  7
   no business connections are disadvantaged in terms of linkage opportunities. Moreover,
   domestic firms may have limited direct interaction with global buyers, especially if lead firms
   (e.g., OEMs) coordinate from headquarter locations outside Vietnam. The lack of information
   on QCD and management standards on the part of suppliers weakens linkages opportunities
   given that upper-tier suppliers and in turn their suppliers are required to follow lead firms’
   quality management processes.
9. On the demand side, evidence suggests that lack of competitive local suppliers who can meet
   quality standards in GVCs is the first-order binding constraint that MNEs currently face.
   There are also information asymmetry and coordination failures in connecting buyers and
   suppliers, even if there is mutual motivation on the part of MNEs and SMEs to create linkages
   on their own. While information gaps exist in both directions, the report finds that lack of
   information is more a binding supply-side problem and less of a buyer’s issue, indicating that
   supply-side information gaps need to be addressed foremost. Nonetheless, solutions such as
   a high-quality supplier database (and that allows suppliers to build their reputation) is needed
   so that more domestic suppliers can be recognized by MNEs. While these constraints provide
   justification for government intervention, the analysis points to policy and institutional
   constraints, such as lack of enforcement, insufficient policy alignment, and poor
   implementation and capabilities constraints in the public sector.
10. Existence of public sector constraints justify the value of private sector involvement in
    government linkage programs as well as private sector solutions to address linkage issues.
    Within Vietnam, early successes of private sector solutions can be found, such as in the case
    of Thanh Long Electronics Production Company and Tam Hop Company in the electronics
    and automotive sectors, respectively. These Vietnamese firms have successfully addressed
    supply-side constraints through the support of FDI-tier 1 suppliers. This report’s review of
    successful linkage cases, however, found that there are not many examples of successful
    domestic companies that have integrated into GVCs. One of the firms, Thanh Long, also
    received technical assistance from development partners and governmental organizations,
    particularly JICA and SIDEC. Overall, private sector approaches remain valid and
    substantially important in achieving the linkage objective. In fact, international experience
    also shows the importance of the role of the private sector in achieving this endeavor.
    Furthermore, public sector and private sector approaches on linkages are not incompatible, as
    both approaches have the same objective of helping firms overcome supply-side constraints,
    and seizing latent opportunities rather than attempting to force linkages.
11. Drawing on international approaches and models (i.e., Czech Republic, Malaysia, Chile, and
    Costa Rica) that have been successfully employed in addressing supply-side constraints and
    market failures hindering linkages and in implementing linkage programs, the report
    highlights the critical policy and institutional elements that may be equally important for
    Vietnam as it forges ahead in the operationalization of its SI development program. Key
    notable elements regarding (i) the institutional framework and inter-ministerial coordination,
    (ii) the facilitation of information flows and contacts between domestic and foreign-owned
    firms, (iii) the provision of targeted support to strengthen domestic suppliers, and (iv) the


                                                                                                 8
   reduction of horizontal constraints in the business environment, feed directly into the roadmap
   for the implementation of this program proposed at the end of the report (cf. below).
12. While Vietnam already has programs in place to support SMEs, these suffer from
    shortcomings that limit their capacity to boost competitiveness and foster linkages. The
    mapping and review of select SME programs and policies undertaken in Chapter 4 sheds light
    on the alignment of these programs with the constraints faced by SMEs and obstacles to
    linkages, and highlights gaps. These programs range from technological upgradation,
    innovation to market development, training and skills as well as standalone financial
    packages. The analysis finds that while existing SME support programs appear in theory to
    address the constraints that firms face in Vietnam, the programs’ effectiveness is not clear
    given lack of monitoring and evaluation systems to assess outcomes and impacts.
    Furthermore, a key lesson from this review highlights the need for high-level strategic
    coordination as well as careful program-level design and implementation to ensure
    effectiveness and impact. The review suggests that Vietnam would benefit from a
    consolidation of overlapping programs; using life cycle stages of firms (start-up, growth,
    established stages) to identify missing SME support programs; and ensuring consistent M&E.
    Program implementation would also be improved by ensuring program sustainability
    (including budget predictability); involving the private sector in program design and
    implementation; and improving program processes of the 5-year SME Development Plan.

13. Based on the conclusions of previous chapters, Chapter 5 proposes a ‘Roadmap for
    Implementing the Supporting Industries Program and Strengthening SME Competitiveness ’.
    This roadmap brings together international and national key lessons learned in implementing
    government support programs. Recognizing that the success of the SI program predicates on
    packaging integrated and complementary solutions for firms rather than piece meal efforts, it
    suggests three key pillars for the operationalization of the SI program in Vietnam (cf. figure
    below). A fourth complementary pillar is also discussed, proposing measures that can be
    undertaken to tackle the key horizontal constraints in the enabling environment.




                                                                                                9
                    Core Pillars of the Proposed SI Implementation Roadmap

            Implementing the Supporting Industries (SI) Program and Enhancing Domestic Enterprise
                                         competitiveness in Vietnam


                                         Establishing a Supplier
                                                                                Addressing IC environ.
 Institutional and governance            Development program
                                                                               constraints to strengthen
   environment for SI policy              for developing SI in
                                                                                      innovation
                                             priority sectors


                                                                                      Pillar 4: Facilitate and
                                                                                    promote demand-driven
        Pillar 1: (i) Establishment                                                 skills training, managerial
        of SI and Competitiveness             Pillar 2: Connecting MNEs                       services,
              Inter-ministerial                       & local firms                 quality/standards as well
           Committee with key                                                       as improvements in R&D
        stakeholders – public and             Pillar 3: Pillar 3: Setting up         eco-system through: (i)
          private (lead firms and             a SDP to support domestic                 use of behavioural
          suppliers in GVCs); (ii)                   firms with : (i)               incentives; (ii) promoting
             Improve business                     consulting/advisory                alternative training and
         regulatory environment;                    services; and (ii)                consulting modalities,
              (iii) SI agency for               upgrading equipment.                  development of R& D
            managing the SDP                                                         clusters through public-
                                                                                    private partnerships with
                                                                                             universities.




14. The first pillar seeks to strengthen and streamline the governance and institutional
    arrangements for SI policy and linkage program implementation (specifically a dedicated
    program for development of suppliers in Vietnam), through the (i) set-up of an inter-
    ministerial committee on supporting industry development, (ii) private sector membership in
    the committee, and (iii) provision of greater autonomy and capacity-building for the lead
    agency in SI development. These measures address the lack of coordination among
    government institutions and between government and the private sector, and fragmentation of
    policies and programs to improve the business environment for SMEs and supporting
    industries.

15. The second pillar seeks to connect MNEs and local firms by reducing search costs for both
    local and foreign firms, through organization of informational events about FDI sourcing
    decisions and requirements, development of an online high-quality national supplier database
    (centered around priority sectors), and implementation of effective business-to-business
    (B2B) match-making services that will help foster productive linkages between high potential
    local suppliers and new or existing foreign investors in Vietnam. This pillar specifically
    addresses key constraints and market failures in focus sectors, particularly lack of information
    and coordination failures between supply and demand.



                                                                                                         10
16. The third pillar aims to design and implement a demand-driven Supplier Development (SDP)
    program for upgrading local firms in key sectors with significant linkage potential. It
    highlights a package of vertical and horizontal support initiatives in specific sectors for the
    SDP - including specialized consulting services, managerial and technical skills, machine
    upgradation, and meeting labor and environmental standards and certification - that upgrades
    domestic capabilities. This support can be provided through the use of behavioral incentives
    which can be targeted towards both local suppliers for upgrading, and to MNEs to encourage
    sourcing locally or invest in supplier training and research and development. The range of
    instruments employed to make the local suppliers bankable can vary from direct support (e.g.
    matching grants) to indirect fiscal support through tax incentives. These incentives must be
    tied to firm performance, targeted, and aimed at minimizing market distortions (e.g., possible
    crowding out of market driven approaches on linkages). This pillar seeks to address the lack
    of competitiveness of local suppliers.

17. The fourth pillar (complementary pillar) aims to address horizontal constraints, particularly
    key binding constraints in the enabling environment in Vietnam that cut across sectors related
    to skills, management capabilities, innovation, and standards. Given that multiple SME
    programs already exist in Vietnam that try to address some of these horizontal constraints in
    the enabling environment, this pillar recommends addressing some of the key systemic issues
    on program design and implementation of SME support programs.



WBG’s on-going support on linkages
18. At MoIT’s request, the World Bank has initiated a technical and advisory project for
    supporting the linkage agenda that includes, among other things, upgrading firm capacity
    through a pilot supplier development program; building a national high-quality on-line
    supplier database as well as building capacity mainly within MoIT to host and maintain such
    database and implement effective B2B match-making services to foster productive linkages
    between high potential local suppliers and new or existing foreign investors in Vietnam;
    developing a new FDI strategy that would help attract a new generation of FDI; and capacity
    building within MoIT and related institutions. The approach being adopted in Vietnam is
    inspired by the Czech Republic model of SDP. As this is a pilot approach, an impact
    evaluation is being initiated in parallel to learn the lessons as the program is scaled up with
    time. Specifically, it can help identify if the choice of instruments is bearing results and areas
    where further improvements may be needed.




                                                                                                   11
                                            Chapter 1: Introduction

Objective and Background
19. The objective of this report is to inform the Government of Vietnam’s on-going efforts
    to enhance the competitiveness of the domestic private sector1 and to facilitate Foreign
    Direct Investment (FDI) spillovers and linkages. This report is anchored in the
    Government’s “Supporting Industries” (SI) policy framework that aims to upgrade the
    capabilities and technology of local enterprises to facilitate supplier linkages with FDI, as
    well as enable them to enter foreign markets (cf.
    below).2 Achieving progress in these areas is                Box 1: Supporting Industries (SI)
                                                                  Development Program, 2016-25
    considered integral to Vietnam’s ambition of
                                                             Key areas of enterprise support includes:
    expanding its participation in global value chains
                                                             • Develop suppliers for foreign and
    (GVCs) as well as moving up the value chain into             domestic clients
    higher value added activities.                           • Adopt management systems aligned to
                                                                                       requirements of GVCs in corporate
20. FDI’s spillover potential – the productivity gain             governance and production
    resulting from the diffusion of knowledge and • Improve quality of human resources for
    technology from foreign investors to local                    SI through training
    economy – is considered the most valuable input • Undertake Research and development,
    to growth and development. Vietnam, like many                 transfer       of     technologies          for
    countries in the region, has attracted FDI in the             manufacturing        of      spare       parts,
    expectation that new technology, upgraded                     accessories, raw materials and
    management skills, exposure to new market                     materials.
    opportunities brought by MNEs will spillover to • Develop SI information web portal
    domestic enterprises, leading to productivity Source: Decision on SI program, Jan 18, 2017, GoV
    improvements. A large part of productivity gains .
    from spillovers are associated with vertical linkages between MNEs/lead firms and domestic
    firms along the supply chain.3 Indeed the emergence of domestic suppliers to MNEs has been
                                                             Source:
    a key factor allowing other East Asian countries - such as             111 on Supporting
                                                                     DecreeTaiwan,
                                                                Korea,                       industries, November
                                                                                      and Singapore          - to
                                                             2015
    move up the value chain. The focus of this study is thus on supply chain linkages which is
    aligned to the SI policy framework.

21. Creating linkages is not automatic, as various supply-side constraints and market
    failures often hinder the process. International experience and academic research has shown

1 Domestic enterprises in Vietnam are predominantly SMEs, comprising 97.6 percent of total enterprises according to “White
Book on Vietnam’s SMEs 2014,” published by the Ministry of Planning and Investment (2014), Ha Noi: Thong Ke publisher, p.
36. These SMEs have less than 100 employees for trade and services sectors.
2 SIs are defined as industries that manufacture materials, components and spare parts to provide for the manufacturing of

completed products. In this report, SI program and developing backward linkages will be used interchangeably. It may also be
noted that it involves both foreign and locally owned suppliers. The term “local” and “domestic” firms is also used interchan geably
as is FDI, MNCs and foreign invested firms.
3 In addition to supply chains – which is the focus of this study- additional mechanisms through which FDI spillovers are

transmitted to local economy include labor turnover (i.e. knowledge embodied in labor can transmit from foreign to local firms),
and competition and demonstration effects.

                                                                                                                                12
    that while many countries have successfully attracted FDI, the record with capturing
    spillovers is mixed due to a variety of market failures (Moran 2014). Linkage process is a
    function of multiple factors that include the spillover potential of FDI, the absorptive capacity
    of domestic firms, as well as the host country’s business policy and institutional environment. 4
    Significant scope exists for sharpening our understanding of the constraints and supply-side
    market failure that deter linkages in Vietnam.

22. A rich knowledge base about the Vietnamese private sector was established in recent
    years. Several important firm-level studies have been carried out in Vietnam,5 that have
    presented a consistent view of enterprise level competitiveness challenges and the nature of
    FDI linkages in Vietnam. Some of the main conclusions emphasized in these studies include:6
    •    The domestic private sector has suffered from a declining growth of labor and total factor
         productivity (TFP) since the turn of the century, representing a reversal from the rapid
         growth of the 1990s and undermining future GDP growth prospects. While formal small
         and medium enterprises (SMEs) have grown in number and become increasingly capital
         intensive since the mid-2000s, there are concerns regarding their capacity to become
         larger over time and reap scale economies. The lack of dynamism of services sectors has
         been particularly highlighted.
    •    A playing field tilted in favor of firms that are state-owned, well connected or foreign-
         owned, in combination with a poor general business environment (e.g. business
         regulations, backbone services and infrastructure) severely undermine the
         competitiveness of domestic firms, large and small.
    •    Most domestic firms in Vietnam have inadequate capacity to establish linkages with
         foreign firms and meet their requirements in terms of quality, prices and reliability, and
         to absorb new knowledge and technology. Firms’ insufficient innovation capacity and the
         limited skills base on which they can rely have been identified as major obstacles. Firms’
         investments tend to be directed towards maintaining or increasing production capacity,
         but rarely towards improving productivity, product quality and diversification, and
         innovation.

23. This report focuses on the operationalization of the FDI linkage development agenda in
    Vietnam. Building on the diagnostics established by the aforementioned studies, it reviews
    both international and domestic experiences, and offers recommendations to strengthen
    policies and programs to support enterprise competitiveness and linkages in Vietnam.




4 This framework draws on the work done by Farole T. and D. Winkler (WB, 2012); and Paus and Gallagher, 2008.
5These  include: Vietnam 2035’ (World Bank and MPI 2016), ‘Vietnam at a Crossroads’ (World Bank 2016), Brand t et al. (2016),
and Newman et al. (2015). Data sources include Firm Census data (GoV) and customized surveys, dating from the 2000s to early
2010s.
6 See Annex 1 for a more detailed summary of the main conclusions of recent reports and studies, including ‘Vietnam 2035’

(World Bank and MPI 2016), ‘Vietnam at a Crossroads’ (World Bank 2016), Brandt et al. (2016), and Newman et al. (2015).

                                                                                                                          13
Relevance to GoV’s Policy Priorities and Programs

24. This work is fully aligned with the Government’s strategic priorities regarding private
    sector development. These priorities are notably outlined in Vietnam’s Socio-Economic
    Development Strategy 2011-2020, the Vietnam Vision 2035 Report, as well as in the World
    Bank Group’s 2016 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Vietnam, which consistently
    underline the need for strengthening competitiveness, particularly for the domestic private
    sector as Vietnam aspires to avoid the “middle-income trap” and become a modern
    industrialized country. The key counterparts for this agenda are the Ministry of Industry and
    Trade (MoIT), the lead agency with the mandate for strengthening GVCs, and the Ministry of
    Planning and investment (MPI).7

25. The conclusions from this study can inform the design and support the implementation
    of key GoV policies and programs that aim to strengthen domestic private sector and
    facilitate linkages. A new decree for the promotion of “supporting industries” was approved,
    followed by the recently issued Decision on “Supporting Industry Development Program for
    the 2016 – 2025 period,” that aims to operationalize the decree.8 This second document
    outlines the key elements of the program for enterprise capacity enhancement, HR training,
    financial support, promotion of R&D, technology and innovation. Furthermore, an SME law
    has been enacted recently to strengthen support to SMEs in Vietnam.9 The law is expected to
    identify the areas of support for SMEs as well as the responsible implementing agencies given
    the cross-cutting nature of constraints faced by SMEs.10 The roll out and implementation
    details of the new programs still need to be worked out and, given the mixed record of GoV
    programs to support domestic firms, there is great value in identifying gaps and lessons
    learned from previous domestic experience as well as to leverage international experiences.
    Lastly, the MPI, through the Foreign Investment Agency (FIA), is in the process of
    formulating a new FDI Strategy and implementation action plan, with support from the WBG.
    This strategy aims to promote and attract “2nd Generation” foreign investments to Vietnam,
    with potential for higher domestic value addition, improved environmental sustainability and
    green technologies, and enhanced FDI-SME linkages.




7 Within the MoIT, it is the former Department of Heavy Industries, or the current Industry Agency that is responsible for the SI
agenda..
8 Respectively, Decree for Supporting Industries No. 111/2015/ND-CP, dated November 3rd, 2015, and Decision No. 68 /QD-

TTg of January 18th 2017.
9The impetus for the new law has been driven by the changing global environment and the identification of significant gaps in

effective SME support. Please refer to the Government of Vietnam. 2015. “Reform Plan and Policy to Improve SME Effectiveness
in the Economic Restructuring, Summary Report”. The Central Economic Committee, Vietnam.
10 Under the law, there will be two categories of support: (a) general support for all SMEs, and (b) specific support provided to

specific categories of SMEs: innovative start-ups; Business Household enterprises converting to SMEs; and SMEs linked to value
chains and clusters. The former support includes: access to credit, taxation support, land access, incubation and enhancement of
technological capacity, market extension, information and consultancy and HR training. Specific support will be linked in line to
the issues faced by SMEs.

                                                                                                                             14
Country Context

26. Vietnam is a posterchild of a fast-track development success story. Economic growth
    since the 1990s has been among the fastest in the world, and its pace of poverty reduction
    almost unprecedented. GDP growth averaged 5.5 percent annually, real per capita GDP more
    than tripled between 1990 and 2014, earning Vietnam a middle-income country status in one
    generation. Expanding opportunities in the private sector - and especially better-paid formal
    wage employment – has been a powerful channel for inclusive growth in Vietnam. As part
    of the country’s structural transformation drive from a primarily agrarian economy to one
    based on manufacturing and services, over 20 million new, largely private sector jobs have
    been created.

27. Trade and investment continue to be the key drivers of Vietnam’s rapid development.
    As one of the most integrated countries in the world11 with a comparative advantage in labor-
    intensive manufacturing, Vietnam has successfully attracted large amounts of efficiency-
    seeking FDI and gained entry into GVCs. Equally impressive has been its export performance,
    with annual export growth rate of more than 18 percent spanning the past two decades.12

28. But with productivity growth stagnating, there are now emerging concerns about
    Vietnam’s competitiveness. Economic growth has moderated in recent years vis a vis the
    earlier decade. Productivity growth, the major driver of GDP growth in the early years of
    Vietnam’s transition has diminished over the past decade. In 2015, enterprises in Vietnam
    witnessed labor productivity decline of more than 4 percent compared to a close to 5%
    productivity increase in the EAP on average. In addition, the productivity decline is reflected
    across firm sizes, including for large firms. (Figure 1)
                              Figure 1: Employment and Labor Productivity Growth
                    10.0         Annual employment growth (%)           Labor productivity growth (%)
                     8.0
                     6.0
                     4.0
          Percent




                     2.0
                     0.0
                    -2.0
                    -4.0
                    -6.0
                             All       EAP      Vietnam                  Small (5-     Medium         Large
                           countries                                       19)         (20-99)       (100+)

         Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey, 2015.



11
 In 2015, the trade to GDP ratio stood at 170 percent of GDP.
12With imports trailing not far behind (reflecting high import content) during the same period. In the last 5 years, Vietnam’s
merchandise export growth averaged 15 percent - almost 5 times the global growth.

                                                                                                                           15
29. Private sector has dual track characteristics, with high performing FDI integrated in
    GVCs and a nascent domestic private sector. Currently the contribution of large firms,
    primarily the foreign-invested sector accounts for about 30 percent of employment in
    Vietnam’s enterprise sector13 and 70 percent of total exports. Only 20 percent of domestic
    enterprises export. SMEs - representing the bulk of the domestic private sector in Vietnam -
    lack the scale, business sophistication and technology needed to boost productivity for market
    expansion. According to the Global Competitiveness Index (WEF, 2016) Vietnam is ranked
    100 out of 138 economies on “business sophistication” pillar and 112th for “technological
    adoption” pillar, behind the Philippines (42nd and 57th), Thailand (35th and 53rd) and Malaysia
    (13th) and 19th)14 – reflecting the country’s competitiveness challenge vis-a-vis its regional
    competitors.

30. While Vietnam’s entry in GVCs through the foreign invested firms has brought the
    country significant benefits of export-led growth and employment, FDI has remained
    largely disconnected from the domestic private sector. Establishing itself as a center of
    manufacturing production and exports, Vietnam specializes in labor-intensive and final
    assembly stage of the GVCs. The country is a major exporter in apparel and mobile phone
    handsets. Many of Vietnam’s higher value manufacturing exports have high import content
    and low domestic value addition, and thus the net contribution to the economy of exports by
    foreign-invested firms can be overstated. This is also reflective of the limited inroads that
    domestic SMEs have made as suppliers to the export-oriented production of the FDI.15 Of the
    supply linkages that exist, these tend to be largely associated with low value-added tasks such
    as basic materials and packaging. Essentially, most domestic SMEs are integrated indirectly
    into GVCs (rather than as a direct exporter) and produce non-core (peripheral) parts of the
    upstream value chain or are involved in downstream assembly. This is reflected in Vietnam’s
    ranking with regard to quality of local suppliers in the Global Competitiveness Index where
    Vietnam is ranked 109 out of 138 economies behind the Philippines (74th), Thailand (77th)
    and Malaysia (22nd).

31. While recent progress is reported in developing linkages with FDI,16 the pace is slow given
    the Government ambitions and regional comparators. At the current stage, Vietnam’s SMEs
    are mostly concentrated in the third-tier supplier industry, which is characterized as an
    industry producing simple and low value-added raw material inputs and/or components
    (Figure 2). In the ICT hardware (electronics sector) and automotive sectors, these include
    plastics, rubber, metal parts, and molding. This third-tier supplier industry is also de-linked

13 This represents close to 7 percent of the total labor force.
14 This is based on responses from an Executive Opinion Survey undertaken by the World Economic Forum (WEF) for the Global
Competitiveness Index, 2016-17.
15 Japanese FDI – as one of the largest foreign investors in Vietnam – sourced 32 percent of its inputs from suppliers operating in

Vietnam in 2015 when compared to its local sourcing record in China (65%), Thailand (55%), and Indonesia (40%).
16 For instance, Vietnamese enterprises are beginning to make inroads in Samsung’s component supply chain. The number of Tier

1 (direct suppliers) Vietnamese vendors increased to 20 in 2016 from only 4 in 2015. Altogether nearly 200 local enterprises are
participating in the component supply chain used by three Samsung plants in Việt Nam, including 20 Tier 1 vendors and 178 tier-
2 vendors. Read more at http://vietnamnews.vn/economy/349749/200-vn-firms-in-samsung-chain.

                                                                                                                               16
     from lead firms (or even first-tier suppliers), which possess the technology and knowledge
     that can increase productivity of these firms. That is, third-tier suppliers are indirect suppliers

                                           Figure 2: FDI-local firm linkages




     to lead firms/FDIs, and thus do not have direct contact with these FDIs. Because of where
     SMEs are positioned, there is minimal product transformation at the domestic economy,
     meaning that spillover possibilities are not maximized, suggesting that there is scope to
     increase the tasks or activities in the ‘currently short’ domestic value chain (through more
     activities in the upstream and downstream sectors). The goal for the Government is to develop
     networks of first-tier (direct) and second-tier/third-tier (indirect suppliers to producers)
     domestic suppliers linked to the final assembly stages with the idea of positioning these firms
     to transition towards production of more sophisticated products and diversification of export
     basket (Figure 2). Moreover, domestic firms have the potential to gain lead firm status in the
     long run.

32. While SMEs may be expected to have the largest productivity gains in increasing linkages,
    not all SMEs can be candidates for linkages. In an era of GVCs, where MNEs are competing
    in international markets, and their survival depends on world-class levels of efficiency and
    productivity, they need to source their inputs from equally competitive suppliers.17
    Developing countries frequently confound supply-chain creation with support for all SMEs.
    A close look at case studies of supplier-development programs and vendor-development
    programs does not support the proposition that small firms should be the preferred targets for
    host country match-makers or MNC talent-scouts. To the contrary, there appears to be
    evidence that medium-sized and larger indigenous companies “are more likely than their

17 Vietnam also faces a more challenging global horizon. Wages in its competitor countries like Bangladesh and Cambodia are
already lower, and the “demographic dividend” is diminishing.

                                                                                                                        17
     smaller counterparts to possess capabilities needed for linkages that result in ‘win-win’
     scenarios”18 for near term pay-off. At the same time, building firm capabilities and tackling
     the key cross-cutting enabling environment constraints that SMEs face in Vietnam remains
     critical for strengthening private sector’s contribution to overall growth and competitiveness
     of the country.

33. Over the last 15 years, the GoV has put in place policies and programs to enhance
    competitiveness and innovation capacity of the domestic private sector. The programs include
    both business development services (BDS),19 and financial support for SMEs. The BDS
    programs range from technological upgradation, innovation to market development, training
    and skills as well as standalone financial packages.20 Policy measures include improvement
    of the legal framework for market entry,21 operation as well as incentives policies. While
    Vietnam’s Doing Business ranking has improved (from 98 in 2012 to 82 in 2017), the business
    environment and regulatory framework require further strengthening—to ensure equality
    between actors, improve access to finance and markets, protect property rights, and enforce
    competition policies.22 In recognition that more needs to be done and that some of the existing
    programs may not be effective, new policy initiatives are underway that are expected to
    enhance competitiveness of the domestic private sector and promote linkages. This includes
    Government’s priority to develop a network of local suppliers – as articulated in its
    “Supporting industries” policy framework as well as the new SME law.23



Conceptual Approach and Scope
34. Several key dimensions determine the potential for linkages and spillovers from FDI.
    This report draws on the conceptual framework presented by Farole and Winkler (2014),
    which analyzes this potential by considering three mediating factors: (i) the spillover potential
    of foreign companies, (ii) the absorptive capacities of domestic firms, and (iii) host country
    factors and institutional framework.24 While this framework considers several transmission

18 UNCTAD (2011). How to Create and Benefit from FDI-SME Linkages: Lessons from Malaysia and Singapore (Best Practices
in Investment for Development series.
19 Business development services (BDS) are defined as the array of non-financial services critical to the entry, survival,

productivity, competitiveness, and growth of SMEs. BDS include training, consultancy and advisory services, marketing
assistance, information, technology development and transfer, and business linkage promotion.
20 These include bank loans by providing credit guarantee funds, and the Credit Guarantee Fund of Vietnam Development

program. Central Economic Committee GoV, (2015).
21The record with new firm entry has been impressive in Vietnam vis a vis its competitors. Within the domestic private sector, it

is the young firms that have created the most jobs, particularly young small firms. See Aterido R. and Mary Hallward-Driemeier
(2015).
22 Vietnam Vision 2035.
23 The WBG has already been engaging with the government on both SI and SME agenda. The former is being undertaken as part

of an on-going IFC advisory services project that includes piloting a supplier development program in two sectors, and developing
a new FDI strategy and action plan to attract new cadre of FDI that will help Vietnam enter into new – for example in hi-tech and
green industries - GVCs. With respect to SME law, the World Bank has provided inputs on some drafts of the law, based on the
early findings of the Enterprise survey and international good practices note.
24 The spillover potential of foreign investors is affected by degree and structure of foreign ownership, FDI motive and global

production and sourcing strategies of GVCs. This includes the extent to which FDIs share their blue prints and guide suppliers on
how to meet them, and the nature of technology that MNEs bring, for examples. Absorptive capacity or ability to absorb foreign
technology and knowledge is in turn shaped by characteristics of domestic firms i.e. technology gaps between foreign and

                                                                                                                             18
     channels for spillovers, including labor turnover and market restructuring, the present study
     focuses on supply chains as the main channel and underlines the supply-side constraints and
     market failures that may deter this process in Vietnam. (Figure 3)

     Figure 3. Conceptual Approach: FDI Spillover Potential, Domestic Private Sector Capabilities
                                    and Business Environment



                                                         Attracting FDI with
                                                         spillovers potential


                                                                                              Absorptive
                        Supply chain
                                                                                              capacity of
                      linkage process
                                                                                            domestic private
                                                                                                sector


                                           Business Environment – Polices and Institutions

                    Source: Adapted from Farole, T. and D., Winkler (2014).




35. The following streams of work are undertaken to examine the multiple dimensions outlined
    in the above approach.
        • Enterprise productivity and investment climate analysis: The first part of the analysis
            examines key business environment constraints that hinder enterprise level
            productivity and innovation in Vietnam, using the latest Enterprise Survey (ES) data
            collected by the World Bank, as well as complementing it with recent analytical work
            conducted on these issues.25 Focusing on linkages, it attempts to better understand
            which firm characteristics and investment climate constraints are the most binding for
            linkages with foreign-owned companies, with a view to identifying promising areas
            for policy interventions to develop such linkages. Comparing domestic firms that are
            suppliers and those that are domestically focused, the analysis also considers both
            internal constraints related to firms’ capabilities and external constraints in the
            business environment. It highlights what firm characteristics and capabilities promote
            absorption of FDI spillovers, and what type of innovation and capacity building lead
            to economic upgrading, on a sustainable basis. Breakdowns of the data by firms’

domestic firms, R&D, human capital, firm size, exporting sector dynamics, competition, and type of ownership. Policies at host
country level can range from labor market regulations, intellectual property rights, access to finance, learning and innovation
infrastructure, trade and investment policy, institutions and governance, and competition. All these processes are interdependent
and dynamic. For instance, changes in domestic firm characteristics and/or host country policy changes can influence foreign
investors’ production and sourcing strategies.
25Enterprise Surveys are comparable firm-level surveys of representative samples of different country’s private sector, regularly

conducted by the World Bank since 2002 (see: http://www.enterprisesurveys.org). The latest survey for Vietnam, conducted in
2015-2016 covered 996 firms, including 294 panel firms also covered by the previous survey in 2009.

                                                                                                                             19
              characteristics (e.g. ownership, age, location, sector) are used where most relevant and
              Vietnam is benchmark against regional competitors (e.g. Thailand, Malaysia,
              Indonesia, Philippines, and Cambodia). Finally, the analysis attempts to use available
              information on gender in the data to highlight specific constraints faced by women in
              the private sector. This analysis is presented in Chapter 2.

         •    Linkages between FDI and domestic private sector: This stream of work first outlines
              the constraints that may deter backward linkages, based on academic literature and
              empirical experience in other countries. Focusing on Vietnam, it then identifies the
              demand and supply side constraints and market failures that are driving the lack of
              linkages in selected sectors (i.e., electronics and automotive). It presents key set of
              interventions that would be necessary to address these constraints in Vietnam,
              bringing together different approaches and models that have been successfully
              employed in other countries for SDPs. Lastly, presents the on-going initiative that is
              being supported by the WBG in piloting the supplier development program in Vietnam
              context for facilitating domestic enterprise participation in domestic value addition
              (DVA) and global value chains, through economic up-grading, greater innovation and
              productivity enhancement. This analysis is presented in Chapter 3.

         •    Mapping and Review of selective SME programs and policies. This chapter undertakes
              the mapping of SME programs and policies to shed light on the alignment of these
              programs with the constraints faced by SMEs. Since the last 15 years a plethora of
              policies and programs, including business development services (BDS)26 as well
              finance, have been put in place to support SME development and to facilitate linkage
              development. The programs range from technological upgradation, innovation to
              market development, training and skills as well as standalone financial packages.27
              The work is based on new work that undertakes mapping and review of selective SME
              programs and policies that under implementation supplemented by a targeted survey
              of beneficiaries, and conduct of two rounds of stakeholder workshop. It then assesses
              their alignment with the supply-side constraints and market failures that domestic
              firms face in Vietnam. Are these programs and policies aligned to support the needs
              of the enterprise competitiveness and linkages in Vietnam? What are the gaps? Going
              forward, what should be the priority focus areas for the Government, and how can the
              program design learn from good practice from other countries? This is the focus of
              Chapter 4.

         •    Chapter 5 offers recommendations to strengthen policies and programs to support
              linkages and competitiveness of domestic enterprises in Vietnam.


26 Business development services (BDS) are defined as the array of non-financial services critical to the entry, survival,
productivity, competitiveness, and growth of SMEs. BDS include training, consultancy and advisory services, marketing
assistance, information, technology development and transfer, and business linkage promotion.
27 These include bank loans by providing credit guarantee funds, and the Credit Guarantee Fund of Vietnam Development

program. (Central Economic Committee GoV, 2015).

                                                                                                                       20
     Chapter 2: Enterprise Productivity and Investment Climate Analysis
36. As the introductory chapter outlined, the development of a vibrant and competitive
    private sector is essential if Vietnam is to achieve its objective to increase domestic value
    addition and strengthen FDI linkages. Overall, productivity and innovation appear as two
    key dimensions of firm performances that will need to be improved in order for more
    Vietnamese firms to meet MNEs and lead firm requirements of product and service quality
    standards, price, scale and on-time delivery to become viable suppliers. Furthermore,
    technology and knowledge transfer from FDI and exposure to international markets require
    complementary capabilities on the part of domestic firms to be able to effectively use and
    internalize the spillovers (Lall, 1992).28

37. This chapter analyzes the constraints in the external business environment, as well as internal
    constraints related to firms’ capabilities that undermine the competitiveness of the Vietnamese
    private sector, and linkages with MNEs. Building on previous work conducted29 and using
    the latest Enterprise Survey (ES) data collected by the World Bank, the first section starts by
    providing an updated assessment of firms’ productivity and innovation capacity - as two key
    dimensions of competitiveness. In the second section, the analysis then attempts to identify
    which firm characteristics and investment climate constraints are the most binding for
    linkages with foreign-owned companies, with a view to identifying promising areas for policy
    interventions to develop such linkages.30


Productivity Analysis31
38. Basic measures of firm-level productivity can be computed using the ES data in order to shed
    light on firm performances in Vietnam, including labor productivity (defined as value-added
    per worker), capital productivity (defined as the ratio of sales to the value of machinery and
    equipment) and TFP. This section presents summary information on several such measures,
    although the usual caveats should be kept in mind when interpreting them.32

28 These capabilities are primarily internal to the firm, and cover both production and technological/innovation capabilities which
accumulate over time. These include managerial practices and organizational capabilities which evolve and become apparent in
management practices and routines.
29These include notably: ‘Vietnam 2035’ (World Bank and MPI 2016), ‘Vietnam at a Crossroads’ (World Bank 2016), Brandt et

al. (2016), and Newman et al. (2015). See Annex 1 for a summary of their main conclusions.
30 As ES survey data does not focus on firm capabilities, the report draws on the findings of the World Management Survey

(WMS) - a Harvard-LSE-Stanford research project - that has developed a survey tool to measure management practices around
the globe since 2002. The survey covers four dimensions of management practices - operations, monitoring, targets and people
management (Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2015).
31 This section draws from a background paper by Clarke (2016), available upon request. Data points on each measure of

performance are for the median firm, based on ES data (latest survey for each country). Unless otherwise noted, amounts are
expressed in 2010 US$.
32 In particular, labor productivity presents the advantage of relying on more solid data and fewer assumptions. However, it varies

with the capital intensity of the firm analyzed and can thus be misleading, especially for cross-sector comparisons. In contrast,
TFP takes into account the contribution of the different production factors such as labor and capital. However, the quality and
availability of data on capital use in firm-level surveys such as ES is generally lower than for labor, especially in developing
countries and for small firms. Moreover, measures of TFP can be influenced by various dimensions of firms’ operating
environment (e.g. evolution of demand, access to market, market power).

                                                                                                                               21
39. Overall, results suggest that productivity is not particularly low in Vietnam compared
    to other Asian countries, although this may not be true for larger firms. Labor
    productivity compares favorably with other Southeast Asian countries and India, although this
    appears not to be true for the firms at the top of the distribution. The apparent relatively high
    labor productivity of Vietnamese firms appears to be partly driven by a high and growing use
    of capital, although there is some evidence that they may not be using it as productively as
    other countries in the region or large emerging economies. While labor costs are higher than
    in the rest of region, they seem in line with productivity levels and thus do not seem to be a
    major obstacle to competitiveness. TFP seems higher in Vietnam than in most regional
    competitors and the BRIC countries, but further analysis would be needed to better understand
    whether this truly reflects higher firm performances or other factors. Finally, comparisons
    within Vietnam suggest that there are significant differences in productivity across regions,
    but that larger firms are not more productive than smaller ones as would be expected, which
    again may indicate weaknesses at the top end of the distribution.

40. Labor productivity: Labor productivity appears to be relatively high in Vietnam, where the
    median manufacturing firm produces about US$10,500 of value-added per worker. This
    compares favorably with other countries in Southeast Asia. It is also more than in India, but
    significantly less than in other BRICs economies (Figure 4).

41. Estimations of the distribution of labor productivity suggest that it peaks at US$8,000 and that
    few firms produce more than US$60,000 of value added per worker (Figure 5). While labor
    productivity is higher in Vietnam than in Cambodia at low deciles of the distribution (e.g.,
    US$2,766 vs. US$ 583 respectively at the 10th percentile), the reverse is true for the most
    productive firms (e.g., US$61,646 vs. US$ 92,378 respectively at the 90th percentile, and
    US$106,436 vs. US$287,632 respectively at the 95th percentile). This is suggestive of a
    weakness at the top of the distribution in Vietnam.

                                   Figure 4. Labor Productivity
                    $25,000
                    $20,000
                    $15,000
                    $10,000
                     $5,000
                         $0




                                                                                                  22
                               Figure 5. Estimated Distribution of Labor Productivity
         20
         15
         10
           5
           0
                $0          $30,000        $60,000        $90,000        $120,000      $150,000       $180,000
               Note: Kernel density estimates use an epanechnikov kernel with the optimal band width. Outliers with
               negative labor productivity or labor productivity were dropped when estimating the distribution.

42. Capital intensity and productivity: Vietnamese firms appear to be capital intensive, far more
    so than Southeast Asian comparators and on par with the BRICs economies (Figure 6).
    Although measuring capital accurately is difficult in developing countries and figures should
    therefore be considered with caution, the median firm in Vietnam reports having about
    US$7,300 of capital per worker. This might partly explain why labor productivity is found to
    be higher in Vietnam than in neighboring countries, since this partial measure of productivity
    increases when firms substitute capital for labor. Despite being as capital intensive as BRICs
    firms, the median firm in Vietnam is, however, considerably less productive than them,
    suggesting that Vietnamese firms are not using capital as productively.

43. While capital intensity is useful to assess the quantity of capital used by firms, the ratio of
    sales to the value capital can give an idea of how productively they use it.33 The available data
    suggests that capital productivity is low in Vietnam (Figure 7), with a ratio of around 160
    percent for the median firm, lower than any of the comparator countries in Southeast Asia or
    in any of the BRIC economies. This confirms that capital might not be used very efficiently
    in Vietnam. It may also suggest that firms are not, on average, highly capital constrained,
    since this would be expected to show in the data through a relatively high capital productivity.

                  Figure 6. Capital Intensity                                 Figure 7. Capital Productivity

     $10,000                                                       800%
                                                                   700%
      $8,000
                                                                   600%
      $6,000                                                       500%
                                                                   400%
      $4,000                                                       300%
      $2,000                                                       200%
                                                                   100%
         $0                                                          0%




44. Labor costs: Although the productivity measures above provide information on how
    competitive firms in Vietnam are relative to firms in other developing economies, they can be

33 Capital productivity does not take use of labor into account and will thus generally be higher for firms that substitute workers
for capital in their production process. Because both capital and value-added are measured in monetary terms, the ratio is purely
relative and does not have a natural unit.

                                                                                                                               23
     misleading when considered in isolation. Labor productivity, in particular, does not
     distinguish between skilled and unskilled workers, although we would expect both
     productivity and wages to be higher for firms employing highly skilled workers. Wages also
     reflect local labor market conditions, i.e. they are higher when the supply of workers is low
     relative to the demand. Wage levels are important because firms can remain competitive when
     productivity is low if wages are comparatively lower. It is therefore useful to look at labor
     costs, defined for each firm as the cost of all payments to all workers divided by the number
     of workers, when assessing competitiveness.

45. Labor costs are higher in Vietnam than in most of the regional comparator countries (Figure
    8). The median Vietnamese firm reported that wages and salaries cost about $2,739 per
    worker—about twice as high as in Lao PDR, Myanmar and Malaysia, and about 30 to 45
    percent higher than in Cambodia, Thailand, and the Philippines. Wage costs are, however,
    considerably lower than in the BRIC economies other than India.

46. Unit labor costs, defined as the ratio of labor costs to value added 34, are higher when high
    labor costs are not fully reflected in high productivity and can thus allow us to assess the net
    impact of labor costs on competitiveness. In contrast to labor productivity, capital intensity,
    TFP, and labor costs, unit labor costs are not typically higher in higher income countries than
    in lower income countries (Clarke, 2012), since both labor costs and productivity tend to be
    higher in those countries.

47. Unit labor costs appear to be relatively modest for the median firm in Vietnam. Although they
    are higher than in China, India, the Philippines and Malaysia, they are lower than in the other
    Southeast Asian and BRIC economies. This suggests that, for the most part, Vietnam’s high
    labor costs are not disconnected from productivity levels.




34Using the sales figures captured in ES only approximates unit labor costs, which would normally measure output in physical
units rather than monetary value. While unit labor costs do not take capital into account, they are not measured in local currency
and, therefore, are unaffected by exchange rate variations.

                                                                                                                              24
              Figure 8. Labor Costs                           Figure 9. Unit Labor Costs
 $7,000                                              60%
 $6,000                                              50%
 $5,000
                                                     40%
 $4,000
                                                     30%
 $3,000
                                                     20%
 $2,000
 $1,000                                              10%
    $0                                                0%




48. Total Factor Productivity: Keeping all applicable caveats in mind concerning the quality of
    data, Vietnam’s TFP compares favorably with TFP in Southeast Asian and BRICS economies
    (Figure 10). This suggest that, after taking worker skills and education, the use of capital and
    sector of operations into account, the median Vietnamese firm seems to be more productive
    than the median firms in any of the other comparator countries except for Laos. That is, the
    higher labor productivity observed in Brazil, Russia and China appears to be mostly due to
    firms in these countries using capital, skilled workers or both more intensively than
    Vietnamese firms do. Similar pattern can be seen focusing on the two industries with the
    largest samples of firms: garments and food processing. Although some countries have
    higher median levels of TFP than Vietnam in both industries, Vietnam compares favorably
    with the comparator countries in both sectors. However, a finer analysis is needed to
    understand if this is true across firm categories within Vietnam.

                               Figure 10. Total Factor Productivity

            300%
            250%
            200%
            150%
            100%
             50%
              0%




49. Within Vietnam Comparisons: Within country comparisons can help understand to what
    extend the relatively low productivity and high capital intensity of Vietnamese firms can be
    explained by characteristics of different groups of firms.

50. Regions: a breakdown by region suggests that labor productivity is lower for the median firm
    in the Red River and Mekong Deltas than in the Southeast, North Central and Central Coastal
    regions (Figure 11). This difference, which is statistically significant, does not appear to be
                                                                                                 25
   due to differences in capital intensity across regions, as this is not consistently correlated to
   labor productivity and cross-regional differences in capital intensity are not statistically
   significant.

                           Figure 11. Productivity Comparison by Region


                                         South East

                                     Red River Delta

                   North Central And Central Coastal

                                Mekong River Delta

                                                       $0    $4,000       $8,000     $12,000   $16,000

                                           Labor productivity        Capital Intensity


51. Firm size: Measured by the number of employees, this is usually positively correlated with
    both labor productivity and capital intensity. However, in Vietnam, no statistically significant
    difference in labor productivity is found between the median small, medium and large firms.
    A statistically significant difference is found between the median capital intensity of medium
    firms (US$12,129 per worker) and large firm (US$3,111), which is atypical (Figure 12).
    While more analysis would be needed to determine the factors driving this, this could be
    suggestive of a weakness of medium and large firms, which would normally be expected to
    be more productive than small ones.

                          Figure 12. Productivity Comparison by Firm Size
                         $15,000

                         $10,000

                          $5,000

                              $0
                                      Small (5-19      Medium (20-99       Large (100 or
                                       workers)          workers)             more)

                                       Labor Productivity       Capital Intensity


52. Export status: In most countries, the literature has found that exporting firms are more
    productive than similar non-exporting firms. This can be explained by the fact that only the
    most productive enterprises are able to enter export markets (i.e., self-selection) and/or that
    the discipline of exporting directly might improve efficiency (i.e., learning-by-exporting).
    Consistent with this, in Vietnam, labor productivity and capital intensity are found to be
    slightly higher for exporters than non-exporters (Figure 13). However, the differences are not
    significant, suggesting that exporting status is not a strong determinant of productivity
    differences across firms in Vietnam.

                                                                                                         26
                      Figure 13. Productivity Comparison by Export Status
                   $15,000
                   $10,000
                    $5,000
                           $0
                                   Labor productivity            Capital Intensity

                                           Non-exporter     Exporter


53. Ownership: Foreign-owned firms are generally more productive than domestic firms in
    developing countries, which can be explained by their easier access to technology and finance
    through parent companies. Likewise, in most countries, foreign-owned firms are more capital
    intensive than domestic firms. While foreign-owned firms in Vietnam are found to produce
    more value added per workers than domestic firms (US$13,100 vs. US$10,189), this
    difference is not statistically significant (Figure 14). Foreign-owned firms appear to be less
    capital intensive than domestic ones, implying that the latter may not be particularly
    constrained at this level.

                           Figure 14. Productivity Comparison by Ownership
                 $15,000

                 $10,000

                  $5,000

                     $0
                                  Labor Productivity               Capital Intensity

                                          Domestic      Foreign-owned


54. In most countries, exporters are more productive than non-exporters, foreign-owned firms are
    more productive than domestic ones, and large firms are more productive than small firms.
    These differences are usually sizeable, reflecting a divide between a modern economy
    inhabited by large, often foreign-owned, exporters and small domestic firms that focus on
    domestic markets. This does not appear to be the case in Vietnam. Although the differences
    are often in this direction—Vietnamese exporters are more productive than Vietnamese non-
    exporters and foreign-owned firms are more productive than domestic firms—the differences
    are not statistically insignificant. While there is no obvious explanation for this, possible
    factors could include data quality issues and higher competitive pressure or lower profit
    margins in the sectors in which foreign and exporting firms are concentrated (e.g. assembly
    tasks in light manufacturing).

55. Evolution of productivity over time: Successive rounds of Enterprise Surveys in 2009 and
    2015, including with a panel for a subset of the sample, make it possible to assess how labor


                                                                                               27
     productivity and capital intensity evolved over time35. While both whole sample and panel
     data suggest labor productivity and capital intensity progressed during those years, the
     difference is more marked and only statistically significant for the panel (Figure 15). The
     difference is large for panel firms, amounting to a 61 percent labor productivity growth
     (following a 67 percent increase between 2005 and 2009) and 185 percent capital intensity
     growth. This appears to confirm a recent trend that Vietnamese firms are becoming
     increasingly capital intensive.

                       Figure 15. Evolution of Labor Productivity and Capital Intensity
                                              160
                         2009 VND, millions




                                              120
                                               80
                                               40
                                                0
                                                       Labor       Capital Intensity      Labor       Capital Intensity
                                                    productivity                       productivity
                                                           Whole sample                           Panel

                                                                         2009     2015


Innovation
56. The need for future TFP growth in Vietnam to rely more on innovation has been
    highlighted in recent reviews of the Vietnamese innovation system (OECD and World
    Bank. 2014; World Bank and MPI 2016). In order to complement the analysis in these reports,
    this section provides firm-level evidence using a new innovation module implemented as part
    of the 2015 Enterprise Survey in Vietnam. It compares different categories of firms in
    Vietnam (e.g. sector, size, region, export orientation, ownership), with firms from comparator
    countries in Asia. The survey covers both subjective measures of different types of innovation
    (e.g. product innovation, process innovation, organizational innovation)36, as well as objective
    measures of innovation inputs (e.g. R&D activities)37.


35 The comparisons for the whole sample are useful because they will generally be more statistically robust than the comparisons
for the smaller panels. The panel results are also useful, but might be affected by to survivor bias (i.e., better performing firms are
more likely to survive) and small sample size. Panel results are unweighted, as the survey weights computed for each survey year
is not applicable to the others. Because no cross-country comparisons is done, monetary amounts are presented in constant
Vietnamese dongs (VND), which avoids attributing changes due to shifts in exchange rates over time to changes in productivity.
36 Product innovation, which refers to the creation and subsequent introduction of a good or service that is either new, or an

improved version of previous goods or services, reflects firms’ capability of differentiating their product from other busine sses.
In Enterprise Survey, product innovation is measured by three questions: whether introduced new or significantly improved
products or services, whether their new or significantly improved products or services were also new for the establishment’s main
market, and the percent of sales from the new or significantly improved product or service. Process innovations reflects firms’
capability to improve their efficiency of manufacturing products or offering services, in order to decrease unit costs of production
or delivery, to increase quality or to produce or deliver new or significantly improved products. Organizational innovation is
understood to encompass a series of managerial and administrative practices put into place in the organization to improve the use
of knowledge, workflows efficiency or quality of goods or services.
37 Subjective measures of innovation in firm-level surveys should be interpreted with caution, as they have been shown to be

affected by reliability issues and tend to overestimate innovation rates in developing countries. For a detailed discussion and
analysis, see Cirera and Muzi (2016).

                                                                                                                                   28
57. The data suggests that Vietnamese firms seek to improve their products and processes no less
    than their peers in other countries in the region, but that they more rarely introduce products
    that are new to their markets and have completely new functions compared to their existing
    products. While a substantial proportion of firms declare spending on R&D, the average
    amount spent as a proportion of sales is lower than in most other Southeast Asian countries
    and relatively few firms in Vietnam invest in licensed or patented knowledge to support their
    innovation efforts.

58. Product innovation: As shown in Figure 16, around 23 percent of Vietnamese firms declare
    having introduced a new or significantly improved product or service over the three previous
    years. This is intermediate between countries, such as Cambodia and the Philippines, where
    this proportion is above 30 percent, and Thailand, Lao PDR and Malaysia, where it is
    significantly lower38. However, the same figure suggests that a smaller proportion of
    Vietnamese firms consider that their main innovation was new to their market than in all other
    comparator countries. Another question seeks to ask firms the reason behind them introducing
    a new product. The most important characteristic of new products that firms in Vietnam
    introduce is to seek to increase quality, similar to all the comparator countries except for Lao
    PDR (Figure 17). However, product innovation in Vietnam appears more often than in other
    countries aiming at reducing costs and less often at introducing completely new functions.

             Figure 16. Product Innovation                         Figure 17. Characteristic of New Products

                                                                   100%
     80%
                                                                    80%
     60%
                                                                    60%
     40%                                                            40%

     20%                                                            20%

                                                                      0%
     0%
                                                                             Completely       Cheaper     Higher quality
           Product innovation (%   New to market (%                         new function
                   firms)          innovating firms)
                                                                             Vietnam       Cambodia      Lao PDR
             Vietnam      Cambodia      Lao PDR
                                                                             Malaysia      Philippines   Thailand
             Malaysia     Philippines   Thailand


59. A breakdown of product innovation rates for different types of firms within Vietnam suggests
    that (i) medium and large firms innovate more than small ones, (ii) joint ventures between
    domestic and foreign investors tend to be more innovative, which are results also found in
    other Southeast Asian countries (Figure 18). This result is consistent with what we find in the
    literature with large and medium firms spending more on innovative activity and spillovers


38As noted, this data should be considered with some degree of caution, as firms’ perception may be more or less aligned with
objective assessment of innovation, and some surprising results, such as the low figure for Thailand, are unexplained.

                                                                                                                           29
   from joint ventures with FDI leasing to greater levels of innovation amongst the domestic
   firms with linkages.

          Figure 18. Product innovation rate by firm size and ownership type in Vietnam

                                        Small           12%
                                      Medium                             40%
                                        Large                             45%
                                   Domestic                   23%
                               Joint venture                                              70%
                                      Foreign             19%


60. Process innovation: Like for product innovation, Vietnam is in an intermediate position
    regarding the proportion of firms declaring that they have recently improved their processes
    (e.g. production method, distribution/logistics, maintenance, procurement, accounting)
    (Figure 19). The data also suggests that process innovation in Vietnam entails the automation
    of manual tasks and the introduction of new technologies or production method similar to
    comparator countries (Figure 20). Finally, Vietnam is also in an intermediate position
    compared to other countries for the rate of innovation concerning firms’ organizational
    structures and management practices.

         Figure 19. Process Innovation                                   Figure 20. Function of New Process

  50%                                                           100%

  40%                                                           80%
                                                                60%
  30%
                                                                40%
  20%
                                                                20%
  10%
                                                                    0%
   0%                                                                           Automation                 New technology /
          Process innovation                (% firms)                                                          method

           Vietnam      Cambodia       Lao PDR                                 Vietnam          Cambodia      Lao PDR

           Malaysia     Philippines    Thailand                                Malaysia         Philippines   Thailand


61. Innovation inputs: In order to complement the perception data presented, it is useful to look
    at more objective measures of firms’ investments for innovation. For instance, a question
    asking firms whether they had spent on formal R&D over the last three years, either in house
    or contracted to external institutions, suggests that a relatively large proportion of Vietnamese
    firms do so compared to other countries in the region (Figure 21). The same evidence suggests
    that the average R&D effort in monetary terms (1.6 percent of annual sales) is lower than in
    Lao PDR (14.5 percent), the Philippines (3.6 percent), Malaysia (2.6 percent) and Cambodia
    (1.9 percent). Within Vietnam, 26 percent of medium and large firms declare spending on
    R&D, compared to only 9 percent of small firms. Around 20 percent of Vietnamese firms

                                                                                                                              30
      declare providing training to their employee for the development and/or introduction of new
      products or processes, more than in Lao PDR, Malaysia and Thailand but less than in the
      Philippines and Cambodia (Figure 22). The same figure shows that, compared to other
      countries in the region, relatively few Vietnamese firms appear to be spending on the purchase
      or licensing of inventions and knowledge for the development of new products and processes.

                Figure 21. R&D Spending                              Figure 22. R&D-related Training and Licenses

     25%                                                              50%

     20%                                                              40%
     15%                                                              30%
     10%                                                              20%
     5%                                                               10%
     0%                                                                 0%
           Formal spending on R&D R&D as % of sales (firms                       Training for R&D     Purchased or licensed
                  (% firms)         spending on R&D)                                 (% firms)         knowledge (% firms)
               Vietnam       Cambodia      Lao PDR                              Vietnam        Cambodia      Lao PDR
               Malaysia      Philippines   Thailand                             Malaysia       Philippines   Thailand


62. Econometric analysis, using logistic regression, confirms that certain firm
    characteristics increase the odds for a specific firm to undertake product innovation in
    Vietnam.39 The main results are as follows:
       • Sector: While firms in retail services are not less likely than manufacturing firms to
          report product innovation, those in other services sectors are. This is suggestive of a
          weakness of services sectors in Vietnam, confirming the findings of previous studies.
       • Region: Compared to firms in the Red River Delta, firms in the South East and even
          more so in the Mekong River Delta are also less likely to report product innovation.
       • Size: As opposed to small firms, being a medium or large firms increases the odds of
          introducing new or significantly improved products by a factor of more than 3.5.
       • Ownership: Results also suggests that, compared to domestic firms, joint ventures
          innovate more and wholly owned foreign firms innovate less. This could be due to the
          fact that innovative activity is undertaken at the head offices of these foreign firms
          that are based outside Vietnam and thus not captured in the data.
       • R&D and training: Unsurprisingly, spending on R&D and providing formal training
          to employees increase the odds of product innovation by factors of 5.4 and 2.7,
          respectively. In line with this, the new SME law has laid out specific support for SMEs
          to access training for product development, intellectual property and implementation
          of procedures on quality and measurement standards. In addition, the Law also lays
          out support for SME to commercialize scientific research and the development of

39 The regressions use as dependent variable a dummy equal to 1 if a firm declared having introduced new or significantly
improved products over the last three years and zero if otherwise. Coefficients are presented as odds ratios. See annex 2.1. for the
full set of regressions.

                                                                                                                                31
              intellectual property. The Law also proposes an innovative start up investment fund
              formed by investor’s capital contribution with a view to invest in innovative start-ups.

63. All these coefficients are highly significant at the 1 percent level, except for those related to
    joint ventures (10 percent) and wholly foreign owned firms (5 percent). Factors such as being
    an exporter, being managed by a woman and having a credit line at a financial institution are
    associated with higher odds of innovation but the results are not significant.


Constraints to backward linkages
64. This section provides a basic analysis of backward linkages using Enterprise Survey data,
    both from the demand side (foreign-owned customers) and from the supply side (domestic
    suppliers). Results notably suggest that some types of FDI (e.g. market seeking, joint
    ventures) have a higher potential for linkages, confirming findings from similar analysis
    elsewhere, and that issues such as the focus on quality, access to foreign inputs, the provision
    of training to workers, innovation efforts and use of ICT may be related to firms’ capacity to
    develop backward linkages with FDI. They also suggest that companies managed by women
    face additional obstacles to establish linkages and may need targeted support.

65. Demand side: The proportion of firms with foreign ownership using domestically produced
    inputs appears to be significantly lower in Vietnam than in comparator countries – while a
    vast majority of FDI firms in China, Malaysia and Thailand source some inputs locally, this
    is only the case for about two thirds of them in Vietnam (Figure 23). Moreover, the propensity
    for FDI firms to buy local inputs appears to be negatively linked with the share of direct
    exports in their sales and the share of foreign ownership in their capital (Figure 24). This
    would confirm previous finding that market-seeking FDI and joint ventures are more likely
    to establish backward linkages.

 Figure 23. Proportion of Foreign-owned Firms         Figure 24. Local Input Sourcing, Exports and
             Using Domestic Inputs                                 Foreign Ownership

                  97.2%       99.9%      96.4%                                                 99.6%
                                                                                       87.8%
      67.6%                                                           65.4%
                                                              36.4%



                                                        Average share of exported Average share of foreign
     Vietnam    China 2012   Malaysia   Thailand                  sales                 ownership
       2015                   2015       2016
                                                             Buy local inputs     Do not buy local inputs


66. Supply side: Differences between domestic firms which managed to establish FDI backward
    linkages and those which did not can inform the design of programs aiming to further develop
    those linkages. This is attempted here, using the Enterprise Survey’s measure of indirect

                                                                                                             32
       exports40. Several constraints and weaknesses of the domestic private sector discussed earlier
       are looked at, including the quality of products, access to finance, innovation, skills, etc.
       Finally, the main business environment constraints perceived by firms are presented,
       distinguishing between linked and non-linked firms.

67. Quality: The lack of competitive potential suppliers able to conform to MNEs’ quality, price
    and reliability standards has been identified as one of the major constraints backward to
    linkages in Vietnam (World Bank and MPI 2016). The latest Enterprise Survey data show
    that, while half of foreign-invested firms hold an internationally-recognized quality
    certification, such as ISO 9001 on quality management systems, less than 10 percent of
    domestic firms do. However, this proportion increases to almost a quarter for domestic
    “linked” firms (Figure 25). To the extent that imported inputs have a higher quality/price ratio
    or embody better technology than domestic ones, linked domestic firms’ heavier reliance than
    non-linked firms on such imported inputs, in Vietnam like in comparator countries, may also
    be a source of higher competitiveness (Figure 26).

     Figure 25. Use of Quality Certification                     Figure 26. Proportion of Imported Inputs

                                                               46%
      Foreign-owned firm                        50%
                                                                                                 32%
          Domestic firms       9%                                    21%
                                                                                 8%                    8%         4% 1%
                                                                                      1%

            Linked firms             24%                     Vietnam 2015      China 2012     Malaysia 2015 Thailand 2016
        Non-linked firms      6%                                             Linked firms      Non-linked firms


68. Access to finance: Access to finance is perceived as one of the top business constraints by
    firms surveyed in Vietnam, with a significantly higher proportion of firms declaring it as their
    main constraint than in Malaysia, Thailand and China (Figure 27). However, the fact that there
    is no large difference between linked and non-linked firms, as well as that the proportion of
    non-linked firms having a credit/loan or overdraft facility is higher in Vietnam than in
    comparator countries, suggests lack of access to finance may not be a major obstacle for firms
    to establish linkages.




40 This question asks surveyed firms to indicate the proportion of their sales “sold domestically to third party that exports
products”. Given the dominant share of foreign-owned firms in Vietnam’s exports, this can arguably be considered a relevant, if
imperfect, proxy for backward FDI linkages. ‘Linked’ domestic firms are thus defined as those exporting indirectly at least o f 1
percent of their output, and ‘non-linked’ firms are those who sell their whole output domestically. Based on the latest Enterprise
Survey for each country, the share of linked firms in Vietnam (5.1 percent) is lower than in China (12.5 percent) and Malaysia
(8.7 percent), but it is higher than in Thailand (0.3 percent). Dimensions discussed include access to finance, skills and workforce
training, and innovation.

                                                                                                                                33
                                          Figure 27 2. Access to finance
                100
                 80
                 60
          (%)    40
                 20
                  0
                      Linked    Non-linked    Linked     Non-linked     Linked   Non-linked     Linked      Non-linked
                       Vietnam, 2015                China, 2012           Malaysia, 2015            Thailand, 2016

                       Access to finance as top obstacle            Has credit/loan or overdraft facility


69. Skills: Compared to non-linked firms, on average linked firms are found to (i) have a slightly
    higher proportion of skilled production workers, (ii) provide much more formal training to
    their employees, and (iii) consider that an insufficient skills and education level of the
    workforce is a major constraint (Figure 28). Furthermore, while no obvious pattern emerges
    in terms of the type of skills linked and non-linked firms say are most difficult to find, the
    primary focus of their training efforts does not seem to be geared towards addressing these
    needs (Figure 29, Figure 30). For instance, skills such as foreign languages, work ethic,
    writing, management and leadership are sought after but do not appear to be the object of
    much of the training provided by firms.

                                                     Figure 28. Skills
                                  87% 76%
                                                          45%
                                                                  18%            27%
                                                                                        8%

                               Skilled production       Formal training      Skills as constraint
                                     workers

                                              Linked firms        Non-linked firms




                                                                                                                         34
     Figure 29. Proportion of firms finding it difficult     Figure 30. Primary focus of formal training
              to find different types of skills                              programs

       Technical skills (other                                  Technical skills (other
             than IT)                                                 than IT)
      Computer or general IT                                   Computer or general IT

           Foreign language                                         Foreign language

             Work ethic and                                           Work ethic and
              commitment                                               commitment

                      Writing                                                  Writing

           Interpersonal and                                        Interpersonal and
            communication                                            communication
             Managerial and                                           Managerial and
                leadership                                               leadership

                                 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%                                  0% 20% 40% 60% 80%100%

                    Non-linked firms    Linked firms                     Non-linked firms       Linked firms


70. Firm capabilities in Vietnam need improvement to enhance competitiveness. Evidence
    from cross-country survey work that measures management practices systematically across
    firms and industries provides evidence for the view that persistent differences in productivity
    at the national level (and in turn at the firm-level) can be due to variations in management
    practices.41 Figure 31 presents a snapshot of manufacturing management scores across the
    globe and finds that Vietnamese management practices, on average, do not fare well compared
    to many countries that have been surveyed.42 The spread of management practices within
    Vietnam is also not as wide as the other Asian countries, suggesting that there is certainly
    room for improvement. This message is reinforced when employers in Vietnam were asked
    about the difficulty of finding employees across a spectrum of different skills set; managerial
    skills ranked at the top across firm size (Figure 29, 30).




41
   Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2015). The World Management Survey (WMS) is a Harvard-LSE-Stanford research
project that has been using a survey tool to measure management practices around the globe since 2002. The survey
covers four dimensions of management practices - operations, monitoring, targets and people management. It may
be noted that ES survey does not focus on firm capabilities.
42
   Bloom, N. et al (2015) Management Practices in Vietnam, March 2015 (Draft). The World Management Survey
in Vietnam was conducted from November 2014 to April 2015, covering 150 manufacturing firms which were
randomly picked from the population of firms with 50 to 5000 employees. The Vietnamese firms are compared and
evaluated with over 15,000 similarly selected manufacturing firms in 35 countries around the world.

                                                                                                                   35
       Figure 31. Vietnam’s Management Scores




      Source: Bloom N. et al (August 2015).



Box 1. Gender Dimension of Linkages
It appears that Vietnamese women manager face additional difficulties to establish linkages (Figure
32a). Moreover, while the limited number of observation in Enterprise Survey data makes it difficult
to look at a very granular level, this difference seems to be found in most sectors (Figure 32b), and is
therefore not driven by differences in sector composition in Vietnam and the other countries. While
this finding would require more investigation, it could justify a specific gender focus in programs
aiming to foster backward linkages.

                                                                Figure 32b. Female top manager by sector
        Figure 32a. Female Top Manager
                                                                               in Vietnam

                                                    82%                           Wood
                                                          64%                 Garments
                                                                      Plastics & Rubber
           23%       28%           25%24%
                           17%                                  Non-metal mineral prod.
      8%
                                                                Machinery & equipment
                                                                 Fabricated metal prod.
   Vietnam 2015    China 2012 Malaysia 2015 Thailand 2016                          Food
                                                                                          0%      20%     40%     60%

                 Linked firms    Non-linked firms                          Linked firms        Non-linked firms


Moreover, Figure 33 presents a comparison of the business environment constraints perceived as being
the most binding for their business between male and female-managed companies. While the rankings
are generally similar, it shows that, compared to men, women managers tend to perceive access to

                                                                                                                        36
 finance as being less constraining, but that inadequate workforce education as being more of a
 constraint. While the data does not allow a deeper analysis of this last point, it could be explained either
 by a more difficult access to skilled workers for firms managed by women, or by a higher attention paid
 by them to skills.
                        Figure 33. Gender Differences in Business Constraints

                      25%
                      20%
                      15%
                      10%
                       5%
                       0%




                                        Male manager     Female manager



71. Innovation: The capacity to innovate can be one of the reasons why some domestic firms are
    capable of meeting foreign-owned clients’ requirements in terms of product diversity, quality
    and price. Alternatively, domestic firms that are linked to MNCs have a greater impetus to
    innovate in order to cater to globally acceptable standards sought of their products. In this
    regard, and subject to the caveats mentioned in section 3.2. Regarding subjective measures of
    innovation by firms, more than twice as many linked firms than non-linked firms declare
    having introduced product/process innovation and having spent on R&D during the three
    years preceding the survey (Figure 34). Furthermore, econometric analysis suggests that the
    introduction of process innovation is positively and significantly correlated with the
    probability of being a linked firm, controlling for firm size/age and with sector/region fixed-
    effects (see Annex 2.2.). Moreover, linked firms are far more likely to report that they
    developed their product/process innovation in cooperation with another firm or institution,
    while non-linked firms seem to mostly rely on their own efforts (Figure). This could be
    indicative of the greater need for linked firms to seek external partners in order to be able to
    undertake innovative activity that get higher quality results and the lack of incentives for non-
    linked firms to undertake truly innovative activity. This would also indicate a higher quality
    of innovation undertaken with external partners.




                                                                                                           37
        Figure 34. Innovation Capacity                                        Figure 35. Source of Innovation

                         72%
                                                                   80%
                                                                   60%
      42%                                                          40%
                               36%         31%                     20%
            20%                                                     0%
                                                 14%




                                                                                         Cooperation




                                                                                                                                   Cooperation
                                                                             Own




                                                                                                           External


                                                                                                                          Own




                                                                                                                                                 External
       Product             Process       R&D spending
     innovation          innovation
                                                                              Product innovation                          Process innovation
             Linked firms       Non-linked firms
                                                                                    Linked firms                      Non-linked firms


72. Use of Information and Communication Technologies: Domestic firms’ capacity to find
    business opportunities with foreign-owned firms can partly depend on their use of modern
    communication and online advertisement platforms. Using as a proxy the proportion of firms
    using their own website and emails to communicate with clients and suppliers, there is some
    evidence that linked firms tend to use these tools more, especially the development of a
    company website (Figure 36). This pattern is also found in other comparator countries except
    China.

                                                   Figure 36. Use of ICT
                  100%
                   80%
                   60%
                   40%
                   20%
                    0%
                           Own        Emails    Own       Emails      Own          Emails               Own            Emails
                          website              website               website                           website
                            Vietnam 2015            China 2012           Malaysia 2015                  Thailand 2016

                                               Linked firms        Non-linked firms




Business environment constraints


73. Although, as argued previously, perception data have limitations, it is useful to look at the
    business environment constraints that firms say are the main obstacles to their business.
    Firstly, Enterprise Surveys ask firms to rate how large a constraint is each of 17 areas of the
    investment climate on a five-point scale between ‘no obstacle’ and a ‘very severe obstacle’.
    Figure 37 shows the proportion of both linked and non-linked firms that rated each area as a
    ‘major’ or ‘very severe obstacle’ (jointly referred to here as serious obstacle or constraint).
    This shows significant differences between the two categories of firms. Non-linked firms find


                                                                                                                                                            38
   the practices of the informal sector or access to transport and telecommunication services
   more problematic than linked firms. On the other hand, linked firms more frequently consider
   that inadequate education of the workforce, access to finance, trade regulations and corruption
   are serious constraints.

          Figure 37. Business Environment Constraints Perceived as Serious Obstacles

              35%
              30%
              25%
              20%
              15%
              10%
               5%
               0%




                                     Non-linked firms   Linked firms


Concluding Summary

74. The latest enterprise survey findings highlight the importance of enhancing the
    competitiveness of Vietnamese firms if more linkages are to be established. Domestic
    firms’ productivity may not be excessively low compared to other Asian countries, although
    there are some indications that medium and larger companies, which are generally seen as
    having more potential to become suppliers for foreign-owned firms, are lagging. While
    Vietnamese firms do innovate, it seems this innovation appears to rarely relate to new
    products or technologies. Innovation also seems to rely on less investment in inputs and
    licensed knowledge than in some competing Asian countries, and there is scope to incentivize
    firms to dedicate more resources to R&D, the licensing of foreign technologies, etc. The data
    suggests that the innovation effort seems driven by larger firms, which could justify targeted
    support to help these firms innovate in a way that is more relevant for linkages, and that
    encouraging joint ventures could boost innovation. Finally, the analysis above confirms that
    programs aiming at fostering backward linkages could target market-seeking FDI and
    promote joint ventures, and that they should encourage the focus on product quality, access
    to foreign inputs, the provision of training to workers, innovation efforts and use of ICT by
    domestic firms.




                                                                                               39
       Chapter 3: Developing Linkages through Supplier Development
                                Programs
                             Lessons learnt from international experience


Introduction

75. In this chapter, the focus shifts to supply chain linkage mechanism as an important channel
    through which FDIs transfer technology, know-how, and management practices, help raise
    domestic firm productivity, as well as connect local firms to global and regional value
    chains.43 Promoting linkages – through the development of a network of local suppliers – is
    the most effective way to achieve these dynamic benefits. Many governments are increasingly
    willing to pursue supplier development programs as is the case in Vietnam.

76. Cognizant of the window of opportunity to exploit its current position in GVCs and move the
    domestic industry up the value chain, the Government has established a Supporting Industries
    (SI) framework. Many countries in the region and globally have trodden this path, and thus
    Vietnam can learn from their experience as it moves towards implementing the program.
    Empirical evidence has shown that developing linkages between MNEs/lead firms and
    domestic suppliers is not an automatic process as various supply-side constraints and market
    failures can deter the establishment of supply chains.44 Undertaking a clear analysis of these
    constraints in Vietnam is thus an essential starting point to justify development of an
    appropriate set of policy responses and instruments.45

77. This chapter is structured as follows. The first section lays out the framework for
    understanding the linkage process, the key players and the dynamic relationships to pinpoint
    bottlenecks. We then apply this framework to examine Vietnam’s experience to-date with
    linkages in section two. Focusing on the electronics sector and the automotive sector, the
    constraints that hold back foreign/lead firms as “buyers” and domestic firms as “sellers” (i.e.
    suppliers) from making the successful connection are examined in the third section. In the last
    section, the chapter draws on the experience of 4 different set of countries – Czech Republic,
    Malaysia, Chile and Cosa Rica – that implemented linkages programs to examine the policies,
    instruments and institutional arrangements deployed to address similar constraints and
    challenges. The objective is to identify common elements of design and implementation in
    each program, and shed light on what works and what does not in different settings. These

43 Primarily through the creation of backward and forward linkages. Supply chains are vertical inter-sectoral linkages which can
be further categorized as either “downstream” (forward) or “upstream” (backward) linkages.
44 Not all constraints arise from market failures; firms may also face constraints due to governance, institutional and capacity

issues. These are discussed later in the chapter.
45For example, the source of underinvestment in technology upgradation (i.e., positive externalities or asymmetric information)

determines an appropriate policy response, such as subsidized finance to compensate firms for the external benefits provided to
other firms or technical assistance on improving information access. Similarly, if the root cause proves to be weak capabilities,
then assistance to build firm capabilities will likely be the optimal response.

                                                                                                                             40
       insights can be useful for Vietnam as it focuses on the operationalization of its linkage
       program, within the context of the country constraints.


Conceptual Linkage process

78. The linkage process is governed by the economic relationship between MNEs/lead firms
    as the buyers, and domestic firms as the suppliers along a given supply chain. In an era
    of GVCs where MNEs compete in international markets, their survival depends on world-
    class levels of efficiency and productivity. Therefore, they need to source their inputs from
    equally competitive suppliers. MNEs are generally keen to source locally if a competitive
    local supplier can be found. However, they are also reluctant to absorb high search-and-find
    costs, and they will typically not invest in assisting local suppliers (who tend to be 3rd tier)
    with upgrading efforts.46 Likewise local firms are generally keen to supply to MNEs, but are
    often not keen to make the necessary investments in technology and in processes to meet the


                   Figure 38. Supply-side and Demand-side Constraints and Market Failures

        Supply-side (domestic suppliers)          Coonnecting supply and demand                Demand-side (lead/foreign)



                                                                 Coordination                           Lack of competitive local
               Lack of access to finance
                                                                    failure                                     suppliers



              Negative externalities related                   Lack of contract                      Negative externalities related to
                to technology and skills                                                              intellectual property and skills
                       investment                                enforcment                                     investment



                                                        Insufficient public sector policy            Lack of information on domestic
                 Lack of skilled workers
                                                                   alignment                             suppliers and capacity



              Lack of information on buyer
                 sourcing strategies and                 Implementation challenges in
              standards and 'own' missing                  delivery of BDS for SMEs
                       capabilities


       exacting quality standards without potential pay-off for such investment. In reality, market
       failures as well as domestic firms’ constraints deter this linkage process. While there is a role
       for government policy to help de-risk this process for both the MNE and the local supplier,
       through overcoming multiple obstacles, there may also be institutional and government



46   MNEs in efficiency seeking FDI particularly invest in “close family” suppliers only (Tier 1).

                                                                                                                                         41
     failures that hinder the linkage process. Figure 38 lays out the three buckets of market failures
     and constraints that may deter supply chain linkages.

79. Demand side or buyers’ constraints: Foreign investors, with potential for spillovers to host
    country, may face multiple obstacles and market failures as they attempt to link with domestic
    suppliers. These include incomplete markets related to the lack of competitive local suppliers;
    negative externalities related to lack of intellectual property rights (IPR) and possible
    poaching of productive suppliers; and lack of information on domestic suppliers and their
    capacity. Lack of competitive local suppliers in the country means that foreign firms will look
    elsewhere and link with other firms which can provide consistent (in terms of quality,
    quantity, and price) and timely inputs47 needed to finalize production. A commercial risk that
    may limit the willingness of MNEs to collaborate with local enterprises are issues related to
    IPRs. The costs of the negative externalities (or spillovers) are larger especially in an
    environment where lack of or weak enforcement of IPR hinder foreign firms to undertake
    upgrading activities that can create linkages with the domestic economy. Externalities related
    to skills training to support domestic firms’ capabilities provide another rationale for why
    MNEs may under-invest in skills training or related skills activities. To illustrate, MNEs’
    training of local suppliers’ employees may lead to poaching by other competing domestic
    firms which will benefit from the newly trained worker. Local suppliers can also be poached
    by competing FDIs in the form of new contracts. Poaching risk in regards to training provision
    applies to both MNEs and suppliers providing training to employees for the purposes of
    managerial and technical upskilling. Finally, lack of formal and informal channels to obtain
    information on domestic supplier and their capacity results to high search costs for buyers,
    weakening linkage opportunities.

80. Supply-side or seller constraints: From the perspective of domestic firms (suppliers),
    possible constraints hindering linkages include incomplete capital markets (lack of access to
    finance); externalities related to technological adoption, innovation, and skills upgrading (and
    subsequent poaching risks); incomplete labor markets (lack of skilled workers); and
    information failure related to lack of information on buyer sourcing strategies and standards .
    Access to finance represents one of the most pressing issues for suppliers and SMEs which
    are trying to invest in required technological capacity, skills and international quality
    standards to upgrade their production to become more competitive domestically and abroad.
    Supplier companies invest in general training if the trained workers stay with a positive
    probability in the training firm. The risk of poaching however discourages local supplying
    firms to train their employees as they are afraid of losing money by training workers who
    might eventually leave. Lack of availability of skilled workers’ further compounds linkage
    opportunities, as skillsets are more often than not a requirement by MNEs. Information
    asymmetry on buyer requirements, which buyers to contact, as well as firms’ lack of a clear
    idea on ‘own’ domestic capabilities that are needed to link with MNEs, leads to high search
    costs for suppliers.

47The need for consistent and timely inputs is also a function of good infrastructure conditions, strong property rights, and reliable
borders. (World Bank, ‘Making GVCs work for Development’, p.13)

                                                                                                                                  42
81. Connecting supply and demand: Institutional and/or government failures may hinder
    linkages even though both buyers and suppliers may be willing to partner with each other.
    Underlying most of these failures is the existence of coordination failures. For instance, there
    can be lack of ‘matching’ between MNE/lead firm and domestic firms or lack of cooperation
    between firms, BDS, and knowledge providers. Inadequate policy enforcement may also
    make it difficult to monitor the performance of the supplier by the MNE. This can thus impair
    the cooperation in upgrading of skills and technology, for example. There may likewise be
    institutional failures where weak capacity of the public sector may result in poor policy design
    of BDS programs that may effectively fail to address the constraints that firms face and/or
    result to poor delivery/implementation of BDS. 48

82. Identifying the binding constraints and market failures in different country and investment
    contexts is thus critical to the mix of policies and programs that are selected. In the next
    section, we apply this conceptual framework to Vietnam, focusing focus on electronics sector
    and auto sector as examples where Vietnam has attracted significant efficiency-seeking FDI.


Electronics and Automotive Sectors in Vietnam49

83. Electronics sector: Flourishing since 2010, the electronics sector in Vietnam today is a major
    final assembly50 hub in the ICT hardware/electronics GVC. According to the Ministry of
    Industry and Trade, from 2011 to 2015, the annual growth rate of the industry was 29 percent,
    more than triple the entire industry average of about 9 percent.51 About 80 percent of
    electronics/ICT hardware and over 30 percent of electronic-related products are produced for
    exports. These exports are being done mostly by foreign firms, leading to increased FDI
    inflows by high-tech firms like Intel, Samsung, and Canon. Also, most exports are
    concentrated in a handful of electronic product groups.52

84. The industry’s impressive performance in terms of output growth and exports is largely
    attributed to the FDI sector. FDI promotion, through tax incentives and preferential land
    access, has been the main strategy in the electronics/ICT hardware sector, leading to increased
    FDI inflows by high-tech firms. This strategy, however, left behind the growth of the domestic
    firms, which have been experiencing declining labor productivity. Moreover, foreign firms


48 For instance, absence of BDS providers targeting SMEs may undermine upgrading of firm capability. In some cases, policy
support may be ineffective either due to design or delivery of the policy.
49The analysis reported here is part of the complementary work on private sector and linkages being conducted under the ongoing

IFC advisory project previously mentioned.
50 Specialization in final assembly means that Vietnam does not have to implement the entire production stages of a good or

service.
51 A recent survey by the Ministry of Trade and Industry found that imported inputs represented a 70% share of total inputs (in

terms of value). 12% share is due to domestic production by multinationals, and the remaining 18% share of inputs are produced
by other FDI firms in-country.
52For example, 75% of exports are concentrated in communications equipment (mostly mobile handsets) and the remaining

exports are in computers and storage devices (12%) and automotive electronics such as wire harnesses (6%).

                                                                                                                           43
     rely on their own supplier base (i.e. Tier 1 suppliers) abroad for input sourcing needs. Global
     leader such as Samsung, for example, relies primarily on Korean intermediate input suppliers
     which have co-located in Vietnam, with only 4 Vietnamese suppliers out of 67 total suppliers
     to Samsung (i.e. 53 from Korea, 7 from Japan, 1 each from Malaysia, Singapore, and the UK).
     The 4 Tier 1 Vietnamese suppliers are primarily in the low value-added packaging business
     (i.e., paper packaging, thin-film packaging, corrugated paper packaging).53

85. Automotive sector: The development of the automotive vehicle industry in Vietnam varies
    between the three most important segments: two-wheelers, passenger cars, and commercial
    vehicles. The two-wheeler sub-sector industry is well developed (specifically motorcycle and
    motorcycle parts) and Vietnam is increasingly becoming a hub for exports. Its exports have
    grown between 10% and 20% annually (dominated by Honda and Yamaha), boosted by a
    strong base of motor vehicle suppliers.54 About 90% of the value added in this segment is
    domestic value added with only some of the most advanced electronic components imported
    from Japan or Thailand. Commercial vehicles’ (buses and trucks) local content are also
    increasing: 30% of inputs are domestically sourced (particularly for engines, transmission
    systems, and gear boxes; 70% of inputs for the electrical parts of the vehicle, and all of truck
    frames and trunks are produced domestically.55 The passenger car sub-sector however does
    not enjoy the healthy performance of the motorcycle sub-sector or the commercial vehicle
    sub-sector, as there is heavy reliance on import content (although some simple and labor-
    intensive parts like car seats are produced domestically) especially for the more sophisticated
    parts: engines and gear boxes are often imported from branches of parent companies or from
    foreign suppliers. Local content use is in the range of 10%-20% only, compared to Thailand’s
    45%.56 Value added is gained at the low value-added stages, including assembly, welding and
    painting. Also, domestic firms contribute to low value-added and labor-intensive parts like
    tires, batteries and wire harnesses (of which wire harness production has developed
    significantly but not for other auto parts). To date, some important multinational Tier 1
    suppliers include Denso, Yazaki, Robert Bosch, and SEWS. Overall, there are about 200-300
    auto part manufacture enterprises, most of which are SMEs with low production capacity and
    low technology.




53 Source: MoIT, 2016. Based on the May stakeholder workshop in Hanoi, the team was informed that the number of local
suppliers have increased further in the last six months.
54 These suppliers produce motorcycle parts such as wire harness, tires, ignition switches, and clutches (with a few more advanced

inputs imported from Japan or Thailand).
55 In comparison, local parts used in the dominant light pickup industry in Thailand averaged 80% of the total, with passenger

cars managing 45% and motorcycles 90%. Without a major parts industry, car production costs are higher than elsewhere in the
region because of taxes on imported components.
56 There is also low demand for passenger cars in Vietnam, thus resulting in a small local market (dis-incentivizing development

of local industry parts). This is so despite that local industry protection is available through import taxes for imported vehicles
(new and used); these import tariffs will however be phased out across the ASEAN by 2018.

                                                                                                                               44
Supply-side Constraints

86. Evidence of obstacles faced by Vietnamese firms in the focus sectors indicate that lack of
    skilled workers and lack of information on FDI sourcing strategies and standards are the
    binding constraints for domestic suppliers.

87. Lack of skills: Domestic SMEs (during qualitative interviews) acknowledge that the lack of
    workforce skills is hindering SMEs to link and secure business with FDIs. This constraint cuts
    across sectors, although there are particular skillsets demanded for by particular sectors. In
    the ICT software and services sector, complaints relate to lack of workers with skills related
    to foreign language, management, and technical skills. Across manufacturing sectors,
    Vietnamese firms also suffer from lack of management skills: Vietnamese management scores
    ranked quite low when compared to other surveyed countries such as Mexico and Chile.57
    Lack of management skills also topped the list of skills when ES-surveyed firms were asked
    about what skills are difficult to find (compared to other skillsets like IT, non-IT, writing, and
    interpersonal skills).58

88. Successful domestic suppliers’ experience in the electronics/ICT hardware and auto sectors
    also indicate that lack of skilled workers is a hurdle that needs to be ‘bypassed’ through skills
    transfer from similar-tier or upper-tier FDI suppliers. Some of the demanded skillsets include
    production management and machinery operations. (see Case Study box)

89. There are several reasons explaining the lack of skilled workforce. For one, this can be traced
    back to the governance structure of foreign lead firms (especially OEMs), which are often
    based abroad and perform high value-added activities overseas. This ‘dis-connection’ with
    the domestic economy leads to a lack of ‘learning-by-doing’ on the part of domestic firms,
    although there can be successful experiences of skills learning between SMEs and FDIs.
    Another is that the local education system is not able to keep up with the demands of a fast-
    paced business environment. For example, Japanese language skills is a sought-after skillset
    especially as Vietnam has recently become the top-two biggest software services exporter to
    Japan.59

90. Lack of information: Without formal information channels to obtain information on FDI
    sourcing strategies, potential domestic suppliers with no business connections are
    disadvantaged in terms of linkage opportunities. Moreover, domestic firms may have limited
    direct interaction with global buyers especially if lead firms (especially OEMs) coordinate
    from headquarter locations outside Vietnam. Domestic firms may sell indirectly to global
    buyers (or brands) through buying houses or agents (e.g., apparel sector), and this hinders
    direct information gathering on the demands of global buyers and acquisition of experience
    and skills such as sales and marketing. This is further compounded by the fact that there can

57 Bloom, N. et al (2015) Management Practices in Vietnam, March 2015 (Draft).
58 World Bank Enterprise Survey for Vietnam, 2015.
59 World Bank, ‘Inclusive GVCs’, p. 49.



                                                                                                   45
   be a ‘relational’ governance structure in the GVC, which rely on informal networks formed
   over time. This makes it difficult for un-connected domestic firms to penetrate the GVC
   without joining a nominated or connected supplier or getting referrals. The experience of some
   successful domestic suppliers suggests the importance of using informal networks to gain
   information on how to participate in GVCs. Informal referral measures serve to ‘bypass’ the
   constraint of lack of market-based formal information on FDI sourcing strategies. Interviews
   with successful domestic suppliers’ executives also indicate that to date, they are not aware
   of official information channels on obtaining MNC procurement opportunities and thus still
   rely on informal personal ties (see Case Study box).

91. Further, lack of information on standards on the part of suppliers weakens linkages
    opportunities given that upper-tier suppliers and their suppliers are required to follow lead
    firms’ quality management processes. Interviews with first-tier suppliers in the auto sector
    indicate that there is a large perception gap on quality, cost, and delivery (QCD) standards
    requirements between local firms and MNCs despite that meeting QCD is a common selection
    criteria required from suppliers. For example, Japanese auto parts buyers find that ‘stability’
    in quality management and a culture of ‘constant improvement’ are non-questionable
    necessities although both perceptions are not often followed religiously by local firms, thereby
    leading to fewer orders.

92. Overall, there is some evidence that lack of information is a constraint for suppliers in the
    focus sectors. Nonetheless, there are government efforts as well as private sector efforts to
    address information asymmetry on FDIs and their sourcing strategies and standards, such as
    in the form of database development and implementation of trade fairs (refer to Chapter 4).
    Other supply-side constraints do not appear to be binding across firms but variations arise
    when they are examined by sectors and firm life cycle stage.

93. Lack of access to finance: While this seems to be a binding sectoral concern for nascent firms
    in the ICT (hardware/electronics and software sectors) sector, this is not necessarily true for
    domestic firms on average (refer to Chapter 2). Focus group interviews with firms in the ICT
    sector indicate that one of the key constraints that hinder start-up and scale-up include lack of
    access to reliable risk capital, although there are a handful of limited internationally-connected
    venture capital firms that start-ups and SMEs can tap into.

94. Financial access nonetheless maybe more restrictive although not necessarily binding for
    firms aiming to be a domestic supplier but are not able to do so. Successful local suppliers’
    experiences (e.g., Thanh Long in the electronics sector and Tam Hop in the auto sector) show
    that financial access concerns ease after linkages with reputable MNCs happen, such as in the
    form of lower cost of finance and easier access to more loans. (see Case Study box)

95. Externalities: Case studies of successful lower tier suppliers in the electronics and auto
    sectors suggest that externalities concern is not likely a supplier’s constraint. Successful
    experience shows suppliers’ willingness to follow (or ‘copy’) management system measures

                                                                                                   46
   implemented by other foreign manufacturers, for example. Implementation of these
   innovative systems actually resulted to substantial gains, such as in the form of increasing the
   number of customers these suppliers supply to, as well as moving up the supply chain tiers.
   (see case Study box)


Demand-side Constraints

96. Demand opportunities (and challenges) for increased GVC linkages in target value chains
    include the following:
    • Increasing numbers of MNE OEMs (original equipment manufacturers) and Tier 1
        suppliers are operating in Vietnam. Feedback from MNEs and Tier 1 suppliers pointed to
        an overall desire to increase localization, including access to internationally-competitive
        suppliers based in Vietnam. The latter has implications for access to information on
        suppliers as well as the 2nd generation FDI strategy.
    • Most MNEs and foreign Tier 1 firms met were actively looking to increase local sourcing,
        but had limited success due to few competitive local suppliers capable of meeting
        international standards. All such companies were initially looking to source simple
        metal/mechanical, plastic and electronic parts, molds and tools as well as packaging. This
        means opportunities to work with MNEs are predominantly at Tier 2-3 levels. Examples
        of inputs demanded by the electronics sector include the following:
                              Box 2. MNC –demanded Components
                          MNC                                          Component
                                                Precision polymer components
                                                Tape, Foam, Stretch Film
                                                Roller
               Canon Vietnam Co. Ltd (CVN)
                                                DC & Brushless motor
                                                PCB & PCBA
                                                Thermistor, USB cable, Connector
                                                Substrates, Chip capacitors
                                                Flux & Underfill
                                                Transistor balls and chemicals to solder such balls
                                                Electric, electronic and mechanic components and
                                                accessories
                      Intel Vietnam             Materials for transportation
                                                Materials for packaging
                                                Materials for manufacturing
                                                Handheld equipment and accessories
                                                Chemicals, software
                                                Cleanroom outfit; cleanroom furniture




                                                                                                      47
                                                                 Maintenance for the cleanroom machines and equipment

                    Source: MOIT 2016

97. Lack of competitive local suppliers: Evidence suggests that lack of competitive local
    suppliers who can meet quality standards in GVCs is the first-order binding constraint that
    MNEs/lead firms in the ICT/electronics and automotive sectors currently face. Lack of
    competitive local suppliers in the country means that foreign firms will look elsewhere and
    link with other firms which can provide consistent (in terms of quality, quantity, and price)
    and timely inputs60 needed to finalize production. This is so because lead firms want to
    minimize supply risks61 and meet production targets. In the ICT sector, foreign investors
    primarily complain about the lack of domestic suppliers who can meet the required standards
    demanded by these firms. For example, Samsung Vietnam found that among 200 domestic
    suppliers who expressed interest to supply to Samsung, which had planned to source 91 parts
    for Samsung Galaxy S4 and 53 parts for tablets (involving batteries, earphones, USB storage
    devices, data transmission cables, etc.), none can meet the requirements set forth in the
    electronics GVC.

98. For the automotive sector, lack of competitive domestic suppliers result to heavy reliance of
    foreign content from overseas factories which produces in large volumes. Heavy import
    reliance also translates to excess capacity in the sector (i.e., estimates show that mean capacity
    use for assembly in this sector is only around 40%). Domestic auto part manufacturers
    primarily lack quality to meet international standards due to its size—firms are mostly small,
    informal, and fragmented, and thus do not have economies of scale to produce quality inputs
    that meet standards set by lead firms.

99. A survey conducted by Supporting Industry Enterprise Development Center (SIDEC) in
    October 2014 revealed that even for firms which are currently part of the supporting industry,
    few firms use up-to-date technology or technology which meets high technical standards set
    up by MNEs. Firms manufacturing metal components commonly use either Japanese
    machinery that were produced a decade ago (although still able to manufacture standard
    components) or Chinese/Taiwanese machinery (which are cheaper but have lower accuracy
    and quality). The survey also found that domestic firms manufacturing electronic components
    often have inadequate technology (such as a clean room system). Moreover, while about 65%
    of surveyed firms adopted quality management standards (ISO 9000 and ISO 9001) and
    management systems (e.g., 5S and Kaizen), only a limited number of domestic firms are
    qualified for higher standards, such as on environmental management (ISO 14000),
    occupational safety and health management (OHSAS 18001), corporate social responsibility
    (SA 8000), and higher order management methods (e.g., Lean, 6 Sigma).62

60 The need for consistent and timely inputs is also a function of good infrastructure conditions, strong property rights, and reliable
borders. (World Bank, ‘Making GVCs work for Development’, p.13)
61 World Bank, ‘Making GVCs work for Development’, p. 156.
62 MOIT, 2016 p.30-32.



                                                                                                                                   48
100. A supply capability assessment conducted on 14 Vietnamese suppliers currently
   supplying to the auto sector (and related manufacturing sectors) and potentially for Samsung
   Vietnam showed that 3 suppliers received a grade A (good quality) result. 3 suppliers were
   also rated B (average quality but have potential to improve production chain) and the majority
   (8 suppliers) were rate C (low quality). These suppliers were assessed on the following
   measures: input storage management, final product storage management, input control,
   product control and prevention, meter adjustment, internal management of error rate, among
   others. Results suggest that majority of these suppliers are not capable to be immediate
   suppliers to Samsung Vietnam. Moreover, even for those with grade A results, firms are
   recommended to invest in clean room and storage control measures (e.g., thermal and humid
   control) to meet Samsung Vietnam requirements. 63

101. Nonetheless, as interviews with firms in Vietnam suggest, there remains keen interest on
   the part of lead firms and first-tier suppliers in the automotive and electronic sectors to access
   globally-competitive local suppliers. Other demand-side constraints appear to be non-binding
   and may not call for immediate remedy.

102. Externalities: Externalities concern related to innovation may not be a concern for FDIs
   such as Intel and Samsung given that most if not all of their innovation and higher value added
   activities are generated overseas. Moreover, the IPR protection concern is more likely due to
   ‘lack of enforcement’ (a public-sector constraint). There is an IPR law that exists on paper;
   however, it is poorly implemented and enforced. There are also other tangible private
   investments on innovation, such as a new applied research industry in Ho Chi Minh City and
   Da Nang that engage in R&D activities.

103. Also, successful domestic supplier experience illustrates that potential negative
   externalities do not hinder buyer investments in developing potential supplier capabilities.
   Some of the support provided by FDI-lead firms to these successful domestic suppliers
   include referrals to a Tier 1 FDI supplier (which provided the hand-holding support for
   domestic suppliers). Specific support includes knowledge exchange (sending expatriate
   experts to work in domestic firms) and learning tours for domestic employees at FDI-
   suppliers’ plants. (see Case Study box)

104. Lack of information on domestic suppliers (and their capacities): This is a constraint
   only if lead firms (FDIs) are looking for this information and could not find them. This is
   however unlikely given the thick and strong ties involved in the governance structure of
   supply chains, such as in the automotive and ICT hardware/electronics sectors. Lead firms
   co-exist with their strong and existing supplier network. Thus, to be able to be noticed by lead
   firms, binding constraints such as lack of quality inputs produced by domestic SMEs have to
   be first addressed. In theory also, the market power and available coordination mechanisms


63   MOIT, 2016, P.36-40.

                                                                                                  49
       existing in lead firms make it easy for lead firms to gather information about potential input
       suppliers.

105. Moreover, there are efforts by lead firms to gain more information on potential suppliers.
   For example, in an effort to grow its domestic supply base, Samsung organized workshops
   with domestic SMEs (suppliers) in order to (i) train suppliers on components the company
   wanted to locally source and (ii) get to know these suppliers (and the quality of their inputs).64




64   World Bank, ‘Inclusive GVCs’, p.35.

                                                                                                  50
                       Case Study Box. Successful Domestic Suppliers: How firms ‘bypass’ constraints65
Background Summary: A review of successful linkage cases find that there are few examples of successful domestic companies that have integrated
into the GVCs. Nonetheless, these two successful Vietnamese firms showed that they were able to address supply-side constraints through the support
of FDI-Tier 1 suppliers, as well as technical assistances from development partners and governmental organizations. The linkage process took quite a
long time and involves trial-and-error, and the journey can start from being a Tier 3 supplier in a sophisticated industry (e.g., electronics) or first being
a supplier to an industry that has less strict standards requirements (e.g., sewing machine). Overall, this Case Study box indicates the importance of
private sector bottom-up approaches in achieving the linkage objective.

Electronics sector: Thanh Long Electronics Production Company
Background
Thanh Long started as Jaguar Vietnam’s (Japanese mini sewing machine manufacturer) supplier and produced printed circuit boar ds (PCB) and
transformers for the MNC. The company eventually became a supplier to RFTech Vietnam, Samsung Vietnam’s 1 st-tier supplier (Thanh Long effectively
became Samsung Vietnam’s 2nd-tier supplier) within 4 years of its inception. To date, Thanh Long is a 1st-tier PCB supplier to Canon Vietnam and a
direct PCB exporter to Germany. It is also on its way to become the first domestic 1 st-tier electronics supplier to Samsung Vietnam itself.

How it addressed constraints
Capital Investments: Achieving its first linkage opportunity meant that the company has to first invest in technology and follow (or ‘copy’) management
system measures implemented by other foreign manufacturers. These include following the 5S management system (Sort, Straighten, Shine, Standardize,
and Sustain) and the Kaizen management systems, where both production processes follow strict performance measures.
Lack of access to finance: This does not seem to be a binding issue for Thanh Long as it historically borrowed from 2 private sector banks (BIDV and
Vietcombank). The company however started to receive a more favorable interest rate for its US-denominated loans after it started exporting inputs to
Germany.
Lack of information on FDIs: The company started to produce for a less sophisticated non-electronic MNC, gaining information in the process, improved
on its management systems overtime, prior to being able to gain information and link with more sophisticated electronic MNCs. The company also
received technical assistance support from JICA and SIDEC to participate in European trade fairs, thereby increasing their information of FDI-buyer
demands.
Lack of skills: This is achieved through skills transfer from similar-tier or upper-tier FDI suppliers. RFTech introduced its Korean PCB supplier
(Wonkyung Electronics Co., Ltd) to Thanh Long. Thanh Long and Wonkyung implemented profit-sharing agreements in exchange for supporting Thanh
Long to produce PCB (at a comparable quality but lower costs than imported PCB). Wonkyung’s support include sendi ng two Korean experts to work
in Thanh Long’s plant (for a year) and implementing a learning tour for Thanh Long engineers in its Korean and Chinese plants to learn about PCB
production processes, machine operations, and production management. In supportin g Thanh Long’s goal to become a 1st-tier supplier, Samsung also
provided technical assistance to Thanh Long in the form of sending 2 experts (for a period of 3 months) to help the company m eet Samsung’s
requirements in the hi-tech household appliances product line.

Automotive sector: Tam Hop Company
Background
Tam Hop Company started as a second-tier metal auto parts supplier for Toyota and specifically supplied to Toyota Boshoku (a 1 st-tier supplier to
Toyota). Initially producing labor-intensive spare tire hangers, it eventually diversified to more sophisticated metal and plastic parts used in vehicle seat
production. It also expanded its customer base through Toyota Boshoku’s direct referrals and reputation gained in supplying to Toyota Boshoku (such
as Kyoei Yamaha and as a direct supplier to Toyota Boshoku’s Australia and Japan locations) , although a substantial percentage (50%) of its output to
date is still captured by a single customer. It obtained ISO-9001 (quality management system standard), about 10 years after becoming a supplier. It is
also making efforts to achieve Toyota’s target standard for cost reduction (3-5% annually), although its current annual cost reduction record is about 1-
2%.

How it addressed constraints
Access to finance: The company does not seem to have binding financial constraints as it has built a relationship with Vietinbank overtime, making it
easier for Tam Hop to obtain loans. However, Tam Hop reported easier financial access after it started to supply to Toyota Boshoku, a reputable MNC.
Lack of information on FDI sourcing: Starting out as a small firm without membership to any business associations, Tam Hop ’s linkage experience first
came about through informal network (personal ties). In fact, when Toyota Boshoku actively looked for auto metal parts suppliers through company
visits to SOEs, one of the executives of these SOEs linked Toyota Boshoku to Tam Hop’s director (a personal friend of the SOE executive). Its product
diversification experience was made possible through repeated interactions with Toyota Boshoku, as it learned about and built on standards requirements
needed to produce more sophisticated inputs. Interviews with Tam Hop executives also indicates that to date, they are not aware of official information
channels on obtaining MNC procurement opportunities. The company still rely on informal personal ties.
Lack of information on FDI standards: Interviews with Tam Hop indicate that mismatch in perceptions on quality management was a significant
challenge that needed to be overcome—for example, Japanese buyers find that ‘stability’ in quality management is a non -question (including a culture
of ‘constant improvement’) although both perceptions are not often followed religiously by local firms, thereby leading to fewer orders. Toyota Boshoku,
which has an aim of finding local suppliers instead of outsourcing functional auto parts from other ASEAN countries (e.g., metal parts, leather and fabric
of seat covers), attributed the amount of time needed to localize a part (i.e., 2 years) in part to a large perception gap on quality, cost, and delivery (QCD)
standards requirements between local firms and MNCs despite that meeting QCD is a common selection criteria required from suppliers.
Lack of skills: Toyota Boshoku experts worked alongside Tam Hop workers to support Tam Hop in becoming a supplier to Toyota Boshoku. Part of
Toyota Boshoku’s support involved training and supporting Tam Hop acquisition of second-hand Japanese auto machines to improve Tam Hop’s
technological capability (through consultation and introduction to Japanese manufacturers). Another support involved hands-on guidance from Toyota
Boshoku experts for Tam Hop’s middle managers on quality control and production management.


    65The case study on Thanh Long Electronics Production Company has been prepared by Truong Chi Binh, and the Tam Hop
    Company in the auto sector by Nguyen Thi Xuan, Thuy, Researcher, Integration Policy and Strategy Division (ISIP) Institute for
    Industrial Policies and Strategies (IPSI), Vietnam.

                                                                                                                                                        51
Institutional and Governance Constraints

106. Government’s role in enhancing FDI-SME linkages is three-fold: as an information
   provider; a connector of supply and demand (facilitator); and a regulator66. There are
   information asymmetry failures involved in connecting buyers and suppliers, even if there is
   mutual motivation on the part of FDIs and SMEs to create linkages on their own. To date,
   there are government efforts to address (i) coordination failures. We also note other policy
   and institutional constraints such as (ii) lack of enforcement; (iii) insufficient policy
   alignment; and (iv) poor implementation of BDS. Results suggest that all of these issues are
   binding. This suggests that horizontal interventions, such as improvement of investment
   climate, are a key part in addressing weak linkages.


Coordination failure


107. In the ICT hardware/electronics sector, government efforts to build supplier capabilities
   and match potential partners are largely ineffective despite acknowledging the need for
   backward linkages. Thus, high search costs remain given lack of effective matching of
   domestic suppliers to foreign firms. Other coordinating mechanisms in the ICT sector are also
   limited: firms complain about the lack of accelerator and incubator programs. Current existing
   accelerator and incubator programs are also deemed ineffective in addressing coordination
   issues: for example, these programs lack knowledge about the local and global ICT markets.
   This means that coordination failures remain to be addressed.

108. Nonetheless, there seems to be successful government efforts to address coordination
   failure (which however opened up a supplier-related issue). The government partnered with
   FDIs to facilitate a call-for-interest and submission of proposal by domestic suppliers. For
   example, the government announced that Samsung Vietnam is willing to buy input parts for
   its smartphones and tablets. The call for proposal resulted to 200 firms’ submission of interest.
   However, even if the coordination problem is solved, the underlying problem lies in the lack
   of quality suppliers who can meet the requirements of Samsung.

109. For the automotive sector, the market (transaction-based) governance structure of the
   automotive sector meant that coordination failure has to be addressed through government
   intervention. Tier 3 suppliers in this sector do not deal directly with lead firms, and so there
   is generally a lack of incentives for lead firms to provide skills and related support and
   knowledge transfers. Suppliers who often receive these types of support are Tier 1 suppliers
   (and sometimes Tier 2 suppliers). Conversely, Tier 3 domestic suppliers may have little
   incentives to invest in upgrading such as moving up to become Tier 1 or Tier 2 suppliers given


66   World Bank, ‘Making FDI work in SSA’, p.4.

                                                                                                 52
   that there are risks that costs incurred cannot be reaped back. For example, there are no
   guarantees that these suppliers will get contracts from foreign firms after they upgrade.
   Supporting industry development will thus be crucial to develop this sector.

110. As a complementary step to solve coordination failure, lack of information between
   supply and demand can be addressed by creating a comprehensive and up-to-date (and also
   sector-specific) buyer-supplier database. However, the limited number of existing databases
   in Vietnam suffer from (a) lack of connections with other similar databases; (b) out-datedness;
   (c) inaccessibility (e.g., most are unavailable online); or (d) lack of particular information that
   foreign firms are looking for.


Lack of enforcement


111. Interviews with firms reveal that while there are market-based legal frameworks, the laws
   written on paper are not put into actual practice: there is a lack of enforcement. Also,
   application of rules is subjective and government bureaucratic processes remain slow. For
   example, domestic firms complain that, unlike the approach put forth by Asian economies
   (e.g., Korea and Singapore) in honing private domestic firm growth, laws related to tax
   incentives (property tax exemptions), access to credit, intellectual property rights (IPR) for
   high-tech firms are de-jure only. Firms wanting to take advantage of these incentives face
   lengthy and cumbersome procedures. Furthermore, IPR approval processes are long and there
   are complaints that ideas are stolen even when patent protection is filed. Given the large and
   fragmented composition of domestic firms, domestic firms lack a united voice to lobby for
   enforcement of regulations.

112. In the ICT sector, other related enforcement issues include lack of transparency in vendor
   selection processes for government contracts and lack of streamlined business procedures.
   Putting Vietnam into perspective, Vietnam ranked quite poorly in terms of transparency in
   government policy-making (116th out of 144 countries) and in burden of government
   regulations (101st) in the 2014-2015 Global Competitiveness Report.


Insufficient policy alignment


113. Lack of policy alignment (e.g., differential advantages according to firm ownership) may
   crowd out domestic suppliers instead of create linkages between SMEs and FDIs. Today, even
   if there is equal legal support for FDIs, SOEs, and private domestic firms, there remains
   implicit rules that are differentially applied to firms. Private firms complain that they are
   disadvantaged in accessing resources such as land, capital and government contracts (even
   while their contribution to the economy and jobs growth are significant). In essence, lack of
   effective domestic competition policies (to complementary investment promotion policies for


                                                                                                   53
   FDIs) risks weakening the development of domestic firms and set-up of forward and
   backward linkages between domestic and foreign firms.

114. In the ICT sector, attempts to engage in R&D activities are largely unsuccessful. This is
   in part due to misalignment in policy objectives, as exemplified in the narrow scope of what
   constitutes ‘high-tech’ and ‘R&D’ in the ‘Law on High Technologies’. This limits
   participation of innovative firms willing to innovate and engage in technological transfer to
   domestic firms.

115. In the automotive sector, investment licenses were excessively issued to spur the
   production of the industry starting in 1996, and this contributed to a fragmented under-
   performing local industry. There is also a lack of policy alignment in tariff structures to
   support multi-level part manufacturing. For example, there is no import tariff on inductors for
   power supplies. However, inputs to make these inductors (i.e., bobbin components) are
   imposed a 12% tariff. Similarly, import tariffs for spare parts of machinery range between 7%
   and 10% even if there is no import tariff for the machinery itself. Lack of alignment in tariff
   structures create disincentives in producing electronics and related manufacturing inputs.


Implementation challenges in delivery of BDS for SMEs


116. Poor implementation of supporting industry services can be attributed to fragmentation in
   the institutional landscape and weak government capacity. For example, supporting industry
   services and related SME support programs are handled by different ministries and remain
   uncoordinated at the national and local levels. This issue is further highlighted in the next
   Chapter.

117. In the electronics/ICT sector, local content development programs exist but their
   effectiveness is questionable. Firms in this sector complain about the lack of consistency of
   government support for its supporting industry program. As a result, firms are left to
   independently develop their input supply base.


International Experience in Linkages Programs

118. What can Vietnam learn from other countries that have implemented linkages programs?
   Drawing on the experience of four countries - Czech Republic, Malaysia, Chile and Costa
   Rica – we highlight the different policy and institutional responses that were adopted in
   response to the country specific constraints in developing linkages program in each case. We
   pull together the common elements in each of the programs, and also shed light on what works
   and what does not for promoting linkages in different settings. We hope these insights can
   help jump start the implementation of Vietnam’s supporting industries program as well as
   side-step the mistakes that were made by its predecessors along the way.

                                                                                               54
Common Elements of linkage programs – what works and what does not


119. The impetus for developing linkages in the 4 countries - Czech Republic, Malaysia, Chile
   and Costa Rica – was the move towards greater integration and commitments to liberalize
   trade and investments. For instance, for Czech Republic, it was the accession to the European
   Union; for Chile, it was the signing of various trade agreements, creating the need for
   exporters (and their suppliers) to comply with international production standards. In all
   instances, with foreign investments pouring in, the Government was keen to capture
   productivity spillovers and access to foreign markets. In examining the country cases, the
   following are the common thematic pillars of policy and institutional responses that were
   employed given the specific country challenges and opportunities. Annex 3.1. provides a
   summary of the specifics for each country.

120. Overarching governance and institutional set-up is essential to address coordination
   failure. This is considered a pre-requisite for success in all 4 countries. This set-up covers
   multiple dimensions:
           o High-level political commitment and ownership of the program is critical for
              spear-heading strategy, policies and institutional arrangements; coordinating
              across agencies and stakeholders; and undertaking oversight function.
           o Government needs to identify and/or develop an agency to manage the program
              design, develop FDI/sector strategy, policies and instruments, and coordinate with
              relevant stakeholders (public and private) for its effective implementation. This
              role was played by CORFO (Economic Development Agency) in Chile, while
              CzechInvest (Investment Promotion Agency) was the lead agency in Czech
              Republic. PROCOMER (export promotion agency) headed Costa Rica’s linkages
              program.
           o Autonomy of the agency is key, and typically the agency is placed under the
              purview of the Ministry of Trade and Industry - as is the case in Malaysia and
              Czech Republic. Equally critical is the institutional capacity to design and
              implement linkages strategies and deliver relevant support services.
           o Coordinating mechanism for aligning roles and responsibilities among
              government agencies must be implemented to address key constraints in the
              enabling and regulatory environment that may impact linkages. Equally important
              is the role of the Government in coordinating with all the other relevant bodies
              necessary for the effective and demand-driven delivery of the BDS. This
              mechanism may be served by establishing an inter-ministerial steering committee.
              Some of the key constraints addressed included the following: promoting
              competition policies (Chile); levelling the playing field between foreign and


                                                                                              55
                  domestic firms (Czech Republic); and working with private sector to address skills
                  shortages (Malaysia).
                o What does not work. The set-up does not work if there are too many agencies
                  involved with overlapping functions, and if coordination across agencies is weak.
                  In all 4 cases, the lead agency was empowered and worked across government
                  agencies. Costa Rica’s experience provides an example of trial and error in its
                  linkage efforts. It experienced three prior failed linkages programs during the latter
                  part of the 1990s. Ineffectiveness of prior linkage efforts was largely attributed to
                  lack of coordination and competition between programs; this is further
                  complicated by the fact that there is no measured strategy outlining the role of FDI
                  in Costa Rica’s development as well as a lack of comprehensive strategy to
                  develop national absorption capabilities through improved workforce skills,
                  increased innovation capacity of domestic firms, etc.67 The country’s later more
                  successful linkage program, CR Provee, was set-up initially as a pilot in 2001
                  before being formally integrated into the country’s export promotion agency
                  PROCOMER in 2004 as a way to institutionalize the program and more
                  sustainably increase FDI-SME linkages.68

121. Evidence-based strategy for fostering linkage programs. Supply chains are selected
   based on assessment of market signals and latest comparative advantage. Where participation
   in GVCs is needed, the challenge is to move up the value chain into higher value-added
   functions. Therefore, demand and supply side analysis should be undertaken.
          o MNEs’ (or tier 1 buyers’) choice of an ‘optimal’ or ‘successful’ supply network is
              an important consideration when selecting focus sectors, and this depends on the
              type of supply chains. For example, MNEs requiring ubiquitous and simpler inputs
              may find that having a network of many smaller suppliers is optimal, whereas
              MNEs requiring more sophisticated inputs may find that a network of fewer but
              larger suppliers is considered successful. In general, criteria for selecting supply
              chains should be based on: (i) critical mass of lead firms and their FDI Tier 1
              suppliers already operating and offering good potential for increased value-
              addition and continued growth; (ii) nature/length of supply chain (supply chain
              tiers and migration path); (iii) demand from MNEs for local supply if
              qualifications can be met and willingness to work in partnership through a supplier
              development program (SDP) can be achieved; and (iv) potential supplier capacity.
              These criteria are critical elements of a demand-led linkage program.
          o SDP should focus on SMEs that have the potential to become suppliers (both
              products and service suppliers) as not all SMEs are linkage program candidates.
              Enterprises should be selected on the basis of potential to become long-term
              suppliers. Clear and transparent criteria for selecting suppliers should also be
              developed. For example, particular weight can be given to candidates sought by
              MNEs, but criteria may also include promising companies that are still unknown

67   Paus and Gallagher, 2008.
68   Monge-González and Rodríguez-Álvarez, 2013.

                                                                                                     56
                to MNEs. For instance, in Czech Republic’s case, this is partly achieved by an
                initial review of existing information of applications and through MNE
                consultation. Also, in the Czech pilot model, an additional competitive element is
                built into the program before major resources are committed. These programs - if
                they are to be effective - are very demanding in terms of management time,
                supplier commitment, and ambition (key success factors).
              o As another example, Malaysia uses the SME Competitiveness Rating for
                Enhancement (SCORE) system, a diagnostic tool assessing SME capabilities and
                performance. SMEs are graded between 0 and 5 stars, and are provided tailored
                capability assistance depending on one’s rating. SMEs which achieved 4 or 5 stars
                are then linked to MNE or government linked corporations (buyers), with a view
                of orienting these firms towards the international markets.69 Malaysia uses
                technical capabilities of SMEs as key criteria, including level of automation, IPR
                registration, level of product/process improvements, and compliance with export
                requirements. Recent empirical evidence also suggests the importance of
                management skills in firm productivity70; therefore, the quality of management
                systems of potential suppliers can be another indicator of firm capacity for
                technological absorption and in meeting higher productivity goals.
              o What does not work. SDP should be targeted and not include all SMEs. Smaller
                firms tend to lack scale and capabilities for meeting MNEs demands and standards.
                Improvements in the large majority of firms, nonetheless, can be supported by
                reducing horizontal enabling environment constraints. This can help strengthen
                SMEs and possibly increase indirect opportunities for linkages.
              o What does not work. “Picking winners” through ad hoc and uninformed means
                are found to be ineffective. Rather, it is targeting industries that have the potential
                to move up the value chain into higher value-added functions. Malaysia learned
                this lesson through its prior linkage program, Vendor Development Program
                (VDP). Local firm participants to the VDP were initially restricted to Bumiputera-
                owned or managed firms, disallowing the participation of more capable Chinese-
                owned firms. This resulted in limiting the number of domestic suppliers that could
                meet MNC input requirements. VDP’s later relaxation of this restrictive supplier
                criteria resulted to more positive results, especially in the automotive sector. This
                lesson served as a basis for succeeding Malaysian linkages programs to develop
                more merit-based supplier assessment processes.71

122. Connecting MNEs and local firms through supplier data base and business-to-
   business (B2B) match-making services. This entails on-line access to quality local supplier
   information aligned to the specific information demands from investors, and also improving
   match making services and events (for examples, meet-the-buyer events and company visits).
   For instance, CzechInvest’s database has more than 3,500 high quality records of suppliers

69 More information can be found at: http://www.score.gov.my/.
70 Bloom, et al, 2015.
71 UNCTAD, 2011.



                                                                                                    57
     interested in long-term cooperation with foreign partners. In Costa Rica, CINDE reports that
     the directory has been an important factor in helping companies start operating in the country.
             o There can also be a private sector role in serving as a repository of the supplier
                  database, and private sector involvement in this area can be further explored. For
                  example, in Chile’s mining sector, Antofagasta Industry Association (AIA)’s
                  sector-level supplier database has information on more than 2,500 domestic
                  suppliers. To be included in the database, suppliers pay a registration fee and an
                  annual maintenance fee (around US$200-400 yearly), and can undergo
                  qualification activities, such as labor certificate and social security compliance,
                  financial and legal analysis, and operations training.72
             o Databases can moreover incorporate reputation building amongst suppliers, in
                  ways that allow SMEs to earn a reputation of quality and reliability overtime.
                  Some successful international models can be drawn from that helps SME-
                  suppliers build their reputation as a ‘verified’ and ‘trustworthy’ supplier.

                            Box 3. Building the reputation of suppliers – Case of China’s Alibaba
                     China’s Alibaba website has a 10-level rating system where suppliers
                     accumulate a ‘rating’ for completed online orders (i.e. a higher ‘transaction
                     level’ corresponds to sellers gaining more of the buyers’ attention). 73 Further,
                     suppliers using Alibaba can opt for a paid ‘Gold Supplier’ membership. Gold
                     Suppliers undergo supplier verification services that verify the legal status and
                     contact information of suppliers (minimum required level of verification
                     undertaken by Alibaba and/or an independent assessor). In a more stringent but
                     optional case, Gold Suppliers can also be further verified based on main
                     product lines/services and supplier capabilities, including on supplier
                     qualification (i.e., product and supplier certifications), human resources, export
                     capacity, production process management, R&D abilities, and company
                     expansion plans. Gold Suppliers who passed this assessment are called
                     ‘Assessed Suppliers’, and onsite assessment is solely done by a top global
                     inspection company.74 Finally, Alibaba has an exclusive channel called
                     ‘Selection’ for export-oriented suppliers. Additional requisite for membership
                     in this channel/database is based on real export performance (which is regularly
                     reviewed). ‘Selection’ suppliers are considered the top supply performers in
                     their respective industry: they gain access to ‘Identity Verified Buyers’ thereby
                     reducing screening cost of sourcing on both sides. Both sides also have access
                     to each other’s trade data.75 Another example is the JETRO model that uses an
                     evaluation sheet of more than 100 points to be assessed, and companies that
                     pass the required benchmark are included in the database.



72 Farole and Winkler, 2014.
73More   information can be found at: https://service.alibaba.com/buyer/faq_detail/20150159.htm
74 More information can be found at:

http://service.alibaba.com/buyer/ab/safety_security/products/verification_services.php?spm=5386.1599690.1998355780.18.ZV
NKPE
75 More information can be found at: https://selection.alibaba.com/



                                                                                                                      58
               o What does not work. Lack of specificity of information in the supplier database.
                 Czech Republic’s successful experience indicates the importance of adequate
                 information that buyers are looking for. Czech Republic’s database can be
                 accessed for free at CzechInvest’s website76, and the database can be
                 disaggregated according to sector, products within each sector, and location. For
                 example, the automotive sector database disaggregates suppliers according to their
                 tier placements in the supply chain (i.e., Tier 1, 2, 3) and product modules (i.e.
                 individual engine parts, drive-train parts, brakes, etc.). Supplier information
                 include contact information, products, customer references, and quality standards
                 certificate obtained by the potential supplier. Lower-tier suppliers, such as that in
                 the automotive sector, can have opportunities of contact with MNCs as a potential
                 supplier.

123. Upgrading capacity of local firms through demand-driven supplier development
   programs.
         o Lead firm/MNE-led approach: Active engagement and support of the MNEs/lead
             firms (OEMs and Tier 1 suppliers) at the head of the supply chain throughout is
             key to a successful linkages program. As a market-led program, MNEs are critical
             stakeholders for SDP design and implementation. Lead firms should also be
             members of the steering committee.
         o MNEs can play a key role in identification and selection of companies with the
             potential for becoming suppliers. For instance, in Czech Republic’s case,
             comprehensive business reviews were benchmarked against MNE standards.
             MNEs’ nominations are based on supplier database, market analysis, and
             transparent scoring. Essentially, industry ownership of the process is required to
             ensure a demand-driven SDP.
         o An SDP program is an efficient way to build the local business consulting capacity
             to help companies innovate. MNEs can be encouraged to partner with local
             institutes of higher education, research, or technical training. The Czech SDP
             trained local specialists to conduct sector-specific enterprise audits and acquired
             universities’ support to develop training curricula. Even countries without large
             FDI inflows can benefit from similar programs by upgrading companies’
             capacities to identify supply opportunities. The Malaysian model, through the
             renowned Penang Skills Development Center (PSDC), showcases a vocational
             training center that is managed by the private sector and represented by MNCs
             (e.g., Motorola, HP and Intel) and domestic SMEs in the steering committee.
             Moreover, MNCs are given a free-hand in designing customized training program
             curriculum aimed at developing domestic SME supplier capabilities. Behavioral
             incentives77 can be provided to local suppliers in terms of upgrading skills, product

76 More information can be found at: https://suppliers.czechinvest.org/
77 Behavorial incentives are primarily aimed at changing the effective behavior of investors. The objective can be related to
stimulating economic activities undertaken by firms – for instance, innovation, skills upgrading through training and integrating
FDI with local economy through SDP.

                                                                                                                              59
                   standards, certification, operational standards, and efficiency; and to encourage
                   MNEs to source locally or invest in supplier training/upgrading.
               o   Choice of instruments: In order to help local firms invest in skills, and
                   technological and managerial upgrading, the following forms of financial
                   incentives are common: (i) tax incentives; (ii) matching grants/cost-sharing
                   schemes; (iii) subsidized loans; and (iv) loan guarantees.
               o   Malaysia, for example, provided a menu of tax incentives for both SMEs and
                   MNEs. MNE costs related to employee training, product development and testing,
                   and technical assistance to SMEs for quality product assurance and improvement
                   are allowed to be deducted by MNEs in their income tax liabilities. In turn, eligible
                   suppliers can use incentives to improve the quality of their products. Eligibility for
                   these supplier incentives are contingent upon manufacture and supply of promoted
                   products to MNCs or large domestic firms (generally capital-intensive products)
                   or participation in R&D activities. Incentives for SME-suppliers include: (i)
                   pioneer status with 100% tax exemption on statutory income for a period of 5
                   years; and (ii) 60% investment tax allowance (100% for promoted areas) are
                   allowed on qualifying capital spending incurred during a 5-year time period.
                   Further, for SME-suppliers who are capable of achieving international standards
                   (in terms of quality, price, and capacity), income tax exemption increases to 100%
                   of the statutory income for a period of 10 years; or 100% investment tax allowance
                   can be used on qualifying capital spending incurred during a 5-year time period.
                   Aside from tax incentives, Malaysia also provided cost subsidies to SMEs for
                   mentoring and employee training at registered training centers such as PSDC (i.e.,
                   SMEs are eligible for grants amounting to 80% of the training cost).78
               o   Chile’s public sector-led linkage program provides cost subsidies for large buyer-
                   sponsored management projects for SME-suppliers. Large buyer-sponsored
                   projects must support 20 or more SMEs in the agribusiness sector (i.e., agriculture
                   or forestry) or 10 or more SMEs in other sectors. These subsidies support costs
                   related to complementary activities provided by external firms or by buyer-
                   sponsors themselves, such as training of personnel, professional advice, transfer
                   of technology, and technical assistance for domestic suppliers. Subsidies cover up
                   to 50% of the project cost, with possibility of subsidy renewal depending on
                   performance.
               o   Incentives for domestic firms to upgrade (in order to produce the inputs that MNEs
                   demand) can be supported by behavioral incentives, although there remain risks
                   that investments and efforts made in upgradation will not lead to sufficient input
                   purchases from buyers (and therefore lack of an investment return). This is highly
                   likely for suppliers with no secondary potential buyer (correspondingly suppliers
                   lack bargaining power on prices of inputs that they can charge). This is indeed a
                   risk for suppliers, which may be more or less critical depending on the supply
                   chain and product specificity. For example, suppliers supplying more sophisticated


78   MIDA (2009) and UNCTAD (2011).

                                                                                                      60
             inputs may find it more difficult to sell to buyers from different sectors while it
             would be easier for suppliers producing cross-cutting simpler inputs to sell across
             sectors. The risk could be partly mitigated by ensuring broad access to information
             on buyers, so that suppliers can make risk-informed investment decisions, and by
             stressing the importance for local firms to obtain sufficient commitment from
             buyers regarding purchases before making investments.
           o What does not work. Linkages cannot be mandated or forced– through local
             content requirements (LCRs) – but require upgrading of local firm capabilities to
             meet lead firm’s quality, cost and delivery (QCD) standards.

124. Type of support must be driven by constraints that prevent linkages between FDI and
   domestic suppliers. For instance, the need for specialized consultancy may require a different
   response from general training gaps. For instance, in the Czech case, an integrated and
   customized approach to identifying the business needs of the participating supplier/potential
   supplier companies based on international benchmarks are employed. The EFQM quality
   model (which the SDP uses) served as the basis for its Business Reviews of individual
   participating companies. The review looks at all aspects of a business to assess priority needs,
   which will differ between companies depending on their stage of development, and suggests
   appropriate responses. It therefore goes wider than the immediate operational issues covered
   by programs such as those of the MNEs. It addresses, for example, broader strategic
   leadership and management issues, as the intention is not merely to raise companies to the
   level where they can obtain immediately available MNC business, but to increase their long-
   term competitiveness and move them up the value chain.
           o What does not work. The SDP does not work if specific constraints from both
               demand (buyer) and supply (seller) are not taken on board in designing the
               programs.

125. Coordinated and streamlined delivery of support services. Equally important to
   identifying the correct needs of SMEs and the choice of instrument is the delivery mechanism
   and how it is administered. Some support is undertaken at firm level through specialized
   advisory technical assistance, and in other instances, training needs are supplied through on-
   going government programs. Most SMEs have limited management time and capability, are
   often not aware of or have the capacity to explore the best practice options and business
   support available and how it might apply to their situation. Removing the hassle out of putting
   together a focused package of integrated support which meets their real individual needs can
   thus be as valuable as any financial support that might be provided. As the Czech model
   shows, the SDP program is an efficient way to build the local business consulting capacity to
   help companies innovate trained local specialists to conduct sector-specific enterprise audits
   and universities to develop training curricula.
               What does not work. The SDP may not work optimally if the support is
               fragmented and access to the program is bureaucratic and time-costly. For
               example, while Costa Rica’s Provee (SDP) provides effective matchmaking


                                                                                                61
                  services for suppliers and buyers79, the program does not provide direct financing.
                  This is despite that participating firms in CR Provee name financial access to be
                  one of the top concerns needed for technological upgrading and better linkages.80
                  Streamlining support to CR Provee firms with other financial and non-financial
                  support programs remains a challenge for Costa Rica (contributing to relatively
                  low program firm participants), despite that positive impacts can be found for
                  linkage participants overall.81

126. Linkage support efforts in the 4 cases resulted in positive outputs and/or impacts. In Czech
   Republic, evaluation of the pilot program found that $46 million worth of new contracts were
   created from 2000-2003 as well as higher productivity for suppliers to MNCs (versus non-
   suppliers) on average.82 In Malaysia, increased sourcing by MNCs (e.g., Tesco) translated to
   domestic SME suppliers becoming popular local brands, among other results.83 In Chile, an
   IDB impact evaluation found that the SDP was beneficial to both SME suppliers and large
   buyers. SME-suppliers experienced growth in terms of sales, employment, and worker
   salaries compared to non-participating SMEs (control group), whereas the impact for large
   buyer-firms are found in the form of increased output sales and export ability.84 In Costa Rica,
   an impact evaluation found that participating firms in CR Provee have higher real average
   wages paid to employees, increased employment, and a higher probability of exporting
   compared to non-participants.85

127. There are also sectoral-level private sector solutions to improve linkages and these
   solutions may not be discounted. Particularly in Chile’s mining sector, the private sector-led
   SDP called World Class Supplier Development Program is an FDI-driven mechanism
   (launched in 2009 by BHP Billiton, an international mining firm) that aims to expand
   innovation through collaborative efforts between mining firms and suppliers in solving
   challenges faced by the Chilean mining industry. The program aims to address the lack of
   competitiveness amongst mining suppliers (where 98% of domestic suppliers use or adapt
   simple technology and do not innovate), with a view of creating 250 world-class suppliers
   (defined as suppliers with international recognition, export at least 30% of supplier services,
   and have innovative and technologically advanced services) in the mining industry by 2020.
   Local suppliers provide innovative upgrading solutions to the key areas identified by mining
   firms as needing innovative interventions, namely water, energy, HSEC (health, safety,
   environment and community), human capital, and operational efficiency. Selection of key
   projects that need solutions under these areas must meet selection criteria (i.e., economic
   benefit, problem urgency, replicability, technology risk, and impact). A cluster of 2-3
   domestic suppliers will come together and then propose and pilot innovative solutions. Mining

79 Paus and Gallager, 2008.
80 Monge-González et al, 2010.
81 Monge-González and Rodríguez-Álvarez, 2013.
82 Smarzynska and Spatareanu, 2004.
83 UNCTAD, 2011.
84 Arráiz, et al, 2011.
85 Monge-González and Rodríguez-Álvarez, 2013.



                                                                                                  62
       firms provide financial and consultancy support as innovation projects are developed (e.g.,
       management, planning, corporate governance, and planning). As of end-2012, the World
       Class program was partnering with 36 suppliers (employing over 5,000 workers) on 43
       projects (total sales of US$400 million). The initial project also resulted to cost savings for
       BHP Billiton (estimated to be at US$121 million).86


Concluding Summary

128. This chapter undertook an in-depth analysis of sources of constraints that deter linkages
   from suppliers’ and buyers’ perspective in Vietnam and thus warrant interventions. Lack of
   availability of skilled workers and lack of information on FDI sourcing strategies and
   standards appear to be the binding constraints for domestic suppliers. Across manufacturing
   sectors, Vietnamese firms also suffer from lack of management skills. Without formal
   information channels to obtain information on FDI sourcing strategies, potential domestic
   suppliers with no business connections are disadvantaged in terms of linkage opportunities.
   Moreover, domestic firms may have limited direct interaction with global buyers especially
   if lead firms (especially OEMs) coordinate from headquarter locations outside Vietnam.
   Further, lack of information on standards on the part of suppliers weakens linkages
   opportunities given that upper-tier suppliers and their suppliers are required to follow lead
   firms’ quality management processes. On the demand side, evidence suggests that lack of
   competitive local suppliers (due to lack of domestic suppliers who can meet quality standards
   in GVC) is the first-order binding constraint that MNEs currently face. At the same time, we
   also highlighted the potential pitfalls on the public sector domain, particularly related to
   institutional fragmentation and capabilities. There are the government and institutional
   failures involved in connecting buyers and suppliers, even if there is mutual motivation on the
   part of MNEs and SMEs to create linkages on their own. As the earlier analysis indicates,
   coordination failures as well as constraints related to lack of enforcement; insufficient policy
   alignment; and poor implementation of supporting industry services, appear to be binding in
   Vietnam. This suggests that horizontal interventions, such as improvement of investment
   climate, are a key part in addressing weak linkages.

129. Drawing on international experiences, the chapter pulls together the common elements for
   designing and implementing a successful linkage program. These insights can be useful for
   Vietnam as it focuses on the operationalization of its linkage program, within the context of
   the country constraints. International experiences also highlight some private sector
   approaches in improving linkages, such as in the area of supplier database development (and
   maintenance) and creation of a sector-focused private sector-led SDP. Given the political
   economy of Vietnam (and existing private sector constraints), private sector’s role in
   supporting the linkage agenda is equally valuable, and more so, needed.



86   Farole and Winkler, 2014 and ICMM, 2017.

                                                                                                   63
Chapter 4: Review of Policies and Institutions for Supporting Enterprise
                   Competitiveness and Linkages
                                        Lessons from within Vietnam


131. This chapter focuses on the current programs and policies in place vis a vis the key binding
   constraints identified earlier. In doing so, it highlights the gaps, if any, for supporting SMEs
   and linkage programs in Vietnam. It then assesses a sub-set of the programs that relate to
   linkages. It highlights the systemic issues that pervade across programs and the scope for
   improvements for increased effectiveness and impact.

132. The primary approach used in this SME program and policy mapping exercise is a desk
   review. As such, there are limitations involved. First, the focus is primarily on state-led
   (central government-led) SME support programs and does not cover programs led by the
   private sector, provincial authorities, or NGOs.87 It reviews the SME support programs and
   policies that are currently being offered by the three key ministries - i.e. MoIT, MPI and MoST
   - mandated to support SMEs in manufacturing and services. Second, there are limitations on
   data collection particularly in terms of the implementation progress of these various programs.
   To minimize these data constraints, the report also draws from SME feedback (through a
   qualitative survey)88 and consultations with both SME representatives and the government
   through a roundtable discussion. In summary, there are 28 major SME support programs and
   5 policies (or regulations) related to SMEs. Majority of the programs has an indirect focus on
   SMEs (i.e., programs broadly focusing on all firm sizes). For those which have direct focus
   on SMEs, these are 8 in total.

133. The chapter is structured as follows. Section one identifies key SME support programs
   that address binding constraints in Vietnam. Section two presents the design elements of these
   different programs: it highlights programs that have behavioral incentives, and disaggregates
   programs according to their support to the different stages of a firm’s life cyc le. This section
   also identifies programs that have a direct focus on SMEs (i.e., SMEs as the primary program
   recipients), and programs that have an explicit focus on creating linkages. This section further
   comments on the timelines, pre-determined budgets as well as monitoring and evaluation
   plans of the programs. The third section discusses the implementation processes, including
   the involvement of stakeholders and key players of these support programs. Finally, section
   four provides recommendations on how SME support programs can be strengthened, in line
   with achieving the programs’ respective objectives.

87The report, nonetheless, discusses other stakeholders’ involvement in these state-led support programs.
88The Survey on Government Support Policies and Programs on SMEs (‘SME survey’) was conducted by CIEM on behalf of the
World Bank. The survey’s objectives are the following: (i) seek feedback from SMEs about the effectiveness (in terms of
accessibility and usefulness) of the SME programs and policies that are currently being implemented; (ii) identify any gaps in
SME support from the Government; and (iii) inform the design and enhancement of implementation of the SMEs support programs
and policies. Target respondents were members of the Vietnam Association of SMEs (VINASME). Respondents were randomly
selected and emailed to answer the survey. There were 149 survey respondents in total.


                                                                                                                          64
Alignment of SME support programs

134. Existing SME support programs appear in theory to address constraints that firms face in
   Vietnam. However, as discussed below, their effectiveness is not clear. About half of the
   programs and policies (currently in operation) do not have monitoring and evaluation plans.
   Many of the SME support programs have limited assessments - whether independently or
   internally - and this makes it difficult to evaluate whether the programs are effective in terms
   of achieving intended outcomes/impacts. Equally important, there is an urgent need to
   improve implementation and program coherence across different ministries.


Lack of access to finance

135. Financial access is considered a top business constraint by firms. GoV has initiated
   interventions that particularly address this issue, such as reducing loan costs and promoting
   the use of credit guarantees. Commercial banks, for its part, support the government’s
   initiative by targeting SME customers, revamping its organizational structure by setting up
   SME-specific departments, and formulating lending policies that accommodate SME needs.

136. There are 3 primary state-led financial support programs, namely: (i) Credit guarantees
   for SMEs through the Vietnam Development Bank, (ii) Credit guarantee fund for SMEs, and
   the (iii) SME Development Fund. The main differences between the 3 finance programs relate
   to the government pioneer, implementing partner, and priority sectors targeted for financial
   access.

                                              Table 1. Financial support programs
 Program                     Program objective            Government   pioneer        Priority sectors              Fund amount
                                                          and     implementing
                                                          partner

 Credit guarantees for       Promote financial access     Pioneered by the National   All manufacturing sectors     Total guarantee value
 SMEs    through   the       by           guaranteeing    Assembly in 2008 and        and services sectors in       sum to VND 11,000
 Vietnam Development         commercial loans to          implemented by Vietnam      health care and cargo         billion (1,500 businesses
 Bank (VDB)                  SMEs (up to 85% of total     Development Bank            transport                     served)
                             project investment)

 Credit guarantee fund for   Provide guarantees for       Pioneered by the Ministry   No    priority     sectors    Total charter capital sum
 SMEs                        SMEs’ loans at credit        of     Planning      and    mentioned                     to VND 575 billion,
                             institutions                 Investment (MPI) in 2001                                  including VND 194.5
                                                          and implemented by the                                    billion from Ho Chi Minh
                                                          Provincial       People’s                                 City (21 provinces have
                                                          Committees                                                set up the fund)

 SME Development Fund        Enhance               firm   Pioneered by the MPI,       Agriculture,      forestry,   Total charter capital sum
                             competitiveness        and   and working with the        aquaculture, processing       to VND 2,000 billion
                             increase firm income and     Ministry of Finance to      and fabricating industries,
                             employment        through    develop regulations on      water supply services,
 (only recently become       supporting         SMEs’     operationalizing the fund   and waste and sewage
 operational   but  its      production-viable                                        management/treatment
 establishment     was       business plans                                           services



                                                                                                                                           65
 approved by the Prime
 Minister earlier)



137. Other SME support programs indirectly address financial access issues by addressing
   other constraints concurrently. In general, these programs provide financial support, such as
   capital grants and subsidies. Financial incentives are tied to some desired objectives, such as
   product or skills upgrading. The Supporting Industry Development program, for example,
   provides financial capital and cost subsidies, with the objective of increasing linkages. Apart
   from the provision of financial support, one of the activities of the supporting industry
   program includes tasking the Vietnam Development Bank to consider the development of
   specific lending regulations supportive of SMEs’ conditions in this industry.


Multiple constraints explaining lack of product/process innovation

138. Close to 40% of SME support programs (or 11 programs) in Vietnam are focused on
   innovation. Innovation programs are primarily product-focused, with aims to develop high-
   tech products. Nonetheless, some maybe process-focused, such as the use of information
   technology in existing processes. In general, these programs tackle multiple constraints and
   market failures (such as externalities, lack of access to finance, lack of skills, lack of
   information, or coordination failures). Table 2 provides a snapshot of select programs,
   including constraints addressed by these activities.

                                                    Table 2. Innovation programs
 Program                   Activities                                                                         Constraints/Market           failure
                                                                                                              addressed

 National Technology       (a) Support firms’ business application of IT and build management                 Externalities, lack of information,
 Innovation Programme      information systems                                                                lack of skills, coordination failures
 until 2020
                           (b) Develop a database of new/ advanced technology and professional
                           technology workforce

                           (c) Assist firms in R&D, product testing, training, hiring of experts in product
                           design and manufacture of new products and technological change processes

                           (d) Support establishment of business incubators

 Enhancing businesses’     (a) Formulate and disseminate 4,000 new national product standards and             Lack of information (on standards
 productivity        and   regulations (of which 45% of these national standards are in line with             and technology), lack of skilled
 quality of products and   international and regional standards)                                              workforce; lack of competitive
 goods                                                                                                        local supplier-firms
                           (b) Conduct research and training for the evaluation and certification of
                           quality management systems (consistent with international standards);
                           conduct productivity and quality management training for over 1,500 staffs
                           (to date, 50% of staffs trained were SMEs); provide productivity
                           improvement consulting services for 363 firms (to date, 80% of firms were
                           SMEs)

 Intellectual Property     (a) Conduct awareness raising and trainings on intellectual property               Lack of information, externalities
 Development Program
                           (b) Support the intellectual property rights of businesses, universities,
                           scientific research institutions and individuals in Vietnam




                                                                                                                                                 66
                          (c) Support the adoption of process management and development of
                          scientific research products and information to enhance the value of
                          intellectual property

                          (d) Support registration of intellectual property of local products (especially
                          products which have export potential) and foreign patent applications that are
                          not protected in Vietnam



139. Pertinent to improving linkages, the Supporting Industry Development Program have
   innovation-related activities, such as (i) popularizing the use of technology in industrial
   production; and (ii) application of management systems in the manufacturing sector.

140. The support towards innovative startups and SMEs is further reiterated in the recent SME
   law that outlines support through incubation and technical support facilities. Specifically, the
   support envisaged includes support to pilot products, for use of technical facilities and
   business incubators and co-working spaces for innovative startups.


Lack of skilled workforce


141. Training program solutions to address lack of skills are primarily subsumed as an activity
   (or sub-program) of broader SME support programs. In total, there are 7 programs seeking to
   address this constraint. The only training-specific SME support program is the ‘Human
   resource development for SMEs’ program, which aimed at developing entrepreneurs’
   business management skills (including corporate governance) and skills on how to start their
   own businesses. On average, training cost per person is around VND 1.2 million from 2011-
   2013: this figure was based on VND 60 million (or US$ 2 million) annual funding from the
   state and 50,000 SME managers and workers trained annually. An Agency for Enterprise
   Development (AED) report shows that SME participants in these trainings have positive
   feedback on these training programs, such as increased knowledge on corporate governance
   and increased confidence about their businesses and in their firms’ business strategies.89

142. Examples of solutions addressing lack of skills can be divided according to the recipients
   of these trainings, namely management staffs (non-production workers) and production
   workers:
       (i)      Management-level trainings include training on technology management, innovation
                management and technology for business leaders (‘High-tech development’ program
                and ‘Business Incubators’ program) and business administration skills training for
                individuals interested in opening an SME (‘Human resource development for SMEs’
                program).
       (ii)     Production workforce trainings include training on science and technology and related
                subjects (‘Development of national science and technology enterprises’ program) and
                vocational training for the workforce (‘Promotion of industrial enterprises including
                rural areas’ program). The ‘National Technology Innovation Programme until 2020’

89   MPI on training course implementation (AED, 2014).

                                                                                                            67
                  program supports training for both production and non-production workers, and have
                  SME-specific targets. In particular, the program targets 30,000 engineers, technicians
                  and managers trained on technology management by 201590 and 80,000 by 2020.
       (iii)      Other programs also aim to support transition of students into the workforce through
                  internships with manufacturing and services companies, such as the ‘Business
                  Incubators’ program.

143. As for the supporting industry sector, the Supporting Industry Development Program
   2011-2020 has a relatively vague concept of addressing lack of skills: its program scope
   includes a sub-program on ‘training human resources’ for SMEs in the supporting industry
   sector.


Lack of information

144. There are 14 programs that address lack of information and other constraints
   simultaneously. There are 2 programs that particularly address the lack of information issue.
   Common lack of information solutions include trainings, such as the following:
      (i)    Face-to-face or online training courses on startup and business administration
             (‘Human resource development for SMEs’ program);
      (ii)   Training on standards and certification of quality management systems
             (‘Enhancing the productivity and quality of products of SMEs’ program); and
      (iii)  Training on intellectual property (Intellectual Property Development program).

145. The 2 programs that specifically address information asymmetry are both online portals.
   One of them is a business portal: www.business.gov.vn. The website provides information on
   business operations, such as on starting-up a business, financing, and making tax payments.
   The website also provides directories of registered businesses, business associations, SME
   banks, and legal consultants91. The other online portal has export-oriented firms in mind:
   Vietnam’s Foreign Market Information Portal (http://www.ttnn.com.vn/) provides
   information about foreign market opportunities. Key difference between the 2 portals is that
   the business portal can be translated from Vietnamese to English, while the foreign market
   information website cannot. This suggests that the business portal also serves as an
   information resource for foreign firms seeking to know more about business processes and
   opportunities in Vietnam.

146. Information failures may also be addressed through campaigns (e.g., awareness
   campaigns). The Domestic Market Development Program (in connection with the
   “Vietnamese using Vietnamese goods” campaign) addresses information and coordination
   failures, with a particular objective of developing the domestic market by encouraging
   domestic consumers to buy locally produced goods. To address lack of information concerns,
   interventions include (i) awareness campaigns about domestic production capacity and
   quality; (ii) encouragement campaigns for domestic businesses to buy local production inputs;
   (iii) advertising campaigns to enable domestic firms to advertise their products to the public;

90   It is unclear whether this target has been achieved.
91   It is unclear whether these directories can be accessed free of charge.

                                                                                                     68
   and (iv) website development as a means of institutionalizing the “Vietnamese using
   Vietnamese goods” campaign (www.tuhaohangvietnam.vn).


Lack of competitive local suppliers

147. There are 2 programs that aim to make local suppliers more competitive. The Supporting
   Industry Development Program 2011-2020 specifically targets SMEs, whereas the ‘Master
   plan on supporting industry development to 2020, Vision to 2030’ has a broader focus on firm
   size in key priority sectors.

148. The National Product Development Program is another SME support program that may
   address the issue of lack of competitive local suppliers in Vietnam, although the program is
   relatively unclear as to whether the goods to be produced are end-products or intermediate
   inputs. It aims to develop key Vietnamese export products using innovative technologies.
   Examples of products the program has developed include high-capacity lifting equipment
   (e.g., self-propelled cranes, tower cranes) and preventive vaccine for animals and livestock.

149. Another program specifically aimed at improving the standards of Vietnam’s products
   (which may include inputs and final goods)—translating into more competitive local inputs
   and/or products—is the ‘Enhancing the productivity and quality of products of SMEs’
   program. The program, which runs from 2010 to 2020, aims to develop 4,000 national
   standards (of which 45% of these standards is targeted to be in-sync with international and
   regional standards). To date, the program has disseminated information on Vietnamese
   standards and regulations (between 2012 and 2013), conducted standards-related trainings,
   and implemented a quality management system ISO for over 300 SMEs. As part of this
   program, JICA experts, SME facilitators of the Northern and Southern SME Support Center,
   AED, and MPI have also collaborated and implemented an on-site consulting model to
   support firm implementation of 354 initiatives in technical improvements and improvement
   of 3S/5S production processes during the last 3 years.


Coordination failure

150. There are 11 programs that aimed to solve coordination failure between buyers and
   suppliers or between suppliers and research institutions, thereby reducing search costs and
   transaction costs (e.g., costs related to firm advertising and promotion activities,
   communication). Policies related to encouraging the development of industrial clusters and of
   supporting industries also address coordination failures. Common solutions for coordination
   failure in Vietnam include the following:
   (i)      Match-making of supply and demand (e.g., Vietnam’s business-to-business
            eCommerce Platform (ECVN), Vietnam’s online technology and equipment market
            called Techmart Online);
   (ii)     Connecting research institutions/scientific organizations/universities and enterprises
            through the ‘Development of national science and technology enterprises’ program;
   (iii) Enabling face-to-face buyer-seller coordination through trade fairs and trade
            promotion programs;

                                                                                               69
   (iv)    Locational solutions such as the development of industrial clusters and industrial
           parks; and
   (v)     Construction of fixed selling points in provinces and centrally-run cities (e.g.,
           Domestic Market Development Program).

151. For (iii), for example, Techmart Hanoi’s Equipment and Technology International Fair in
   2013 has attracted over 300 booths and displayed 352 technology-related products (providing
   a channel for firms to innovate and improve their product quality).

152. Another example is the trade promotion activities conducted as part of the National Trade
   Promotion Program, which is participated by local businesses. With a goal of heightening
   Vietnamese exports, the program generated about 1.4 billion dollars’ worth of demand-supply
   contracts and 162 billion worth of memorandum of understanding (MOUs) in 2013, and
   supported 6,000 SMEs (90% of recipients). Annual budget stands at about VND 100 billion.
   Provinces have also actively allocated budgets for trade promotion programs in their
   respective localities.

153. For (v), the Domestic Market Development Program’s objective of connecting domestic
   sellers to domestic consumers include not only informational campaigns (as discussed in the
   Access to Information section) but also construction of fixed selling points in provinces and
   centrally-run cities in order to hasten the flow of goods towards domestic consumers.


Public sector constraints related to (i) lack of enforcement and (ii) lack of policy alignment

154. Recognizing public sector constraints related to lack of enforcement and misaligned
   policies (contributing to lack of support for SMEs), two SME support programs sought to
   address these constraints, namely ‘Legal Support for SMEs’ program and ‘Support to SMEs
   in government procurement and in provision of public services’ (‘Government Procurement’
   program).

155. The ‘Legal Support for SMEs’ program serves as a conduit for information dissemination
   on government efforts to level the playing field for the domestic sector. To date, the
   government has developed regulatory policies to overcome SMEs’ concerns on accessing
   information about the law and law enforcement. The program’s activities include
   development of legal databases (with particular focus on SMEs as the audience), building
   SMEs’ legal knowledge through trainings, disseminating information related to laws and
   regulations on SMEs (through newsletters, radio and television), assisting SMEs on their legal
   issues, and collecting feedback from SMEs on how to improve the legal system.

156. The ‘Government Procurement’ program follows Korea’s electronic procurement system
   (Koneps). This program seeks to replace paper-based bidding processes in government
   procurement through the online bidding platform (http://muasamcong.mpi.gov.vn/ ).
   Procurement procedures, including tender notice, are posted on this website. Firms are
   allowed to submit bids online, and results of the bidding processes are also published online.
   This platform was piloted in late 2010 before being fully implemented. The revised
   Procurement Law (i.e., Procurement Law No. 43/2013 / QH13 November 26, 2013) also
                                                                                                 70
   mandated online bidding, and has provisions for preferential treatment for SMEs to participate
   in bidding processes for consulting services and construction and installation services (Article
   14, Clause 3, section c). Overall, this program serves as an important step for SMEs to provide
   services to the government.


Design elements of the programs


Using Behavioral incentives to achieve program objectives

157. Of the 28 SME support programs, there are 8 programs that involve behavioral incentives
   for the private sector. Majority (5 out of 8) of programs with behavioral incentives have
   objectives related to technological innovation. Two programs focus on incentivizing firms in
   priority sectors (one of these programs specifically focuses on integrating FDI with the local
   economy through supporting industry development). One program targets increasing business
   opportunities in poor districts.

158. For support programs related to supporting industry, the desired behavioral goal for the
   target manufacturing firms is increased backward linkages from multinationals buyers to local
   suppliers. Fiscal incentives include tax incentives under the provisions of Law 71/2014/QH13
   and tax exemptions from import tax on goods used for fixed assets. Financial incentives
   include the following: cost subsidies amounting up to 50% of R&D spending for pilot
   production projects in the Supporting Industry; cost subsidies of up to 75% of spending for
   technology transfer for material production projects using over 85% of raw domestic
   processing minerals; preferential incentives on land rental, land use, and water surface rent;
   cost subsidies related to spending on trademark registration, domestic/foreign exhibition fairs
   and market access; and interest subsidies (ability to get loans at investment credit interest rate
   from the investment credit fund of the State). Examples of incentives and type of behavioral
   change desired for the private sector can be found below.




                  Figure 39. SME support programs with Behavioral Incentives



                                                                                                  71
                                                                                                      Desired behavioral change for
                    Program                         Type of behavioral incentives
                                                                                                            the private sector


                                         Fiscal (tax support on corporate income tax, export
            Development of high-tech         /import tax, VAT) and Financial (preferential            Innovation, product and skills
             businesses and SMEs          incentives in land rental, loan guarantees, interest                 upgrading
                                            subsidies, cost subsidies on R&D and training)


             SME Development Fund            Financial (subsidized loans for projects and             Enhanced competitiveness of
                  (SMEDF)                         production-viable business plans)                         priority sectors


                Support enterprises
                                          Financial (cost subsidies for project implementation,
                including SMEs to
                                              loan guarantees from National Science and
               implement scientific                                                                            Innovation
                                           Technology Fund (NAFOSTED), loan guarantees
              research, technological
                                                 on energy efficiency-related projects)
                    innovation

                                            Fiscal (tax incentives/exemptions) and Financial           Increased supporting-industry
               Supporting Industry
                                         (preferential incentives on land and water surface rent,         development (improved
              Development Program
                                                    cost subsidies, interest subsidies)                          linkages)


               Vietnam Inclusive
                                        Financial (grants for projects that fit the criteria of the   Innovation towards BoP (Base
               Innovation Project
                                                                project)                                     of the Pyramid)
                 (VIIP) program


                Vietnam Climate                                                                         Increased clean technology
                                         Financial (grants for local firms that develop clean
               Innovation Center                                                                          products that cope with
                                                            technologies)
                    (VCIC)                                                                                    climate change


                                                                                                         Improved local innovation
             The Vietnam – Finland
                                                                                                         and strengthened business
             Innovation Partnership                 Financial (grants up to €100,000)
                                                                                                         relations between Vietnam
               Programme (IPP)
                                                                                                                 and Finland


                                                                                                             Increased business
              Program 30A (Poverty      Financial (loan interest subsidies (State shoulders 50% of
                                                                                                         investments for 61 poorest
                   Reduction)                 loan interest at state-run commercial banks))
                                                                                                            districts in Vietnam




159. Mapping of SME support programs and policies using the behavioral incentives lens
   reveal that most of the support programs and incentive policies do not have clear behavioral
   incentives targeted for SMEs. Rather, the programs and policies target all firm types and
   include SMEs. This runs the risk of not meeting the desired behavioral change due to broad
   incentive structures that may not necessarily match SME needs and capabilities.

160. Also, there are behavioral objectives that are missing relative to identified constraints in
   Vietnam. One of the binding constraints found in this report relate to the lack of skills.
   However, only one program (High-tech development program) subsidize training costs
   incurred by the private sector. This suggests that incentive policies to boost skills have to be
   increased, especially for private sector-led specialized workforce trainings.

161. Finally, many firms (particularly SMEs) do not reap the benefits provided by these
   behavioral incentives due to lack of information disclosed by firms. This makes it difficult for
   government agencies to implement preferential policies applicable to SMEs. (This is also
   mentioned in the Challenges section.)




                                                                                                                                       72
162. Most of the programs have an indirect focus on SMEs (i.e., all firm size-types are target
   clients of the program). There are only 8 SME support programs that have a direct focus on
   SMEs (i.e., SMEs are target clients of the program), of which 3 programs are focused on
   increasing access to finance (in yellow). Nonetheless, 3 programs have showed preference for
   SMEs despite targeting all firm size-types (in green). These programs’ preference for SMEs
   is evident in how (a) the program has SME-specific targets (National Technology Innovation
   Program until 2020), (b) majority of program recipients (90% in 2012) are SMEs (National
   Trade Promotion program), or that (c) the program has an explicitly stated preference for
   SMEs (Government Procurement program through public bidding).

                                               Figure 40. SME-focused programs
                                                                        Credit
                                                                      guarantees
                                                                      for SMEs
                                                                     through the
                                          Vietnam                      Vietnam
                                                                    Development                 Credit
                                           Climate
                                                                        Bank                   Guarantee
                                         Innovation
                                                                                               Fund for
                                            Center
                                                                                                SMEs
                                           (VCIC)




                 Business                                                                                            SME
                  portal                                                                                          Development
               (www.busine                                                                                           Fund
                ss.gov.vn)                                                                                         (SMEDF)




                                                                      SME-
             Enhancing
                                                                     focused                                              Supporting
                 the                                                programs                                               Industry
            productivity                                                                                                 Development
            and quality                                                                                                  Program for
            of products                                                                                                  SMEs 2011-
              of SMEs                                                                                                        2020




                             Human                                                                           National
                            Resource                                                                       Technology
                           Development                                                                     Innovation
                            for SMEs                                                                       Programme
                             program                                                                        until 2020

                                                      Government
                                                      Procurement                   National
                                                        program                      Trade
                                                        through                    Promotion
                                                         online                     program
                                                        bidding



163. Further distinguishing SME support programs according to the life cycle stages of firms
   (i.e., start-up, growth, and established/developed), Figure 41shows that SME support
   programs are mainly focused on the growth and established stages. Among the 28 SME
   support programs, only 8 programs include the start-up stage in their program activities. These
   start-up-related programs primarily focused on increasing firm capability in innovation and




                                                                                                                                       73
       developing the high-tech sectors. There are neither SME support programs on financial
       access92 nor market access for start-up firms.

164. SME support programs also overwhelmingly focus on the growth and established stages.
   Yet, there are critical support programs related to enhancing firm capability for the growth
   and established stages that are lacking. This include trainings related to enhancing global
   managerial skills, mentorship programs (e.g., linking Vietnamese overseas with locals), and
   business development services.

                    Figure 41. SME support programs according to the life cycle stages
                                                                     Program 30A (poverty reduction)

                                                                 Domestic market development program

                                                                    Industrial cluster development plan

                                                                    Foreign market information portal; business portal; business-to-business eCommerce

                                                                                              National trade promotion program
     Markets
                                                                                     Public procurement program through online bidding

                                                                                          Supporting industry development program

                                                                                    Program promoting industrial enterprises in rural areas

                                                                                          Intellectual property development program

     Firm                                                                              Legal support to businesses and SMEs program
     Capability
                                                                                           National Product Development Program

                                                               Human resource development for SMEs program

                                                        The Vietnam – Finland Innovation Partnership Programme (IPP)

                                                                 Vietnam Climate Innovation Center (VCIC)

                                                        Vietnam Inclusive Innovation Project (VIIP) project for the BoP

                              Program on high-tech development; Business Incubators program

                     Develop national S&T enterprises                                                                  Develop national S&T enterprises

                                                                              Program enhancing productivity and quality of products of SMEs

                                                                     Support for information, S&T, and development of S&T fair (Techmart) Program

                                                                  Program supporting firms to implement scientific research and technological innovation

                                                           National Technology Innovation Programme until 2020

                                                                                            SME Development Fund (SMEDF)
     Finance
                                                                             Credit guarantees via VDB and via provincial people’s committees



                               Start-up                                         Growth                                         Established



92Some of the access to finance programs for start-up firms can be implemented, such as crowdfunding platforms, seed/start-up
funds, and angel investor networks.


                                                                                                                                                          74
Program timeline and budgets

165. Analysis of the plans of the SME support programs show that many of program
   implementation budgets do not seem to be incorporated in the design phase. Just over half (14
   out of 26) of the ‘currently operational’ SME support programs have either pre-specified
   budgets or are found to be ‘budgeted annually’. A similar observation can also be said for
   program policies (or regulations): 3 out of 5 policies have either a predetermined policy
   support budget or is ‘budgeted annually’.

166. For programs/policies that are ‘budgeted annually’, this suggests that funding amounts are
   variable and are thus vulnerable to various types of risks, including political risks, budget
   risks, and implementation risks. For example, the ‘Encouragement of SMEs and businesses
   to invest in agriculture and rural development’ policy is powered by annual budgets of various
   provincial authorities. On the flip side, programs that are ‘budgeted annually’ meant that
   lagging programs can be weeded out and resources can be directed into more successful
   programs (This however is contingent upon having robust M&E plans and implementing
   guidelines to support the creation of feedback loops that help policymakers in their budget
   allocation decision-making processes for the next fiscal cycle.).

167. Many of the SME support programs and policies (i.e., 10 programs and 3 policies) do not
   have time limits. Even for programs with pre-determined budgets, it is not clear how the
   programs can be sustained given limited budget sources and an unlimited program time frame.
   Budget sources mostly come from central state budget, with some coming from local sources
   such as the provincial authorities. A handful of programs’ budgets come from ODA of other
   government counterparts and technical assistances of international organizations such as the
   World Bank and JICA. Generally, where there is involvement of other ministries and
   provincial authorities, these agencies also share budget costs.

168. Even for programs with a limited time frame, the question on sustainability also arises. It
   is not clear as to whether there are transition programs that SME program recipients can be
   linked into when a program finishes. Moreover, there is high budget dependence on foreign
   aid. SME support programs have historically stopped to be implemented when aid funds cease
   to be channeled into the program.


Monitoring and Evaluation

169. Implementation of the SME support programs can be assessed according to outputs and
   outcomes (vis-à-vis targets). Output information can be revealed from annual activity reports
   and process evaluation assessments. Outcome information can be assessed through client
   feedback surveys, impact evaluation, or other M&E methods. Many of the SME support
   programs however have limited assessments, whether assessed independently or internally,
   and this makes it difficult to evaluate whether the programs are effective in terms of achieving
   intended outcomes/impacts.


                                                                                                75
170. About half of the programs and policies (currently in operation) do not have monitoring
   and evaluation plans (whether complete or incomplete), suggesting concerns related to lack
   of transparency. A complete M&E plan presents M&E guidelines as well as input-level,
   output-level, and outcome-level targets connected to the program. An incomplete M&E plan
   includes some of the M&E elements, such as having target indicators.

171. For those that at least have M&E-related target indicators in the design phase, there are
   issues, including:
   (i)     Lack of targets: Many have intermediate targets only or outcome targets only (but
           only a handful has both). This poses concern on whether the intermediate targets have
           achieved the intended outcome (if there are no available outcome targets). Another
           concern is being able to monitor the outputs and identify lagging outputs that are
           hindering the achievement progress of the outcomes (if there are no available output
           targets).
   (ii)    Mismatch in targets and outputs: For example, the ‘Enhancing the productivity and
           quality of products of SMEs’ program targets to form 4,000 new national standards
           and guide 40,000 businesses on technological innovation. However, it is unclear how
           the reported intermediate outputs (e.g., trainings) have supported one of the targets:
           formation of new national standards. Also, it is unclear how the reported outputs
           supported the program’s outcome target of improving the contribution of TFP growth
           of GDP by 30% by 2015.
   (iii) Unmeasurable targets: For example, the units used by the Intellectual Property
           Development program renders the targets unmeasurable. The targets of the program
           call for achieving 70% of the requirements in ‘X’ activity, such as an awareness raising
           activity. It is unclear what these ‘requirements’ are.
   (iv)    Lack of criteria to identify a target output/outcome: Even for those with M&E
           plans, it is not clear what criteria were used to define a ‘successful’ target. That is, a
           target can be too unrealistic that it is not achievable, or a target can be too easily
           achieved. For example, the Domestic Market Development Program has an objective
           of linking domestic sellers with domestic consumers through informational campaigns
           and construction of selling distribution points around the country. While the target
           output links well with the program objective, targets may be unrealistic (e.g., 100% of
           consumers and businesses know about the campaign by 2020) or lack a benchmark
           (e.g., 80% market share by local goods in traditional distributional channels in rural,
           mountainous, isolated, and remote locations). This 80% market share may easily be
           achieved or have already been achieved without the program due to the foreign market
           inaccessibility of the locations in the first place.

172. While majority of the SME support programs have output information (e.g., number of
   beneficiaries served, number of SME proposals approved), half of these have no pre-identified
   targets. Again, this makes the assessment on implementation processes difficult. Likewise,
   only 5 programs and policies have outcome information (e.g., whether program achieved
   objective/s such as number of jobs created, number of exports products produced, etc.).

173. As part of assessing SME support programs for this report, an SME survey was conducted
   in order to generate broad SME feedback on accessibility and usefulness of the SME support

                                                                                                  76
       programs. This survey found that there is demand for SME support programs: 70% of
       respondents have been searching for or have searched for programs and policies on SMEs
       during the last three years. Access to information about SME support programs in Vietnam
       seem to be relatively uncomplicated as 60% mentioned that they have no difficulties in
       acquiring information about SME support programs. Yet, for those with issues about getting
       SME program information, concerns include lack of knowledge about where to search for
       SME support programs (38%) and not knowing whether the firm is eligible to apply for these
       programs (44%)93.

174. 55% of respondents who have searched for SME support programs thought that there are
   high application barriers in applying to these programs. They find that application
   requirements to such support programs are either ‘restrictive’ or ‘very restrictive’, implying
   that application procedures need to be made simpler to lower transaction costs for applying.
   This also suggests that there is a perception issue with regards to applying to SME support
   programs. Nonetheless, SME survey reveal that: Of those which have searched for SME
   support programs, 86% have been successful in applying to these support programs and about
   half of these programs are recently granted (i.e., in the past year). The proportion of successful
   applicants represents 62% of total respondents (including those who have not searched for
   programs). Among the grantees of the SME support programs, majority of information about
   the program were received from local authorities or agencies (79%), followed by informal
   networks such as family and friends (28%), and internet search by oneself (7%)94.

175. 41% of program grantees however found difficulties related to accessing the SME support
   program even when their application was successful. Issues include: difficulties in fulfilling
   support acquisition requirements even after the application was successful (18%), delays in
   provision of support by the program agency (9%), and informal bribes asked by government
   officials even after the application was successful (3%), among others. Nonetheless, for
   program grantees, the SME support program was helpful in improving
   management/leadership skills (75%), improving workforce skills (71%), improving
   production processes (67%), and supplementing working capital (9%). A negligible 1% of
   program grantees found that SME support programs were not helpful at all.

176. 84% of total respondents mention that their business face difficulties currently.
   Difficulties include complying with tax or labor regulations, land acquisition, access to
   markets, capital, and/or technology (including branding), and hiring an educated work force.
   95% of total respondents expect to obtain government support to address these difficulties.
   Among the support programs and policies sought by SMEs include fair competition with
   regards to regulation, trainings, and preferential treatment for SMEs.




93   Multiple answers are allowed.
94   Multiple answers are also allowed.

                                                                                                  77
Implementing SME support programs: Stakeholder Involvement, Achieved
Results, and Challenges


Stakeholder Involvement

177. The Government of Vietnam has set up the SME Development Council to advise the prime
   minister on the development of policies that support SME development. Headed by the
   Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI), the council involves a broad range of
   stakeholders from the government, non-governmental institutions, and the private sector. The
   institutional structure and the different key players involved in SME development can be seen
   below.

                                     Figure 42. SME Institutional Structure in Vietnam

                                                                  Prime Minister



                                                           SME Development Council
                                                 (Headed by the Minister of Planning & Investment)




     Ministry of Trade &
                                       Ministry of Planning and Investment             Provincial, City People’s         Other supportive
    Industry (MoIT), other
                                                      (MPI)                                  Committee                   Agencies:
    Ministries (e.g. MoST)
                                                                                                                         • Vietnam Chamber
                                                                                                                            of Commerce and
                                    Agency for Enterprises                 Agency for Business                              Industry (VCCI)
                                     Development (AED)                        Registration                               • Vietnam
                                                                                                                            Cooperative
                                                                                                                            Alliance (VCI)
                                                                                                                         • Union of Science
                         North, Central and South             Information supportive                                        and Technology
                        SME Technical Assistance                Enterprises Center                                          Institutions
                                 Center                                                                                  • Vietnam SME
                                                                                                                            Association
                                                                                                                            (VINASME)
                                                                                                                         • Vietnam Young
                                                                                                                            Entrepreneurs
            Supportive Units                 Business Clubs,                  DPI (coordination role) + SME                 Association
             of Ministry and              provincial supportive               Technical Assistance Center of             • Other enterprises
              Departments                  Institutions, NGOs               departments or People’s Committee               Association
                                                                                                                         • STAMEQ




                                                                          SMEs

Notes:
i. Other ministries and departments include the Ministry of Industry and Trade (MOIT), Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Ministry
of Finance, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Ministry of Construction, Ministry of Transport, Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment, Ministry of Education and Training, Ministry of Labor - War Invalids and Social Affairs (MOLISA), and
Steering Committee for Enterprise Development and Reform.
ii. Provincial/city people’s committees include Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City, Hai Phong, Da Nang and Can Tho.



                                                                                                                                        78
178. Amongst the different member ministries in the council, three ministries are actively
    involved in leading SME support programs, namely MOIT, MOST, and MPI. Each ministry
    is leading at least 7 SME support programs. Nevertheless, among the 28 programs in total,
    almost half of them involve other ministries. For example, the Supporting Industry
    Development Program is pioneered by the MOIT, but also involve MPI and MOST.
There is also some involvement by the provincial authority in state-led SME support programs,
such as on programs related to supporting industry, credit access, intellectual property, and trade
promotion. Involvement by universities and research institutes in state-led SME support programs
primarily concern R&D and innovation projects; there is also an MPI-led Vietnam Inclusive
Innovation project (VIIP) precisely aimed at strengthening university and private sector
coordination in R&D and innovation.95 Private sector involvement in state-led SME support
programs however seems to be small and mostly focused on credit access, such as by commercial
banks.

179. While not the focus of our mapping exercise, there are also some province-led, private
   sector-led, and university-led support programs applicable to SMEs. For example, provinces
   have set up promotion centers related to trade, investment, tourism and/or industrial
   promotion. Also, business associations such as Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry
   (VCCI) and Vietnam SME association (VINASME) have their own initiated SME programs
   (e.g., trade promotion centers), apart from supporting state-led support programs and
   advocating for the interests of the business community, including SMEs. Similarly, some
   universities have their own SME support centers (e.g., National University of Technology)
   and business start-up support centers (e.g., National Economics University) and these centers
   themselves reach out to the private sector. Finally, there are also international
   organizations/donors and NGOs supporting SME development. These either involve funding
   support and technical assistance for state-led SME support projects (e.g. VCIC project) or
   NGO-initiated programs. Areas of support include business development, labor standards
   improvements, fair trade, and rural entrepreneurship.

180. The state-led SME support program listing below suggests that ministries lead on program
   topics where they have comparative advantages (or expertise). For example, MOST primarily
   focuses on product innovation using technology. MOIT focuses on enhancing the supporting
   industry and building industrial clusters (in light of promoting and expanding trade). MPI’s
   programs are more diverse, and includes access to finance programs, information and training
   programs related to starting/operating businesses in Vietnam, and a public procurement
   program. There are however overlaps in the programs initiated by the ministries thereby
   reflecting fragmentation amongst ministries in program development (discussed in the
   Challenges section).


Achieved Results

181. For programs that have output and outcome information, the achievement of SME support
   programs is encouraging. Considerable strides can be found in government efforts to (i)

95 This project, financed by the World Bank, is expected to be shortly closed. Another project which precisely aims at
strengthening university and private sector coordination in R&D is MOST-led FIRST project.

                                                                                                                   79
    increase credit access to SMEs, (ii) increase access to information such as legal information,
    (iii) promote industrial enterprises in rural areas, (iv) develop clean technology that address
    climate change, and (v) improve quality of products. An internal assessment by the Agency
    for Enterprise Development (AED) also found that about 50% of SME support policies
    achieved satisfactory feedback, particularly on programs related to access to finance, human
    resource development (business management skills), and access to information through trade
    promotion programs.

                            Table 3. SME support programs with information on outcome
 Program                    Timeline       Information on output                             Information on outcome


 Credit      Guarantee      Since 2001;    21 provinces have set up the fund; funds are      Assessment shows that there are higher
 Fund for SMEs                             assessed to be more effective in some             job creation rates and higher profits for
                            No limits      provinces but not in others; there are capacity   firms which accessed the fund.
                                           issues given high demand for fund; there are
                                           also SME complaints such as complicated
                                           procedures and stringent requirements to
                                           access the fund

 Legal    Support    to     2010-2014      Among other outputs, law-related classes,         Feedback from business owners on
 Businesses and SMEs                       workshops, and trainings summed to 82 in          effectivity of trainings and other
                                           2012 and involved 15,720 business owners          information dissemination activities are
                                                                                             largely positive (e.g., helped SMEs
                                                                                             lower or avoid legal risks))

 Promotion of industrial    2007-2012      Among other outputs, vocational training          25.3% achieved in 2012 (despite the
 enterprises   including                   provided to 21,000 workers and 1,600              target   of:   industrial production
 SMEs in rural areas                       students in 2013; program supported over          accounting for 28-30% of rural
                                           200 industrial promotion projects in 2012         production value by 2010)

 Vietnam         Climate    2015 - 2018    Among other outputs, 18 projects awarded          Clean technology projects supported by
 Innovation       Center                   out of 300 proposals as per June 2017             the program saved energy and reduced
 (VCIC)                                                                                      carbon dioxide emissions (e.g., use of
                                                                                             LED in the fishery sector)

 Program       enhancing    2010-2020      9 conferences on standards were conducted         No information on whether the target of
 productivity and quality                  in 2012 and 2013; 30 construction firms           improving the contribution of TFP
 of products of SMEs                       trained and guided in 2012-2013; quality          growth of GDP by 30% by 2015 has
                                           management system ISO for over 300 SMEs           been achieved; However, technical
                                           implemented in 2013; 354 initiatives in           improvement coordination with JICA
                                           technical improvements and improved 3S/5S         resulted to reduced production costs and
                                           production processes implemented in the last      improved productivity and product
                                           3 years                                           quality for participating firms



182. There is also modest institutionalization of state-led SME support programs at the
   provincial level. For example, Techmart programs are locally institutionalized as provincial
   authorities earmark budgets for these programs. Tax policies have also adapted to SME needs,
   in light of macro-economic situations, such as ability of SMEs to apply the 20% corporate
   income tax (CIT) rate from July 2013, half-year earlier than the implementation schedule of
   the amended CIT law.

Implementation Challenges




                                                                                                                                    80
183. Despite considerable results achieved, challenges remain. We provide general
   implementation challenges and also provide examples of specific issues faced by SME
   support programs.

184. Long program/policy development process: In terms of the process of designing an SME
   support program/policy to actually implementing the program/policy, the time lag is quite
   long and can take between 2 and 3 years (in general). This is true for the National Technology
   Innovation Programme to 2020, National High Technology Development Program, and the
   National Product Development Program. SME Development Fund is reported to have taken
   over 3 years before approval was obtained. Given rapid changes in the SME landscape, the
   long time lag meant that the policies may no longer reflect the changing needs of SMEs.

185. Overlaps in programs across ministries: For example, MPI also has an innovation project,
   even though MOST have other innovation projects (albeit these projects have different
   respective focus). There are also overlaps in information-related programs: MOIT has its
   Foreign Market Information Portal, MOST has its Techmart program, MPI has its own
   business portal, and the Department of E-Commerce and Information Technology under
   MOIT has its eCommerce Platform (ECVN). While the objectives and target audience of
   these information websites may be different, there are similarities in the information provided.

186. These overlaps can be traced back to institutional failures to support SME program
   development (discussed in the next section). Ideally, SME needs are addressed through
   specific and holistic SME program packages that simultaneously address the different
   constraints that firms face (such as on financial access, information access, etc.). The new
   SME Law outlines the roles for each of the different ministries and places the responsibility
   of overseeing incubation services, commercialization of research and innovative activity
   under the Ministry of Science and technology. This clarity in the roles and responsibilities if
   implemented will increase the efficiency of the system that would be able to provide a more
   comprehensive support for SMEs without resources being spent on duplicating efforts through
   different implementing agencies.

187. Fragmented support policies: Policies that create an enabling environment to support
   SME development are largely fragmented and not SME-focused. For examples, tax incentive
   policies, business-licensing policies, competition polices, accounting standards policies, and
   land access and use policies are issued by different ministries, and in general, do not prioritize
   SMEs as the primary beneficiary of the policy.

188. Limited implementation of SME support programs and policies at the provincial level:
   While mapping of SME support programs initiated by provinces is not the focus of this report,
   one fact is that a significant proportion of provinces have not initiated SME support programs
   in their respective provinces, although there is modest participation in state-led programs.
   Moreover, about one-third of provinces do not have an approved provincial SME
   development plan (nor are there implementation progress reports on SME development
   submitted to MPI)96.

96   Report on the Implementation of the Decree No. 56 of the Ministry of Planning and Investment (2015).

                                                                                                            81
189. Limited scale and scope (e.g., small number of SME recipients) of state-led support
   programs: This issue is faced by a number of programs, including ‘Support enterprises
   including SMEs to implement scientific research, technological innovation’ program,
   National Technology Innovation Programme until 2020, ‘Business Incubator’ program, and
   ‘Credit guarantee funds for SMEs’ program. For examples, the Business Incubator program
   have only 8 business incubators to date in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh cities while 18 provincial
   funds of the ‘Credit guarantee funds for SMEs’ program are found to have limited guarantee
   values (reflecting a limited number of SMEs accessing the fund).

190. Limited number of recipients can be traced back to perception problems about application
   requirements (thereby hindering SMEs to apply) and implementation issues including SME
   experience of difficulties in accessing the program even when SMEs’ application to the
   program is successful (may discourage SMEs to apply in other programs) 97. Other
   implementation issues include lack of access to information about government-led support
   programs and policies, lack of specific guidelines to participate in these programs, complex
   requirements to participate, and mismatch in program content and SME needs98.

191. For the ‘Credit Guarantee Fund for SMEs’ program, in particular, complaints include
   difficulties in accessing the program due to complicated procedures and stringent
   requirements to access the fund. The fund also suffers from capacity issues due to high
   demand for the program (and which credit guarantees (supply) cannot keep up with the pace
   of demand for the fund).

192. Lack of value addition of some SME support programs: Information support programs
   such as eCommerce platform (ECVN) and Foreign Market Information Portal provide general
   information to SMEs on these programs’ websites. Moreover, these informational websites
   are found to be difficult to navigate: websites are not well maintained, unfriendly to non-
   Vietnamese users, and that the user experienced technical issues when accessing the website.
   For programs with training-related components, contents of the training courses are non-
   specialized and do not reflect and adapt to the specific needs of SMEs, thereby reducing SME
   participation in such courses. Lack of value addition of these programs can be traced back to
   weak program design and content.


Why implementation challenges persist: underlying political environment

193. First, most SME support policies (for example 6/8 policy groups defined in Decree
   56/2009 / ND-CP) are integrated into sectoral programs which are run by different line
   ministries. Accordingly, these programs are targeting a broad group of beneficiaries which
   SMEs are only one group. The design of many programs are not really suitable for SMEs,
   leading to the inability to evaluate the results of support for SMEs as well as the reduction of
   SMEs. Opportunity to participate / benefit from SME support policies is limited or are not
   made available to the wide number of SMEs.


97   These issues were identified in the SME survey conducted as part of this report.
98   Report on the Implementation of the Decree No. 56 of the Ministry of Planning and Investment (2015).

                                                                                                            82
194. Second, some of the support policies are regulated under Decree 56/2009 / NĐ-CP.
   However, implementation of such policy is subject to Land Law, Law on Investment, Law on
   Credit Institutions, and Competition Law. Therefore, it is impossible to stipulate in detail the
   preferential policies for SMEs, thus hindering the implementation of the policies.

195. Third, the coordination between Ministries, government authorities at both central and
   local levels is weak. There is a serious lack of coordination mechanisms for SME development
   assistance. At present, almost every department / industry (both at the central and provincial
   levels) independently implement its own policies / programs (i.e., central level implements its
   own SME support program and the local level implements its own as well). There is a lack of
   linkage with other programs to focus on a key business group, and lack of focus on scaling up
   and spillover effects to other businesses. At the same time, reporting and information sharing
   mechanisms have not been implemented seriously and fully.

196. Fourth, the focal agencies to support SMEs may benefit from strengthened capacity
   building, and increased coordination. Under the provisions of Articles 15 and 18 of Decree
   56/2009 / ND-CP, the Agency for Enterprise Development (AED) under the Ministry of
   Planning and Investment and local Departments of Planning and Investment have the
   functions and duties of State management on SME development assistance. The Department
   is also in charge of acting as a focal point in coordinating with concerned agencies in
   formulating programs and plans on assistance for the development of SMEs, submitting them
   to competent authorities for approval, promulgation and directing the implementation thereof.
   However, at present, only 16 out of 63 provinces and centrally-run cities have coordination
   units under the Department of Planning and Investment (DPI) to perform the function of
   supporting development of small and medium enterprises. Tasks related to SME development
   at the local level are assigned to different departments (e.g., Business Registration Offices,
   Branch Management Offices) to perform the functions and tasks mentioned above. There are
   currently only about 200 staff responsible for SME development assistance in these agencies.
   This is considered one of the main causes leading to weaknesses and shortcomings in the
   implementation of SME development assistance policies.

197. Fifth, the interest and investment of localities in SME development assistance is low while
   the central budget is limited. Most localities have not been proactive in allocating budgets to
   support SMEs, if any, and this is very limited compared to the high demand from the SME
   community (only 19% business support). Resource constraints are one of the causes of
   underdevelopment of the SME development program and limited scope of impact.

198. Finally, the weaknesses stem from SMEs internally. Information on the business is not
   sufficient. Reliability of SMEs is an issue. Low quality of financial information and reporting
   by enterprises and SMEs makes it difficult for the management agencies to implement the
   preferential policies and support for SMEs (e.g., taxation, credit). Capacity and vision of
   SMEs are limited. Most SMEs do not have a long-term development strategy. Therefore,
   awareness and interest of SMEs in innovation and competitiveness promotion programs are
   low.




                                                                                                83
Concluding Summary
111. This chapter focuses on the current programs and policies in place vis a vis the key binding
constraints identified earlier. It highlights the scope for improvements – both in design and
implementation – of these programs for increased effectiveness and impact. Following are some
of the program design and implementation solutions addressing key systemic issues that pervade
across programs which the government can implement as it updates its SME policy:


Program Design

199. Consolidate overlapping programs: Some of the SME support programs aim to achieve
   similar objectives but are initiated and implemented by different ministries. For example,
   there can be overlaps in innovation program trainings offered as a sub-program (or activity)
   by the various innovation-related and MOST-pioneered programs. Where programs have
   overlaps with another program, a corollary issue relates to targeting and selecting SME
   beneficiaries. As such, it would be important to analyze targeting and selection strategies of
   these different overlapping programs to avoid redundancy on program coverage and issues of
   under-coverage in other areas. In light of consolidating similar programs, a program can serve
   as a one-stop shop for addressing ‘X’ desired SME-related objective. SME-specific incentives
   can then be developed around that objective. Consolidating these programs also meant
   addressing overlaps in the functions of SME units of the different line ministries and agencies
   concerned with SME development.

200. Identify missing SME support programs based on life cycle approach: An analysis of the
   programs based on the life cycle stages of firms find that SMEs on the start-up stage are not
   fully benefitting from SME support programs. Programs focusing on this target group (and
   address their constraints) have to be considered (e.g., market access programs, financial access
   programs). Some of the ‘missing’ access to finance programs for start-up firms that can be
   implemented include crowdfunding platforms, seed/start-up funds, and angel investor
   networks. Even at the growth and established stages, some of the ‘missing’ critical support
   programs relate to enhancing firm capability, including trainings related to enhancing global
   managerial skills, mentorship programs (e.g., linking Vietnamese overseas with locals), and
   business development services.

201. Ensure consistent M&E: Many of the programs have M&E related target indicators.
   However as mentioned, there are issues such as incomplete identification of output and/or
   outcome targets, as well as lack of M&E implementation guidelines/plans. For targets, there
   should be clear intermediate/output targets and identified outcomes. As part of M&E, it is
   worthwhile to generate client feedback of SME support programs to understand whether
   SMEs find the programs useful and effective and to support improvement of program results.
   In general, a clear reporting/monitoring mechanism attached in the design phase of the
   program can ensure transparency, accountability and oversight.




                                                                                                84
Program Implementation

202. Ensure sustainability of the programs: Sustainability of the programs has to be ensured
   especially on the budget phase as well as on the implementation phase. On the budget phase,
   the key objective is decreasing dependence on central government/state support subsidies
   through other sources. Predictability of budgets has to also be ensured, especially on programs
   that are ‘budgeted annually’. There can be a threshold rule indicating how much a program’s
   budget can ‘decrease’ (all else equal). For programs dependent on foreign aid, transition (or
   graduation) of program beneficiaries have to also be considered to ensure holistic SME
   development. On the implementation phase, sustainability has to also be considered for
   programs without time limits. For programs with time limits, linkage of a certain program to
   other programs can be streamlined to ensured maximum impact for SME beneficiaries. The
   key is to understand how SME support programs complement other SME support programs.

203. Increase private sector involvement: Private sector involvement are mostly focused on
   financial access, such as partnerships with commercial banks. Public private partnership
   approaches can be considered in the design and implementation stages of the SME support
   programs. For example, successful private enterprises can be called upon to train and mentor
   other firms with high growth potential.

204. Moreover, business associations/industry associations can be tapped to increase
   involvement of the private sector as a whole. Its roles in the SME community can be made
   more profound by promoting business associations as a link (i) between ministries and SMEs
   in support programs and policy development and implementation and (ii) between firms
   themselves to collaborate in business production and complementary resource sharing
   processes. Business associations can also develop strategic thinking programs that change
   firms’ short-term business thinking towards a longer-term mindset (which can be reflected in
   firms’ respective business strategies, such as focus on key business lines/strengths and higher
   propensities to invest in innovation). Capacities of business/industry associations can thus be
   improved to help associations assume these roles.

205. Improve the program development and implementation processes of the 5-year SME
   Development Plan: This can be done by strengthening the coordination role of the SME
   Development Council in directing ministries, sectors, provinces and business associations
   (i.e., members of the council) to implement holistic and targeted SME support programs.
   Strengthening SME Development Council’s coordination role may also reduce overlap in
   SME support programs.

206. Promote SME consultation channels in the development and implementation of SME
   support policies: In order to increase access to information on incentives applicable to SMEs,
   GoV can facilitate and support business associations to participate in the implementation of
   SME support policies.




                                                                                               85
     Chapter 5: Roadmap for Implementing the Supporting Industries
           Program and Strengthening SME Competitiveness
207. The concluding chapter offers a roadmap for facilitating linkages and strengthening
   domestic private sector in Vietnam. The recommendations are anchored in the Government’s
   priorities and programs, primarily the Supporting Industries (SI) program policy framework.
   As the analytical findings underscore, the operationalization of the linkage program can act
   as a powerful catalyst for reforms in the enabling environment to help strengthen the
   competitiveness and capabilities of SMEs. The key messages emerging from the review of
   existing SME programs can also help inform the SME policy implementation once it is
   finalized and approved. Drawing on lessons from international countries and within Vietnam,
   it highlights the need for coordinated and complementary set of policies and institutions for
   achieving success.

208. Successful bottom-up and market-based linkages solutions from within Vietnam
   nonetheless can be highlighted, and further suggests the importance of (i) private sector
   involvement in the government’s linkage agenda as well as (ii) encouraging the proliferation
   of effective private sector solutions that complement the government’s programs. Existing
   public sector constraints further justify the value of both of these private sector roles. Public
   sector and private sector approaches on linkages are compatible, as they have the same
   objective of helping firms overcome binding constraints. Early successes of private sector
   solutions within Vietnam, such as the cases of Thanh Long Electronics Production Company
   and Tam Hop Company in the electronics and automotive sectors, showed that Vietnamese
   firms were able to address supply-side constraints through the support of FDI-Tier 1 suppliers,
   although some also require technical assistances from development partners and quasi-
   governmental organizations and took a long time for linkage to materialize. Overall, private
   sector approaches remain valid and substantially important in achieving the linkage objective.
   However, the challenge of lack of successful domestic companies that have integrated into
   the GVCs suggests that a more organized policy roadmap to achieve the linkages agenda is
   needed.

209. The recommendations offered below are presented in two parts. The first section
   highlights the key pillars for the operationalization of the SI program in Vietnam. The second
   section proposes measures that can be undertaken to tackle the key constraints in the enabling
   environment that are holding back domestic private sector’s competitiveness as well as
   impacting linkage development opportunities.




                                                                                                 86
Recommendations


Part I: Operationalizing the SI linkage policy framework in Vietnam

210. Drawing on international experience, the study recommends the following pillars of
   support for implementing the SI program in Vietnam (Figure 43).




                                   Figure 43. Linkages Program - Core Pillars
          Implementing the Supporting Industries (SI) Program and Enhancing Domestic Enterprise
                                       competitiveness in Vietnam



                                                 Establishing a Supplier
                                                                                     Addressing IC environ.
     Institutional and governance                Development program
                                                                                    constraints to strengthen
       environment for SI policy                  for developing SI in
                                                                                           innovation
                                                     priority sectors


                                                                                           Pillar 4: Facilitate and
                                                                                         promote demand-driven
           Pillar 1: (i) Establishment                                                   skills training, managerial
           of SI and Competitiveness                  Pillar 2: Connecting MNEs                    services,
                 Inter-ministerial                            & local firms              quality/standards as well
              Committee with key                                                         as improvements in R&D
           stakeholders – public and                   Pillar 3: Setting up a SDP         eco-system through: (i)
             private (lead firms and                  to support domestic firms              use of behavioural
             suppliers in GVCs); (ii)                            with : (i)              incentives; (ii) promoting
                Improve business                          consulting/advisory             alternative training and
            regulatory environment;                         services; and (ii)             consulting modalities,
                 (iii) SI agency for                    upgrading equipment.               development of R& D
               managing the SDP                                                           clusters through public-
                                                                                         private partnerships with
                                                                                                  universities.




211. Pillar 1- Institutional and Policy Environment for linkages: The aim of this pillar is to
   strengthen and streamline the governance and institutional arrangements for SI policy and
   linkage program implementation. Encouragingly, the recent approval of the SI policy
   framework underscores the priority placed on this agenda by the Government. In addition,
   MoIT has been assigned as the lead agency responsible for implementing the SI agenda.
   Specifically, the Department of Industry – under MoIT - is in charge of formulation and
   implementation of support policies and programs and recognizes the need for a dedicated
   program for development of suppliers in Vietnam.


                                                                                                         87
212. At same time, there is a lack of coordination among government institutions with regard
   to policies and programs to improve the business environment for SMEs and supporting
   industries. As the discussion in Chapter 4 has indicated, the current provision of business
   development support services is weakened by being fragmented across ministries. For
   instance, separate regional TAC Assistance Centers for SMEs (MPI) and Centers for SI
   Development (MoIT) provide training courses, direct development support for companies
   using international experts, and seeking to promote international business linkages through
   organizing visits overseas. The new SME law promises wide-ranging support for all SMEs,
   with targeted programs for start-ups, formalization of household enterprises and SMEs to
   become part of GVCs. Thus there remains risk of overlap in some programs. To mitigate this
   risk and strengthen coordination, the study recommends:


   o    Setting up an “Inter-ministerial Committee on Supporting Industry Development,” to
        strengthen the coordinating mechanism, and influence relevant stakeholders across
        boundaries for policy coherence and reform in cross-cutting areas. Specifically, the
        Committee would work across government agencies (i.e. MPI, MoST, provincial
        agencies etc.) to streamline roles and responsibilities among government agencies to
        address key constraints in the enabling and regulatory environment that may impact
        linkages. It would also coordinate the effective and demand-driven delivery of the BDS
        across agencies. Lastly, it would engage with businesses especially MNEs and private
        sector industries/associations in planning and implementing the SDPs in strategic GVCs.
        The proposed Inter-ministerial Committee would serve a focused agenda on linkage
        development. It would coordinate closely with the SME Development Council that has a
        broader oversight of SME development while for SI development the modality of support
        needs to be targeted to specific sectors and strongly linked to OEM/Buyers. The
        secretariat can be hosted by the soon-to be established Supporting Division under the
        Industry agency of MOIT.
   o    Private sector membership in the committee. Lessons from outside Vietnam and within
        it indicates the importance of involving the private sector (as a critical actor) in
        institutionalizing the linkage agenda and addressing related constraints. The public-
        private partnership model in Penang (Malaysia) for skills provision, whereby private
        sector (MNEs and domestic firms) and academia sit on the Board of Penang Skills
        Development Center (a vocational training initiative created by the Penang Development
        Corporation) is found to be critical in achieving the skills objective supporting the
        linkages agenda. Chile had both successful public and private linkages solutions—
        therefore private sector membership in the committee will be instrumental in developing
        complementary and coordinated private sector solutions supporting the linkage agenda.
        Moreover, the actual service providers to SME linkages are business development
        organizations such as the Supporting Industry Development Centers in Hanoi and Ho Chi
        Minh City and business associations such as Vietnam Supporting Industry Association
        (VASI), for examples, indicating the significant role that the private sector plays in the
        provision of assistances.


                                                                                               88
   o    Greater autonomy and capacity-building of the lead agency. The Government has
        already identified the former Department of Heavy industry, which is now a part of the
        newly established Industry Agency, as the lead agency given the focus of linkages in the
        manufacturing sector. Looking ahead it is important that this agency receives greater
        autonomy and that its capacity to manage the complex SI agenda is strengthened. The
        new Industry Agency is expected to have more autonomy in terms of setting its own
        agenda and budget. The scope for strengthening the technical and operational capacity of
        this agency is significant as it takes on the management of the supplier development
        program (SDP), and also functions as the technical arm of the Committee.


213. Pillar 2 - Connecting MNEs and local firms: As discussed earlier, connecting MNEs/lead
   firms with domestic firms in Vietnam is a critical element for the success of the SI program.
   While information gaps exist in both directions, lack of information is more a binding supply-
   side problem and less of a buyer’s issue. That is, local firms need to first understand their
   technology and skills gaps and QCD standards in order to to start upgrading. International
   experience suggest that this can be done through ‘Meet the Buyer’ events or suppliers’ forum,
   where potential suppliers can learn about procurement requirements of lead firm-buyers.
   Local experience also has similar endeavors, such as annual trade fairs and exhibitions (see
   Chapter 4), although the scale and scope of these programs, as well as their effectiveness
   varies. There is also a need to reduce search costs for foreign firms. Currently information on
   suppliers is fragmented, not regularly updated and held in various national and local
   databases, making the quality of information variable. Also, current databases do not allow
   for a measure that incorporates reputation-building among suppliers, making it difficult for
   ‘improving’ suppliers to be recognized by MNEs. The aim of this pillar therefore is to
   organize informational events benefiting potential suppliers and to develop a high-quality
   national supplier database that allows suppliers to build their reputation - centered around
   priority sectors - and available online. In addition, building capacity mainly within MoIT to
   implement effective business-to-business (B2B) match-making services will help foster
   productive linkages between high potential local suppliers and new or existing foreign
   investors in Vietnam.


214. While there are existing online platforms that address information and coordination
   failures in Vietnam (see Chapter 4), current platforms do not provide the adequate services
   needed, such as lack of specific information and lack of website maintenance. Nonetheless,
   synergies amongst platforms (including simplification) should be developed and duplication
   avoided when implementing this pillar.


215. Pillar 3 - Setting up a supplier development program to upgrade local firms: This pillar
   seeks to address the lack of competitiveness of local suppliers. In line with the SI framework,
   the objective is to design and implement a demand-driven Supplier Development Program
   (SDP) for upgrading local firms in sectors where potential for linkages has been identified. It
   highlights a package of vertical and horizontal support initiatives in specific sectors for the
   SDP - including specialized consulting services for improving managerial and technical skills,


                                                                                               89
    machine upgradation, and meeting labor and environmental standards and certification - that
    upgrades domestic capabilities. This support can be provided through the use of behavioral
    incentives which can be targeted towards both local suppliers for upgrading, and to MNEs to
    encourage them to source locally or invest in supplier training and research and development
    (Figure 44). The range of instruments employed to make the local suppliers bankable can vary
    from direct support (e.g. matching grants) to indirect fiscal support through tax incentives.
    These incentives must be tied to firm performance, targeted and with sun-set clause and aimed
    at minimizing market distortions (e.g., possible crowding out of market-driven approach on

                   Figure 44. Behavioral Incentives Tools -Examples from Singapore
                 Incentives to MNEs                                        Incentives to local firms

 •Research Incentive Scheme for Companies (RISC)             •Capability Development Grant (CDG)
  •encourages the development of research and                 •CDG up to 70% of costs (e.g., consultancy,
   development capabilities and technologies                   training, certification and equipment costs)
   through the support of projects in the areas of            •large scale upgrading projects in areas such as
   science and technology                                      increasing productivity, process improvement,
                                                               product development and market access
 •Training Grant for Company (TGC)
  •encourages manpower capability development in             •Productivity and Innovation Credit (PIC)
   applying new technologies, industrial skills and           •400% tax deductions up to $400,000 or 60% cash
   professional know-how through the support of                pay out up to $100,000, for investments in
   training programmes for companies' employees.               innovation and productivity improvements
                                                              •The six activities covered under PIC include:
 •Productivity Grant (PG)                                      •R&D
  •encourages firm-level projects which aim at                 •Registration of IPRs
   improvements to energy, water, land or labour               •Acquisition and in-licensing of IPRs
   efficiencies through transformation efforts to
                                                               •Acquisition or leasing of prescribed automation
   enhance companies' operations or involving
                                                                 equipment
   adoption of technologies.
                                                               •Training of employees
                                                               •Approved design projects

Source: Promoting FDI Linkages and Domestic Value addition, T&C Global Practice, PPT, April 2017



    linkages). When the support elapse, these Vietnamese suppliers should be able to continue
    growing with their anchor customers, and/or sell their products to new lead firms or global
    suppliers in Vietnam and elsewhere. The Committee for Support Industry Development could
    then tap these successful local tier 1 suppliers to help develop tier 2 suppliers. This path would
    involve a global tier 1 supplier replacing lead firms and platform leaders, working directly
    with the government to support the development of local tier 2 suppliers. These newly
    developed tier 2 suppliers could then work to develop tier 3 level suppliers.

216. National experience shows that most of the SME support programs and incentive policies
   in Vietnam do not have clear behavioral incentives targeted for SMEs (see Chapter 4).
   Therefore, any support provided in an SME linkages program need to be targeted and
   monitored to avoid a similar fate. Another way to minimize these distortionary impacts is
   asking firms to cover a portion of the technical assistance to signify commitment, such as
   costs related to product development and training. International experiences (e.g., Czech
   Republic, Chile) have incorporated this measure into their SDPs. A number of support

                                                                                                                  90
    programs in Vietnam are now following this approach: companies have to pay for training
    fee, cover 50% of the cost of participation in trade fair abroad, or cover 30% cost of technical
    assistance to obtain certain certifications. Careful and sparing use of incentives can also
    minimize budget issues.

217. The Government has allocated funds to support the implementation of this program, albeit
   the scale is far more ambitious than the available resources. It may therefore be useful to start
   the program on a pilot basis, and raise additional resources building on success. International
   experience also shows success predicates on packaging integrated and complementary
   solutions for firms rather than piece meal efforts. It is neither skills nor match-making of
   sellers and buyers that will bring about impact but putting them altogether will.


WBG’s on-going support on linkages
218. At MoIT’s request, the World Bank has
   initiated a technical and advisory project for    WBG Support: Vietnam Private Sector Project
   supporting the linkage agenda that includes,
   among other things, upgrading firm capacity
   through a pilot supplier development Objective: improve the regulatory and business
   program; building a national high-quality on- environment and enhance the ability of domestic
                                                     suppliers to participate in value chains in targeted
   line supplier database as well as building
                                                     sectors. Focuses on two components:
   capacity mainly within MoIT to host and
   maintain such database and implement 1) Develop a FDI Strategy and Implementation
   effective B2B match-making services to                Plan to attract next generation FDI, leading to
   foster productive linkages between high               improved FDI linkages
   potential local suppliers and new or existing 2) Facilitate FDI-SME linkages
   foreign investors in Vietnam; and developing          (a) Strengthen linkage policy and supporting
   a new FDI strategy that would help attract a          institutions
   new generation of FDI; and capacity building          (b) Development of a quality and shared
   within MoIT and related institutions (see             national supplier data-base
   Box). The approach being adopted in Vietnam           (c) Upgrade SME/local firms’ capacity through
                                                         a pilot supplier development program
   is inspired by the Czech Republic model
   discussed earlier. As this is a pilot approach, Source: IFC project Implementation Plan, June 2017
   an impact evaluation is being initiated in
   parallel to learn the lessons as the program is
   scaled up with time. Specifically, it can help identify if the choice of instruments is bearing
   results and areas where further improvements may be needed.


Part II: Objective: Strengthening Enabling environment for private sector competitiveness


219. Pillar 4: Addressing binding constraints in enabling environment: The key binding
   constraints in the enabling environment in Vietnam that cut across sectors relate to skills
   management capabilities, innovation, and standards. Enterprise survey findings, reported in
   Chapter 2, reinforce the importance of enhancing the competitiveness of Vietnamese firms if
   more linkages are to be established. While Vietnamese firms do innovate, it seems this

                                                                                                      91
   innovation appears to rarely relate to new products or technologies. Innovation also seems to
   rely on less investment in inputs and licensed knowledge than in some competing Asian
   countries, and there is scope to incentivize firms to dedicate more resources to R&D, the
   licensing of foreign technologies, etc.

220. As Chapter 4 discussed, multiple SME programs already exist in Vietnam that try to
   address some of these horizontal constraints in the enabling environment. Thus the need for
   an Inter-ministerial Committee (Pillar 1) that effectively coordinates and facilitates the
   addressing of horizontal constraints, is paramount. However, the in-depth analysis indicated
   scope for improvements – both in design and implementation - of these programs for increased
   effectiveness and impact. Following are the key systemic issues that pervade across programs
   which the government can address as it finalizes the SME policy and gears up for
   implementation:

Program Design

221. Consolidate overlapping programs: Some of the SME support programs aim to achieve
   similar objectives but are initiated and implemented by different ministries. For example,
   there can be overlaps in innovation program trainings offered as a sub-program (or activity)
   by the various innovation-related and MOST-pioneered programs. Where programs have
   overlaps with another program, a corollary issue relates to targeting and selecting SME
   beneficiaries. As such, it would be important to analyze targeting and selection strategies of
   these different overlapping programs to avoid redundancy on program coverage and issues of
   under-coverage in other areas. SME-specific incentives can then be developed around that
   objective. Consolidating these programs also implies addressing overlaps in the functions of
   SME units of the different line ministries and agencies concerned with SME development.

222. Identify missing SME support programs based on life cycle approach: An analysis of the
   programs based on the life cycle stages of firms find that SMEs on the start-up stage are not
   fully benefitting from SME support programs. Programs focusing on this target group (and
   address their constraints) have to be considered (e.g., market access programs, financial access
   programs). Some of the ‘missing’ access to finance programs for start-up firms that can be
   implemented include crowdfunding platforms, seed/start-up funds, and angel investor
   networks. Even at the growth and established stages, some of the ‘missing’ critical support
   programs relate to enhancing firm capability, including trainings related to enhancing global
   managerial skills, mentorship programs (e.g., linking Vietnamese overseas with locals), and
   business development services.

223. Ensure consistent M&E: Many of the programs have M&E related target indicators.
   However as mentioned, there are issues such as incomplete identification of output and/or
   outcome targets, as well as lack of M&E implementation guidelines/plans. For targets, there
   should be clear intermediate/output targets and identified outcomes. As part of M&E, it is
   worthwhile to generate client feedback of SME support programs to understand whether
   SMEs find the programs useful and effective and to support improvement of program results.
   In general, a clear reporting/monitoring mechanism attached in the design phase of the
   program can ensure transparency, accountability and oversight.

                                                                                                92
Program Implementation

224. Ensure sustainability of the programs: Sustainability of the programs has to be ensured
   especially on the budget phase as well as on the implementation phase. On the budget phase,
   the key objective is decreasing dependence on central government/state support subsidies
   through other sources. Predictability of budgets has to also be ensured, especially on programs
   that are ‘budgeted annually’.

225. Increase private sector involvement: Private sector involvement are mostly focused on
   financial access, such as partnerships with commercial banks. Public private partnership
   approaches can be considered in the design and implementation stages of the SME business
   development support programs. Strengthening alternative training modalities, namely on-the-
   job training and IT-based training can be undertaken. Vouchers for employers to send their
   employees to training courses (public or private) or tax rebates to companies with certified in-
   house training programs have been successful in many countries.

226. Improve the program development and implementation processes of the 5-year SME
   Development Plan: This can be done by strengthening the coordination role of the SME
   Development Council in directing ministries, sectors, provinces and business associations
   (i.e., members of the council) to implement holistic and targeted SME support programs.
   Strengthening SME Development Council’s coordination role may also reduce overlap in
   SME support programs.




                                                                                                93
References
Aitken, Brian J. and Ann E. Harrison. 1999. "Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign Investment?
     Evidence from Venezuela," American Economic Review 89(3), 605-618.
Arráiz, I., Henríquez, F. & Stucchi, R. 2011. “Impact of the Chilean Supplier Development Program on
         the performance of SME and their large firm customers”. IDB Working Paper.
Bloom, N., and J. Van Reenen. 2007. “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices across Firms and
    Countries”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1341-1408.
Bloom, N., Raissa Ebner, Kerenssa Kay, Renata Lemos, Raffaella Sadun, Daniela Scur and John Van
    Reenen. 2015. “Management Practices in Vietnam”. Draft Report (March 2015). World Management
    Survey.
Brandt, Kasper, John Rand, Smriti Sharma, Finn Tarp, and Neda Trifković. 2016. Characteristics Of The
    Vietnamese Business Environment: Evidence From A SME Survey In 2015. Helsinki: UNU-
    WIDER.
Cirera, Xavier, Silvia Muzi. 2016. Measuring Firm-Level Innovation Using Short Questionnaires –
     Evidence from an Experiment. Policy Research Working Paper No. 7696. Washington DC: World
     Bank.
Clarke, George. 2016. Firm Performance in Vietnam. Mimeo, World Bank.
Clarke, George. 2012. Manufacturing firms in Africa: Some stylized facts about wages and productivity.
     In H. T. Dinh & George Clarke (Eds.), Performance of manufacturing firms in Africa: An empirical
     analysis (pp. 47-86). Washington DC: World Bank.
Cusolito, A., Safadi, R., and D., Taglioni. 2015. “Inclusive Global Value Chains: Policy options in trade
    and complementary areas for GVC Integration by small and medium enterprises and low-income
    developing countries”. WBG working paper (joint with OECD).
Dahlman, C.J., B. Ross-Larsonn., and L. Westphal. 1987. “Managing technological development: lessons
    from the newly industrializing countries”, World Development, 15, pp. 759-75.
Dinh Hien Minh, Trinh Quang Long, Dinh Thu Hang, and Pham Thien Hoang. 2010. “Beyond investment-
    led growth: First report of the research on ‘Restructuring the Vietnam economy through ri ght
    investment incentives and improved macro management’.”
Djankov, Simeon and Bernard Hoekman. 2000. "Foreign Investment and Productivity Growth in Czech
    Enterprises." World Bank Economic Review 14(1), 49-64.
Farole, T. and D., Winkler. 2015. “The Role of Foreign Firm Characteristics, Absorptive Capacity and the
     Institutional Framework for FDI Spillovers.” The Journal of Banking and Financial Economics, May
     2015, Vol. 1, Issue 3, pp. 77-112.
Farole, T. and D., Winkler (Co-edited). 2014. Making Foreign Direct Investment Work for Sub-Saharan
     Africa: Local Spillovers and Competitiveness in Global Value Chains. Washington, DC: The World
     Bank, 2014.
Gladys Acevedo and Tan H. 2010. Impact evaluation of SMEs Program in LAC. The World Bank.
Government of Vietnam. 2015. “Reform Plan and Policy to Improve SME Effectiveness in the Economic
    Restructuring, Summary Report”. The Central Economic Committee, Vietnam.


                                                                                                      94
Government of Vietnam. 2015. Decree for Supporting Industries No. 111/2015/ND-CP. November 3,
    2015. The Socialist Republic of Vietnam
Government of Vietnam. 2016. Decision on the Approval of the Supporting industry development
    program, 2016-2025 (draft). The Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
Haltiwanger, J. 2012. “Job Creation and Firm Dynamics in the United States” The National Bureau of
     Economic Research.
Hansen, Henrik, John Rand and Finn Tarp. 2009. “Enterprise growth and survival in Vietnam: Does
    government support matter?,” Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 45, No.7, 1048-1069.
International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM). 2017. “World-Class Supplier Programme in Chile”.
         [https://www.icmm.com/en-gb/case-studies/world-class-supplier-programme-chile]
Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska. 2004. "Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of
     Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillover Through Backward Linkages," American Economic Review
     94(3), 605-627.
Kee, Hiau Looi. forthcoming. “Local Intermediate Inputs and the Shared Supplier Spillovers of Foreign
     Direct Investment,” Journal of Development Economics.
Kee, Hiau Looi. 2014. The shared supplier effect: How foreign firms benefit domestic firms.
Konings, Jozef. 2001. "The Effects of Foreign Direct Investment on Domestic Firms." Economics of
    Transition 9(3), 619-633.
Lall, S. 1992. “Technological capabilities and Industrialization.” World Development, Vol. 20 Issue 2:
         165-186.

Malaysia Industrial Development Authority (MIDA). 2009. “Malaysia Investment in the Manufacturing
       Sector: Policies, Incentives and Facilities”. [Available at:
       http://www.mida.gov.my/env3/uploads/Publications_pdf/MalaysiaInvestment_Policies_Icentive
       s_Facilities/MIMSed0409(Eng).pdf]
McKinsey Global Institute. 2012. Sustaining Vietnam’s growth: The productivity challenge.
McMillan, Margaret and Dani Rodrik. 2011. “Globalization, structural change and productivity growth,”
   NBER Working Paper No. 17143.
Monge-González, Ricardo and Juan Antonio Rodríguez-Álvarez. 2013. “Impact Evaluation of Innovation
      and Linkage Development Programs in Costa Rica: The Cases of PROPYME and CR Provee”.
      IDB Working Paper.
MOIT. 2016. “Studying the Proposal to Develop Supporting Industries via Promoting Linkage and Supply
   to Multinational Corporations Operating in the Electronics Sector of Vietnam”.
Newman, Carol, John Rand, Theodore Talbot and Finn Tarp. 2015. Technology Transfers, Foreign
   Investment and Productivity Spillovers. European Economic Review 76: 168-187.
OECD and World Bank. 2014. Science, Technology and Innovation in Viet Nam. OECD Reviews of
   Innovation Policy. Paris: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Paus, E., and K. Gallagher. 2008. “Missing Links: Foreign Direct Investment and Industrial Development
     in Costa Rica and Mexico.” Studies in Comparative International Development. New York, United
     States: Springer.


                                                                                                   95
Rand, John. 2007. “Credit constraints and determinants of the cost of capital in Vietnamese
    manufacturing,” Small Business Economics, Vol. 29, 1-13.
Reyes Aterido R. and Mary Hallward-Driemeier. 2015. “Enterprise Dynamics and Job Flows in Vietnam
    2004-2012: Implications for Continued Dynamism for 2035”. (August 2015 draft). The World Bank.
Rodriguez-Clare, Andres. 1996. "Multinationals, Linkages, and Economic Development," American
    Economic Review 86(4), 852-873.
Smarzynska, B. and M. Spatareanu. 2004. “Czech Suppliers of Multinational Corporations – Benefits and
      Challenges”.
Sutton, J. 2012. Competing in capabilities: the globalization process. Oxford University Press: United
     Kingdom
Tarp, Finn, David Roland-Holst and John Rand. 2003. “Economic structure and development in an
     emergent Asian economy: evidence from a social accounting matrix for Vietnam” Journal of Asian
     Economics, Vol 13, 847-871.
UNCTAD. 2011. How to Create and Benefit from FDI-SME Linkages: Lessons from Malaysia and
   Singapore (Best Practices in Investment for Development series).
Vietnam Academy of Social Sciences. 2011. Poverty Reduction in Vietnam: Achievements and
     Challenges. Hanoi: Vietnamese Academy of Social Sciences.
World Bank. 2002. Vietnam Development Report 2003: Delivering on its Promise. Washington, DC:
    World
World Bank. 2011. Vietnam Development Report 2012: Market Economy for a Middle-Income Vietnam.
    Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2014. Big Business of Small Enterprises: Evaluation of the World Bank Group Experience
    with Targeted Support to Small and Medium-Size Enterprises, 2006–12, IEG. Washington, DC:
    World Bank
World Bank. 2016. SME Growth and Productivity Action Plan, FY16-19. Innovation and
    Entrepreneurship, Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2016. Behavioral Incentives for Linkages. (draft). Investment Climate, Trade and
    Competitiveness Global Practice. Washington, DC.: World Bank.
World Bank. 2016. Improving Linkages for Domestic Value Addition. (PPT). Investment Climate, Trade
    and Competitiveness Global Practice. Washington, DC.: World Bank
World Bank and Ministry of Planning and Investment of Vietnam. 2016. Vietnam 2035: Towards
    Prosperity, Creativity, Equity, and Democracy. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank and MPI. 2016. Vietnam 2035: Toward Prosperity, Creativity, Equity, and Democracy.
    Washington, DC: The World Bank Group / Hanoi: Ministry of Planning and Investment.
World Bank. 2016. Vietnam at a Crossroads: Engaging in the Next Generation of Global Value Chains.
    Washington DC: The World Bank Group.




                                                                                                   96
    Annex 1.1. Summary of recent studies about the competitiveness of the Vietnamese private
       sector

Several important studies have been carried out on the Vietnamese private sector in recent years, which
together provide a rich knowledge base for the present analysis.
In particular, the report “Vietnam 2035” (World Bank and MPI 2016) analyzed at length the challenges
and opportunities related to firm productivity, global value chains (GVCs) and innovation:
    -   Productivity growth: The report contrasts the rapid within-sector labor productivity and TFP
        growth of the 1990s, triggered by the Doi Moi market reforms and removal of various economic
        distortions, with the broad-based declining trend since then. It argues that GDP growth was only
        maintained throughout the 2000s thanks to forces which are likely to reach their natural limits,
        namely the accumulation of capital and labor as well as structural transformation. The report
        further explains that private firms have not been immune from this trend and have seen their labor
        and asset productivity growth gradually decline to the level of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and
        far below their Chinese peers. The Vietnamese private sector is showed to be fragmented between
        a majority of small and largely informal firms, which have become increasingly capital intensive
        but lack economies of scale and thus suffer from declining asset productivity, and a small number
        of large firms, which do not fare better than SMESs in terms of labor/asset productivity. Two main
        factors are emphasized as driving this low-level equilibrium, namely: (i) the gradual
        “commercialization” of state institutions and the granting of various privileges to SOEs, foreign-
        owned and a few connected domestic firms (e.g. taxes, public procurement, access to land and
        finance); and (ii) the failure to remove fundamental constraints in the general business
        environment and to build critical market institutions and guarantee key elements, such as property
        rights and competition, inhibiting the formalization of small firms and the emergence of large
        competitive ones.
    -   Global value chains: The report argues Vietnam has strongly benefited from its insertion in GVCs
        thanks to trade and investment liberalization, but that the predominant model remains FDI-led and
        focused on import-dependent final-stage assembly tasks, with limited backward linkages. Meeting
        productivity and GDP growth targets will thus require improving local firms’ capacities and
        fostering linkages, technology transfers and knowledge spillovers. The two key constraints
        emphasized are: (i) the limited absorptive capacity of local SMEs and lack of potential suppliers
        able to conform to MNCs’ quality and reliability standards, (ii) the poor performances of key
        services sectors needed by manufacturers (e.g. finance, telecom, power, logistics) and need to
        deepen reforms in those sectors.
    -   Innovation: The report argues that the weakness of the Vietnamese innovation system (e.g. low
        and ineffective public and private R&D efforts, poor capacity to adopt existing technologies, weak
        IPRs or financing for innovation) hampers productivity and growth, and that neither companies
        nor education and research institutions are currently geared to a major push on this agenda. Four
        foundations for an innovation-led economy are put forward: (i) raising the firm’s demand for
        knowledge, mainly by increasing the competitive pressures under which they operate, (ii) improve
        firms’ capacity for technology absorption, including through more effective programs to improve
        managerial practices and innovation efforts, (iii) improve the quantity, quality and relevance of




                                                                                                       97
          public research, and (iv) continuously enhance labor force skills through increased responsiveness
          and dynamism in tertiary education99.
     -    Other: Several other relevant issues are discussed in the report, including (i) the need to support
          urban and industrial densification100, as well as connectivity, and (ii) the constraints posed by
          remaining weaknesses on specific dimensions of governance, including regulatory quality.
The report “Vietnam at a Crossroads” (World Bank 2016) deepens the analysis of the determinants of
Vietnam’s participation in GVCs and constraints to its upgrading. It argues that structural transformation
and capital accumulation considerably boosted Vietnam’s export competitiveness since the 1990s. While
domestic value added exported grew fast, particularly in sectors such as automotive, electronics,
agribusiness and apparel, foreign (imported) value added embodied in Vietnam’s gross exports grew as a
share of gross exports from 20.9 to 36.3 percent between 1995 and 2011. Backward linkages have
remained weak, as most of the growth in domestic value added exported came directly from export
activities, dominated by foreign firms, rather than indirectly through domestic inputs. One specific area of
weakness pointed out by the report is the low share of services in value added of exports, although higher
value added segments of GVCs are often rich in services content. The report identifies priority areas for
policy interventions to maximize the benefits from GVCs, including improving market institutions and
backbone services, promoting linkages between foreign-owned and domestic firms, maximizing the
latter’s absorptive potential and innovation capacity, and fostering skills development. One relevant
chapter of the report by Aterido and Hallward-Driemeier uses census panel data for 2004-2012 to analyze
the determinants of firm dynamics. It documents the large expansion of formal employment over this
period, mostly driven by private firms with more than 20 employees, and shows that, while the largest
firms still account for the majority of formal jobs, the employment structure has been shifting towards
SMEs over time. This is seen as a sign of dynamism but leads to questions regarding SME’s capacity to
exploit economies of scale and to grow their productivity and market shares. Further, the report
distinguishes between SOEs, which tend to be large at entry and not grow much after, foreign-owned
firms, which also tend to enter relatively large but continue to expand over time, and private domestic
firms, which are small at entry and very rarely grow to become large. The analysis also contrasts the
dynamism of firms in manufacturing with the lower growth of those in services sectors, especially outside
of retail.
A biannual survey of domestically-owned manufacturing micro, small and medium enterprises conducted
since 2005 by the Government and United Nations University sheds additional light on the characteristics
and constraints faced by the Vietnamese private sector101. Among other results, the study finds that:
     -    Employment growth rate decreases in firm size and formal firms are larger contributors than
          informal one to the overall positive employment growth trend experienced between 2013 and
          2015.
     -    A large movement from the informal to the formal sector between 2013 and 2015 is detected and
          linked to revised enterprise and investment laws which streamlined registration procedures.
     -    There are no significant differences in employment growth rate across provinces.


99 For a more detailed analysis of innovation performances and policy framework in Vietnam with similar conclusions, see
OECD and World Bank (2014).
100 The report notably notes the high fragmentation of industrial parks, which are numerous and dispersed in almost all

provinces throughout the country, with often occupancy rates below 50 percent.
101 The report prepared to analyze the results of the 2015 round used a sample of around 2,600 businesses, with panel

information for over 2,000 of them (Brandt et al. 2016). It includes both formal and informal businesses, although the survey
does not claim to be representative of the latter category.

                                                                                                                                98
       -Labor productivity measured as sales and value added per employee is found to have increased in
        2015 compared to previous rounds.
    - Investment is positively correlated with firm size, but slightly fewer small and medium firms
        reported new investments in 2015 than in 2013. In a vast majority of cases, the main purpose of
        investments was to increase production capacity and, to a lower extend, replace old equipment,
        while investments to improve productivity and quality or introduce new products were rare. Only
        3 percent of surveyed firms are found to have invested in R&D, human capital upgrading and
        patents.
    - The propensity to resort to formal and external sources of finance grows with firm size. While
        access to finance is perceived by respondents to be the top business constraint, a result often found
        in firm surveys across the world, the proportion of firms citing this as their main constraint is
        found to have decreased from 45 percent in 2011 to 30 percent in 2013 and 24 percent in 2015.
        The study links low investments to credit constraints and argues that better designed credit lines
        for SMEs with improved guidance for applicants could help.
    - Around 24 percent of surveyed firms reported having introduced new products in 2015, a
        significant increase compared to 2013. On the other hand, 13 percent of firms reported
        improvements to existing products, slightly less than in the previous survey. Although the
        direction of causality is not established, innovation is found to be correlated with firm size and
        rural location. Firms located in industrial parks are found to be more likely to improve existing
        products, but not to introduce new ones. Lack of capital and of market outlets are the first and
        second main reasons for not introducing new products.
    - Less than 12 percent of surveyed firms produced more than one product and larger firms have a
        higher rate of product diversification.
    - Medium firms are more likely than micro and small ones to introduce new technology, and the
        proportion of medium firms using new technology slightly increased from 15 to 16.5 percent
        between 2013 and 2015.
    -    While 16 percent of surveyed firms use transportation services, less than 2 percent use
        professional or business development services, which is nonetheless higher than in 2013.
    - Larger and urban firms employ more professionals and are more likely to experience difficulties
        in hiring skilled workers, although the reasons behind this are not investigated (e.g. lack of skilled
        labor supply, lack of relevant skills, matching difficulties).
    - Very few firms use quality or environmental standards, especially international ones, although
        compliance with standards is found to be positively correlated with various measures of firm
        performance.
Specifically, on the issue of linkages, Newman and co-authors (2015) used panel data from a government
survey of 4,000 manufacturing firms in Vietnam to analyze whether FDI in this country has had positive
or negative impacts on domestic firms’ productivity through direct linkages and/or indirect spillovers.
According to this data, 16 percent of private domestic firms report using inputs supplied by foreign-owned
firms (forward linkages), and 26 percent of them report selling their output to FDI firms (backward
linkages)102. These linkages are associated with technology transfers in half the cases for forward linkages
and a third for backward linkages. The main results of the econometric analysis include:
       -    Horizontal spillovers: Consistent with the literature, there is no evidence of horizontal (i.e. within
            sector) productivity spillovers from FDI,



102   By contrast, 77 percent of foreign-owned firms report forward linkages with FDI and 70 percent report backward linkages.

                                                                                                                             99
    -   Indirect backward spillovers: There are positive indirect spillovers for domestic firms supplying
        inputs to downstream sectors with heavy foreign presence. Moreover, this effect is stronger for
        sectors with more joint ventures between foreign and domestic investors than fully foreign-owned
        firms. Some evidence is also found that positive spillovers from downstream FDI are associated
        with domestic firms expanding production into other sectors or changing sector altogether,
        consistent with previous studies finding that firms tend to switch into sectors where there are
        opportunities for productivity gains.
    -   Direct backward linkages: However, no evidence is found of productivity gains through direct
        backward linkages between FDI and domestic suppliers upstream.
    -   Direct forward linkages: In contrast, the results suggest that being directly linked to FDI suppliers
        upstream is an important source of productivity growth for domestic firms, although this does not
        seem to be the result of deliberate technology transfers. Possible channels mentioned include the
        higher quality of inputs produced by FDI firms or accompanying services for clients. Some
        evidence is also found that spillovers through direct forward linkages are stronger for domestic
        firms downstream which diversify their production, suggesting that purchasing inputs from FDI
        positively impacts the productivity of domestic firms to the extent that it pushes them to diversify
        their production.
    -   Indirect forward spillovers: Strong evidence is also found of negative indirect spillovers (i.e. not
        through direct supply chain linkages) from a dominance of FDI in upstream sectors on the
        productivity of downstream domestic firms. This is hypothesized to be caused by FDI firms
        gaining a dominant market position in upstream input sectors (e.g. machinery and equipment,
        electronics and electrical equipment), reducing competition and increasing prices, which decrease
        the profitability of domestic downstream producers.
Newman and coauthors conclude that, while there are indirect FDI spillovers, a large part of productivity
gains come from direct linkages, particularly forward linkages, highlighting the value of policies to
promote direct knowledge transfer between foreign-owned and domestic firms.




                                                                                                         100
Annex 2.1. Logistic regression of product innovation
The table below present the results of logit regressions for which the dependent variable is a binary variable equal to 1 if a firm declared having introduced new or significantly
improved products over the last three years and zero if otherwise. Coefficients are presented as odds ratios.
                                                                       (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)           (5)               (6)
             Sector - retail services                                 0.618           0.609             0.496              0.701         0.755             0.550
                                                                     (0.342)         (0.341)           (0.273)            (0.370)       (0.410)           (0.305)
             Sector - other services                                0.501**         0.454***         0.461***            0.544**       0.445**          0.434***
                                                                     (0.148)         (0.133)           (0.138)            (0.162)       (0.141)           (0.140)
             Region - North Central area & Central coastal area       1.387           1.374             1.478              1.286         0.973             1.065
                                                                     (0.522)         (0.532)           (0.579)            (0.557)       (0.422)           (0.463)
             Region - South East                                    0.480**         0.451**          0.428***            0.367***      0.303***         0.290***
                                                                     (0.166)         (0.143)           (0.138)            (0.122)      (0.0962)          (0.0951)
             Region - Mekong River Delta                            0.140***        0.124***         0.0835***           0.143***      0.121***         0.0857***
                                                                    (0.0559)        (0.0523)          (0.0305)           (0.0676)      (0.0592)          (0.0340)
             Size - medium                                          4.805***        5.282***         5.024***            4.003***      3.462***         3.635***
                                                                     (1.604)         (1.726)           (1.674)            (1.362)       (1.214)           (1.294)
             Size - large                                           4.270***        4.950***         4.279***            3.908***      3.205***         3.558***
                                                                     (1.477)         (1.770)           (1.655)            (1.628)       (1.332)           (1.516)
             Ownership – joint venture                                              25.55**            16.35*            19.68**       14.04**            14.05*
                                                                                     (38.43)           (23.43)            (29.43)       (18.86)           (18.95)
             Ownership – 100% foreign                                               0.262**          0.198***            0.194***      0.232**           0.213**
                                                                                     (0.144)           (0.120)            (0.123)       (0.142)           (0.138)
             R&D spending                                                                                                5.795***      4.905***         5.422***
                                                                                                                          (1.891)       (1.741)           (1.985)
             Training for employees                                                                                                    2.670***         2.676***
                                                                                                                                        (0.941)           (0.973)
             Exporter                                                                                   1.859             1.990*         1.641             1.704
                                                                                                       (0.750)            (0.786)       (0.679)           (0.719)
             Female top manager                                                                         1.043                                              1.239
                                                                                                       (0.393)                                            (0.507)
             Line of credit                                                                                                                                1.429
                                                                                                                                                          (0.438)
             Constant                                               0.312***        0.318***          0.303***           0.223***      0.241***         0.130***
                                                                    (0.0999)         (0.104)           (0.105)           (0.0768)      (0.0850)          (0.0731)

             Observations                                              963             962               953                956           950              928
             F                                                        9.351           8.931             9.823              8.115         7.859            8.016
                                                              Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                                                                                              101
       Annex 2.2. Econometric analysis of linkages: linkage determinants
       The table below present the results of probit regressions for which the dependent variable is a binary variable equal to 1 if it is a linked supplier-firm and zero if
       otherwise. Regressions control for firm age, firm size, sectoral fixed effects, and regional fixed effects (not presented for brevity). All predictors are held at their
       mean values.
                            (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)            (12)
firms with loan or
                          -0.021
overdraft
                          [0.018]
firms competing
                                          0.023*
against informal firms
                                         [0.014]
product innovation                                       0.026
                                                        [0.019]
process innovation                                                   0.041**
                                                                     [0.018]
R&D                                                                                0.032
                                                                                  [0.020]
formal training                                                                                0.048**
                                                                                               [0.020]
skilled production
                                                                                                             0.127
workers
                                                                                                            [0.085]
skilled workers                                                                                                           0.113
                                                                                                                         [0.097]
use website                                                                                                                          0.042***
                                                                                                                                      [0.014]
use email                                                                                                                                          0.039*
                                                                                                                                                   [0.021]
international
                                                                                                                                                                 0.043
certification
                                                                                                                                                                [0.032]
uses technology licensed from
                                                                                                                                                                              0.009
foreign firms
                                                                                                                                                                             [0.099]
size_medium                0.019          0.012          0.008         0.007       0.011        0.005        -0.032       -0.034       0.008        0.012        0.016        -0.025
                          [0.019]        [0.020]        [0.021]       [0.017]     [0.020]      [0.016]      [0.053]      [0.055]      [0.013]      [0.020]      [0.019]      [0.056]
size_large                -0.011          -0.020         -0.027       -0.019       -0.027       -0.031       -0.037       -0.081       -0.024       -0.026       -0.038       -0.080
                          [0.017]        [0.023]        [0.026]       [0.017]     [0.023]      [0.025]      [0.059]      [0.060]      [0.017]      [0.024]      [0.033]      [0.071]
age_medium                 0.033          0.032          0.038         0.034       0.039       0.031*       0.137**      0.138**       0.025        0.035        0.033       0.160**

                                                                                                                                                                          102
                           [0.028]          [0.027]           [0.034]    [0.023]     [0.031]     [0.017]     [0.058]   [0.057]    [0.018]     [0.028]      [0.028]      [0.071]
age_mature                 0.083**          0.088**            0.086*    0.074**     0.088**    0.074***    0.229***   0.225**    0.058**     0.087**      0.079**     0.270***
                           [0.040]          [0.045]           [0.046]    [0.030]     [0.043]     [0.028]     [0.086]   [0.088]    [0.025]     [0.044]      [0.038]      [0.101]
food                        -0.034           -0.038           -0.045*    -0.033*     -0.043*     -0.034*     -0.115*   -0.109*    -0.030*      -0.035     -0.051**     -0.156**
                           [0.023]          [0.024]           [0.025]    [0.019]     [0.026]     [0.020]     [0.066]   [0.065]    [0.017]     [0.025]      [0.025]      [0.079]
non-metallic mineral
                           -0.044*         -0.047**          -0.055**    -0.040**    -0.052**    -0.038*    -0.127**   -0.119**   -0.037**     -0.049*    -0.054**     -0.152**
products
                            [0.025]         [0.024]           [0.026]     [0.018]    [0.026]     [0.020]    [0.062]    [0.060]     [0.018]     [0.026]     [0.027]     [0.068]
fabricated metal
                           -0.057*          -0.063*          -0.069**    -0.049**    -0.067**   -0.053**    -0.177**   -0.174**   -0.043**    -0.065**    -0.067**     -0.200**
products
                            [0.030]          [0.033]           [0.034]     [0.023]    [0.034]     [0.026]    [0.079]    [0.077]     [0.022]     [0.032]     [0.034]     [0.086]
other manufacturing        -0.057**         -0.064**          -0.067**    -0.046**   -0.062**    -0.049**   -0.142**   -0.146**    -0.051**    -0.061**    -0.063**    -0.156**
                            [0.025]          [0.029]           [0.031]     [0.019]    [0.028]     [0.021]    [0.058]    [0.058]     [0.021]     [0.028]     [0.029]     [0.063]
retail                     -0.072**         -0.076**          -0.085**   -0.068***   -0.084**   -0.073***                          -0.067**    -0.079**    -0.079**
                            [0.029]          [0.030]           [0.035]     [0.025]    [0.034]     [0.027]                           [0.027]     [0.032]     [0.033]
other services            -0.072***        -0.075***         -0.083***   -0.064***   -0.08***   -0.071***    -0.094     -0.094    -0.065***   -0.079***   -0.082***     -0.060
                            [0.020]          [0.020]           [0.022]     [0.018]    [0.022]     [0.020]   [0.079]    [0.076]      [0.019]     [0.022]     [0.023]    [0.096]
Observations                  729              724               742         742        745         739       441        435          744         745         738        427
Standard errors (clustered at sampling strata) in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                      103
Annex 3.1. International experience in developing linkage programs – summary highlights from Czech Republic, Malaysia, Chile and
Costa Rica
                                  Czech Republic                             Malaysia                                         Chile                                Costa Rica
 Overall impetus/motivation       Accession to the European Union            Strategic shift from import-substitution         Trade agreements created the         Trade liberalization and increase
                                                                             industrialization to export-oriented             need for suppliers which can meet    in FDI
                                                                             industrialization (focus on attracting           international quality standards
                                                                             manufacturing FDI)
 Institutional/governance set-    Headed by CzechInvest (investment          Headed by MIDA and SME Corp under the            Government-led SDP (PDP) is          SDP headed by investment
 up: Overarching structure for    promotion agency) under the Ministry       Ministry of International Trade and Industry     headed by CORFO, Chile’s             promotion agency PROCOMER
 linkage programs                 of Industry and Trade                                                                       Economic Development Agency
 Key stakeholders – roles and     -MNC Steering Committee can                -SMEs undergo a rigorous SCORE rating to         -Along with CORFU, private           -Public sector agencies such as
 processes                        nominate potential suppliers and advise    participate in linkages programs;                sector also have their own           Customs agency are involved in
                                  on action plan (MNEs’ purchasing           - Penang Development Corporation                 complementary SDPs (e.g.,            monitoring the program
                                  managers also participate);                provides regional-level or sector-level          World-Class Supplier Program in      -Private sector entities are
                                  -Potential suppliers can submit business   support to increase FDIs;                        the mining industry)                 consulted to improve the
                                  proposals but need to invest               -Private sector (MNEs and domestic firms)                                             program
                                  management time to undergo business        and academia sits on the board of Penang                                              -Lack of coordination between
                                  review process                             Skills Development Center (vocational                                                 CR Provee and complementary
                                                                             training initiative created by PDC)                                                   support programs remain

 Enabling environment policies    Relatively strong labor market             Relatively flexible labor market (no             Pro-competition economic             EPZ (export processing zone)
 (Horizontal constraints)         regulations                                minimum wage until 2012); High-level             reforms promoting                    laws were modified to increase
                                                                             committee created in 2008 to address             nondiscrimination against foreign    linkage activities; Business
                                                                             regulatory burden on business (one of 2          firms; Strong legal framework;       registration procedures were
                                                                             constraints identified by WB as key growth       Stable tax policies; Government      reduced and approval days are
                                                                             constraints, besides skills shortage), such as   focus on tertiary education          shorter; but there are other
                                                                             improving customs procedures and speedier                                             investment climate concerns
                                                                             processing of expatriate work visas
 Vertical        Lack of          SDP indirectly addressed this: Positive    SMEs can access complementary financial          ProPyme (“Pro-SME”) Seal             No direct financing involved in
 interventions   access to        business review results or contracts       support programs targeted for SMEs               awarded to large firms which         the SDP
 addressing      finance          with MNCs increased credit worthiness                                                       provide swift payment terms to
 supply-side                      of SMEs to Czech banks; advanced                                                            SME-suppliers; complementary
 constraints                      payment and financing was a top                                                             private sector financial support
 and market                       assistance provided by MNCs to                                                              programs
 failures                         suppliers during the pilot (2003 FIAS
                                  survey)
                 Lack of          Supplier databases maintained by           Supplier database and matchmaking                Sectoral level databases; industry   Supply and demand data
                 information      CzechInvest and matchmaking services       services                                         exhibitions
                 Lack of skills   Specialized trainings for potential        MNC-designed trainings                           Specialized trainings depending      In-house training and
                                  suppliers                                                                                   on SME needs (e.g., private sector   consultancy services; private-
                                                                                                                              input in program design of           sector partnership with
                                                                                                                              courses to ensure relevance to       universities in curriculum
                                                                                                                              business needs)                      upgrading (e.g., Intel)
                 Lack of          Consulting services (by local and          -Behavioral tax incentives such as tax           Cost sharing scheme between          Not directly addressed, although
                 competitive      international consultants) implemented     exemptions and investment tax allowance          CORFO (Chile’s Economic              there are other government
                 suppliers        through matching grants awarded to         for SME suppliers for technological              Development Agency) and MNC-         innovation programs that
                 (quality and     high-potential suppliers (95%              upgrading; and -Cost subsidies for MNCs          buyers (mostly in the agribusiness   suppliers can theoretically apply
                 tech gap)                                                                                                    sector) in PDP; private sector-      to (e.g., PROPYME)


                                                                                                                                                                                                 104
                         CzechInvest contribution, 5% firm                                                     provided management consulting
                         contribution)                                                                         services (to increase domestic
                                                                                                               supplier capacity)
          Coordination   Macro: Effective IPA (CzechInvest)     Macro: Coordinating structures                 Macro: Strong and effective        Micro: Matchmaking services
          failure        coordinating various stakeholders      implemented at the national and regional       collaboration between the          between buyers and suppliers
                         (MNCs, SMEs, universities);            levels (e.g., regional-level GLCs such as      government, private sector, NGOs
                         Micro: matchmaking services between    Penang Development Corporation, which          and universities
                         buyers and suppliers                   provides industrial zone infrastructure,
                                                                R&D, skills development, and tailored
                                                                incentives to MNCs);
                                                                Micro: matchmaking services between
                                                                buyers and suppliers
Results                  -Evaluation of the pilot program       -Domestic SME suppliers became popular         -An IDB (2011) impact evaluation   -An impact evaluation by
                         found that $46 million worth of new    local brands given increased sourcing by       of the PDP found that the SDP      Monge-González and
                         contracts (2000-03) were created       MNCs (e.g., Tesco);                            was beneficial to both SME         Rodríguez-Álvarez (2013) found
                         with 15 suppliers;                     -Successful private sector involvement in      suppliers and large buyers;        that participating firms in CR
                         -2003 FIAS survey found that 59% of    skills development helped produce              Impacts were found in terms of     Provee have higher real average
                         suppliers reported acquiring ISO       successful local SMEs (such as in the          higher sales growth and            wages paid to employees,
                         standard certifications to supply to   electronics sector) and attracted additional   employment growth                  increased employment and a
                         MNCs (50% reported increasing          foreign investments (particularly in Penang)                                      higher probability of exporting
                         value added of products supplied to
                         MNCs); 90% of MNCs reported
                         sourcing from at least 1 Czech firm;
                         Analytical results found higher
                         productivity for suppliers to MNCs
                         (versus non-suppliers)




                                                                                                                                                                             105
Annex 4.1. Vietnam: Mapping institutional landscape for Supporting Industries (SI) lead agency & SME support agencies




Sources: Vietnam, IFC AS




                                                                                                                        106
