i
© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The
World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not
imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or
the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
World Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433,
USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




2
Table of Contents
Acronyms ............................................................................................................................ 4
List of Figures ..................................................................................................................... 5
List of Tables ...................................................................................................................... 5
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................. 6
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................ 8
1.     Introduction ............................................................................................................... 16
2.     Transparency and Openness in Nigeria .................................................................... 18
3.     PPP Experience ......................................................................................................... 21
4.     Legal and Institutional Framework for PPPs ............................................................ 30
5.     Legal and Policy Framework for PPP Disclosure ..................................................... 37
6.     Disclosure in Practice and Key Challenges .............................................................. 45
7.     Gap Assessment ........................................................................................................ 51
8.     Recommendations ..................................................................................................... 54
9.     Key Materials Reviewed ........................................................................................... 61
Annex A: Suggested Amendments to the ICRC Act 2005 ............................................... 63
Annex B: Suggested Text for Disclosure Framework (ICRC) ......................................... 64
Annex B.1: Draft Template for Proactive Disclosure of Projects in Nigeria ................... 73
Annex B.2: Sample Contractual Provisions (ICRC) ......................................................... 76
Annex C: Suggested Amendments to the NSIA Act 2011 ............................................... 81
Annex D: Suggested Text for Disclosure Framework (NSIA) ......................................... 82
Annex D.1: Template for Proactive Disclosure of NSIA-to-Public Projects.................... 91
Annex D.2: Template for Proactive Disclosure of NSIA-to-Private Projects................... 94
Annex D.3: Template for Proactive Disclosure of NSIA PPP Projects ............................ 95
Annex D.4: Suggested Standard Contractual Clauses (NSIA) ......................................... 98
Annex E: Comparison of World Bank and Agreed Framework with
Current Practice (ICRC) ................................................................................................. 103
Annex F: Comparison of World Bank and Agreed Framework with
Current Practice (NSIA) ................................................................................................. 109




                                                                                                                                     3
Acronyms
AFC      Africa Finance Corporation
AGF      Attorney General of the Federation
BPE      Bureau of Public Enterprises
BPP      Bureau of Public Procurement
CCSA     Cross-Cutting Solution Area
CSO      civil society organization
EOI      expression of interest
FBC      Full Business Case
FCDA     Federal Capital Development Authority
FCT      Federal Capital Territory
FEC      Federal Executive Council
FESTAC   Festival of Arts and Culture
FMARD    Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
FMOF     Federal Ministry of Finance
FMOH     Federal Ministry of Health
FMWR     Federal Ministry of Water Resources
FOI      Freedom of Information
GIFMIS   Government Integrated Financial Management Information System
ICRC     Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission
ICT      information and communication technology
MDAs     ministries, departments, and agencies
MMA2     Murtala Muhammed Airport Terminal Two
MOU      memorandum of understanding
MW       megawatts
NEITI    Nigeria Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
NIF      Nigeria Infrastructure Fund
NIIMP    National Integrated Infrastructure Master Plan
NSIA     Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority
OBC      Outline Business Case
PPA      Public Procurement Act
PPIAF    Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
PPP      Public Private Partnership
RFP      request for proposal
SPV      special-purpose vehicle
TCN      Transmission Company of Nigeria
UNCAC    United Nations Convention Against Corruption




4
List of Figures
Figure 1: Number of PPP Projects, by Sector                                      21
Figure 2: PPP Investments, by Sector (US$, millions)                             22
Figure 3: Elements of the World Bank Recommended Disclosure Framework for PPPs   54




List of Tables
Table ES.1: Snapshot of Recommended Disclosure for ICRC                          11

Table ES.2: Snapshot of Recommended Disclosure for NSIA                          14

Table 1: Disclosure Environment in Nigeria                                       17

Table 2: PPP Projects under Implementation in the Custody of ICRC                23

Table 3: Process for PPP Procurement in Nigeria                                  33

Table 4: Institutional Framework for PPPs in Nigeria                             34

Table 5: NSIA Activities, by Type of Investment                                  36

Table 6: Legal Framework for Disclosure and Implications for PPP Disclosure      40

Table 7: Current PPP Disclosure Practices                                        46

Table 8: NSIA’s Current Disclosure Practices, by Type of Investment              48

Table 9: Gap Assessment                                                          51

Table 10: Suggested Content for a PPP Disclosure Framework for ICRC              57

Table 11: Suggested Content for a PPP Disclosure Framework for NSIA              58

Table B.1: Summary of Specific Disclosures                                       67

Table D.1: Summary of NSIA Information Disclosure, by Type of Investment         88




                                                                                      5
Acknowledgements
This Public-Private Partnerships Disclosure Diagnostic Report for Nigeria has been prepared
by a team consisting of Shyamala Shukla, Senior Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) Specialist,
World Bank Group PPP Cross-Cutting Solution Area (CCSA) and Task Team Leader for the
Global Project on Transparency and Accountability in Public-Private Partnerships; Prashant
Sharma, Senior Consultant, World Bank Group PPP CCSA; Susanne Foerster, Legal
Consultant; and Chibuzo Ekwekwuo, Adetoun Adetona, and Mirelle Raad, Consultants, World
Bank Group PPP CCSA. Halim Mirzoaliev, Ministry of Finance, Tajikistan, and Voice
Secondee, World Bank, provided valuable technical insights and inputs into this work.
Laurence Carter, Senior Director, and Clive Harris, Practice Manager, World Bank Group PPP
CCSA, provided valuable guidance.
The World Bank team thanks the Federal Ministry of Finance, Government of Nigeria, for
providing valuable support in the implementation of this project. Specifically, the team
acknowledges the invaluable input provided by the Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority
and the Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission.
Junglim Hahm, Regional Program Leader, Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
(PPIAF); Serah Njoroge, Regional Program Coordinator, PPIAF; and Samuel Baiya,
Consultant, PPIAF, provided valuable inputs during the implementation of the project.
The team thanks the following individuals who provided excellent technical inputs during
various meetings and stakeholder consultations:
Aminu Diko, Director General/CEO, Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission
(ICRC); Engr. Chidi Izuwah, Executive Director, Support Services Department, ICRC;
Mohammed A. Bamalli, Director, Contract Compliance Department, ICRC; Felix Igho Ogbera,
PhD, Head, Policy & Regulation, ICRC; Devaan Priscilla Jiwunde, Project Manager, ICRC;
Michael Ohiani, Director, Public Private Partnership Department; and Emmanuel Onwodi,
Jobson Ewalefoh, Ahmed Abdulrazaq, Femi Pat-Natson, Williams Monday, Hadiza Sani,
Abdullahi Hashim, Doris Alinnor, and Shola Elias-Fatile, ICRC; Uche Orji, Chief Executive
Officer & Managing Director, Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority (NSIA); Stella Ojekwe-
Onyejeli, Chief Risk Officer & Executive Director, NSIA; Richard Eckrich, Head, Nigeria
Infrastructure Fund (NIF), NSIA; Ezinwa Okorafor, General Counsel, NSIA; Tade Fadare,
Head, Operational Risk, NSIA; Obinna Ihedioha, Portfolio Manager, NIF, NSIA; Titilope
Olubiyi, Communications Adviser, NSIA; Pius Osiriamhe Ayiador, Portfolio Manager, NIF,
NSIA; Tosho Suleiman, Senior Legal Adviser, NSIA; Seun Lawal, Internal Audit Manager,
NSIA; Louise Skarvall, Analyst, NIF, NSIA and Bode Yebisi, Information Technology Officer,
NSIA; Innocent E. Aziegbe, Senior Associate, Credit Admin & Operational Risk Management,
Africa Finance Corporation (AFC); Abiola Dabiri, Assistant Company Secretary, AFC; Mark
Tomlinson, Managing Director, Nigeria Infrastructure Advisory Facility; and Emmanuel
Akinwumi and Ifeyinwa Emelife, African Development Bank.
Mokuolu Adesina, Bureau of Public Procurement; Rabiu Abubakar Abba, Bureau of Public
Enterprises (BPE); Fidelis Kur and Audu Uba Mohammed, BPE; Bartholomew Aja, Debt
Management Office; Engr. Saka A. Ismail, Mass Housing/PPP, Federal Capital Development
Authority (FCDA); Engr. E.A. Oluwadamisi, FCDA; Fatima Hayatu, Deputy Director, Federal


6
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (FMARD); Nwaiwu Chidi, FMARD;
N. A. Lawal, Federal Ministry of Budget and National Planning; Dr. Essien Akparawa, Federal
Ministry of Finance; Dr. Omobolanle Olowumni, Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH);
Ogunbiyi Oluwaseun, FMOH; Odegbaro Gladys, Federal Ministry of Justice; Margaret
Akinmuko, Eucharia O. Alozie, Engr. O. G. Ifewolara, Agu Kanayo, Engr. C. M. Ugwuanyi,
and Emmanuel Oka Ukpai, Federal Ministry of Power, Works, and Housing; Bello A.
Dogondaji, Ansha Igbayima, and Prince Chinedu Ozuruocha, Federal Ministry of
Transportation; Yunusa Abdulsalam, Federal Ministry of Transportation (Aviation); Engr. Z.
O. Akinjogbin, Assistant Director, Federal Ministry of Water Resources (FMWR); Esther
Oyeniyi Ajibewa, FMWR; Engr. Dr. Emeka Agbasi, Ouindamola Adene, and Halirat Suleiman
Umar, Federal Roads Maintenance Agency; Alade Isaac B., Garki Hospital Abuja; Bukola
Azeez, Health & Human Services Secretariat; Dele Ejekukor, Nigerian Maritime
Administration and Safety Agency; Engr. Tolulope Talabi, Nigerian Ports Authority; and Ala
Green, Glory E. Onojedo, and Mustapha Zubairu, Nigerian Shippers’ Council.
Funmi Ogunlesi, Executive Director, Public Sector Group, Africa Treasury and Trade
Solutions, Citi Bank Nigeria; Mudassir Amray, Group Head, Corporate & Investment Banking,
Citi Bank Nigeria; Patrick Okey Mgbenwelu, Director & Head, Debt Solutions, FBN Merchant
Bank; Abiodun Akinjo and Chuma Onwuka, Debt Solutions, FBN Merchant Bank; Pekun
Bakare, Akinyo Oladele, and Umar Haruna, FBN Merchant Bank; Rachel More, Head,
Infrastructure Finance, Investment Banking, Rand Merchant Bank; Olamide Oladosu, General
Counsel & Company Secretary, Rand Merchant Bank; Uchenna Mkparu, The Infrastructure
Bank Plc.; and Abdul Ganiyu Sanusi, The Infrastructure Bank Plc.
Mindat Sambo, Alheri Engineering Co. Ltd.; Salisu Abdullahi, Centre for Management
Development; Dr. Kabir Kabo Usman and Abdulazeez Ogbole, CMD Abuja; Olusegun
Adewuyi, Deanshanger Project Ltd.; Oyename Olusegun, Greenview Development Nigeria
Ltd.; Suru Daniels, Head of Financial Advisory, Greenwich Trust Limited; Oduye Bestmann,
Greenwich Trust Limited; Chinomso Onyemaizu, Infrastructure Consulting; Kola Balogun,
Julius Berger Nigeria Plc.; Pamela Gold and Mohammed Ismail, Mainstream Energy Solutions
Ltd.; Chimenem Stilo Ogbonda, Phase 3 Telecom Ltd.; Arc Abdulwaheed Adetona, Principal
Partner, QA Consultants; and Yvonne Agbodike, Weircapacity Ltd.
Maxwell Kadiri, Open Society Justice Initiative; Seember Nyager, Nkem Ilo, and Helen
Abawulo, Public & Private Development Centre; Eneh Obi, Right to Know Nigeria; Sarah
Effin, Channels TV; Chris Agabi, Daily Trust; Lucy Nwachukwu, News Agency of Nigeria;
and Mathias Okwe, The Guardian.
The team thanks Sandra Gain for editing the document, and Victoria Adams Kotsch for the
cover, layout, and formatting.
This is a joint product of the ICRC, NSIA, Federal Government of Nigeria, World Bank Group,
and PPIAF. Funding for this product has been provided by PPIAF and the World Bank Group
PPP CCSA.




                                                                                         7
Executive Summary
A World Bank Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) team conducted a study in Nigeria
between September 2016 and April 2017, using the PPP Disclosure Diagnostic template
recommended by the World Bank’s Framework for Disclosure of Information in PPPs.
This study has been consolidated in the form of a PPP Disclosure Diagnostic Report for
Nigeria. The Diagnostic Report examines the political, legal, and institutional environment
for disclosure in PPPs. Based on a gap assessment exercise with key political, legal,
institutional, and process findings benchmarked against the World Bank Framework, the
Diagnostic Report makes specific recommendations to improve disclosure. The
recommendations include a suggested enhanced framework for disclosure of PPPs
applicable to all federal government projects in Nigeria, and an extended disclosure
framework (beyond PPPs) for three types of investments by the Nigeria Sovereign
Investment Authority (NSIA).
The findings suggest a move toward greater transparency and openness in all areas of
government in Nigeria, with several new initiatives having been launched in recent years.
The 1999 Constitution of Nigeria led to increased pressure on public bodies to promote
more transparent governance structures. This was enhanced substantially with the Nigeria
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (NEITI) Act 2007, and the Freedom of
Information (FOI) Act 2011, which, among others, promote proactive disclosure of
contract information. Nigeria has taken other progressive steps, such as signing the United
Nations Convention Against Corruption, joining the Open Government Partnership,
launching the Open Data Development Initiative, placing its parliamentary proceedings
since 1999 on the Hansard web portal, launching electronic applications for certain
services, launching the Government Integrated Financial Management Information System
for more transparent financial management, and setting up National eGovernment
Strategies as a PPP project with the mandate to facilitate, drive, and implement the Nigerian
eGovernment Program. NSIA has been lauded as one of the most transparent among
sovereign investment funds globally.
However, given that most of these initiatives are very recent and still in the process of being
institutionalized, their impact in improving disclosure in the PPP space, so far, has not been
substantial. NSIA discloses substantial information through its annual reports, but ongoing
disclosure of information in a more structured manner will be important for the
organization as it increases its portfolio of investments, including in PPPs.
The past decade has seen an increase in interest in the use of PPPs in Nigeria, largely driven
by the government’s Vision 2020. The Private Participation in Infrastructure database
indicates that 56 PPP projects with a total investment commitment of US$39 billion
reached financial closure between 1990 and 2015. The Infrastructure Concession
Regulatory Commission (ICRC) website lists 90 projects at various stages of development
and procurement, and 51 under implementation under its guidance and custody. These
projects cover a variety of sectors, key among these being transport, energy, education,
housing, and health. NSIA is also participating in the country’s infrastructure development


8
process through PPPs, most notably as an investor and developer of the Second Niger
Bridge project.
Currently, Nigeria has a fairly well-developed legal and institutional framework for PPPs.
The Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission (ICRC) Act 2005 is the key
legislation relevant to PPPs at the federal level. Other supporting legislation includes the
Debt Management Office (Establishment, Etc.) Act 2003, the Public Procurement Act
(PPA) 2007 and the Fiscal Responsibility Act 2007. The ICRC Act 2005, together with the
other supporting legislation, provides the legal capacity to government bodies to enter into
PPP contracts, address gaps and remove conflicts in existing laws, clarify the roles and
responsibilities of various bodies involved in PPPs, and establish institutions to prepare
and approve PPP projects. The NSIA Act under which NSIA was set up in 2011 provides
the legal framework as well as the management and approval processes through which
NSIA invests in PPP (and other infrastructure) projects.
Nigeria has a relatively well-defined legal and policy framework, which directly and
indirectly impacts PPP disclosure significantly. Key legislation that enables proactive
disclosure are the FOI, ICRC, NEITI, PPA, and Fiscal Responsibility Acts. The FOI Act
2011 provides for proactive disclosure of information relating to project contracts signed
by the government. The ICRC Act 2005 puts clear disclosure obligations on the ICRC, as
it creates PPP-related information and records, takes major approval decisions, and
provides guidance to public institutions in the process. Provisions in the NEITI, PPA, and
Fiscal Responsibility Acts emphasize transparency and disclosure requirements across all
stages of the procurement process specifically, and on the financial affairs of the
government more generally. ICRC has recently published detailed guidelines on disclosure
of PPP contract information, following technical assistance by the World Bank in 2012 –
13. These guidelines have been approved by the Board of ICRC, and it is expected that
these will be implemented in a substantial way going forward. NSIA subscribes to the
Santiago Principles (formulated by the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds),
which emphasize accountability and transparency in Sovereign Wealth Fund investments.
The NSIA Act also speaks of transparency as a key principle of its operations.
However, ICRC and NSIA can improve their current disclosure frameworks to ensure that
information is disclosed earlier in the project process. Although the ICRC guidelines on
disclosure of PPP contract information provide a good framework for disclosure of
information following contract execution, these do not cover the project preparation and
procurement phases. The NSIA provisions, in contrast, require greater structure in
disclosure as well as disclosure beyond what is included in the annual reports.
At present, there is limited information on PPPs in the public domain. However, ICRC is
currently in the process of redacting complete project contracts and preparing these for
disclosure. Being a young institution, NSIA has so far been involved in a limited number
of PPP projects, and has proactively disclosed information on them to different degrees. It
also regularly discloses details of its investments through its annual reports, which are
easily accessible in the public domain.




                                                                                          9
This Diagnostic Report recommends an enhanced framework for ICRC, which includes all
phases of the project process. The Diagnostic Report also recommends a systematic
structure for NSIA for proactively disclosing information. The recommended disclosure
suggests a holistic approach to disclosure through predefined standards, tools, and
mechanisms, allowing for increased disclosure efficiency, as outlined in tables ES.1 and
ES.2.
The recommended design for ICRC largely follows the World Bank Framework. It is
hierarchical and includes a logical framework that moves from a high-level mandate to
disclose toward the basic elements that need to be disclosed. Table ES.1 provides a
snapshot of the recommended features of the suggested framework for ICRC. Table ES.2
provides a snapshot of the recommended disclosure for NSIA. Although these
recommendations follow the World Bank Framework in principle, they go beyond PPPs
and suggest three templates for disclosure of information relevant to NSIA investment
categories.




10
TABLE ES.1: SNAPSHOT OF RECOMMENDED DISCLOSURE FOR ICRC
       AREA                                      DESCRIPTION
                      Widen the legislative mandate as follows, for more effective
                      implementation of the FOI and ICRC Acts: (i) amend the FOI Act to
                      include institutional structure, roles, and responsibilities relating to
                      the implementation of the Act, including the creation of an
                      independent and well-funded appellate body or tribunal; (ii)
                      introduce clauses that place sanctions on public officials for
LEGISLATIVE MANDATE   noncompliance with the law and the orders of the appellate
                      authority; (iii) reduce exemption clauses; and (iv) introduce
                      timebound obligations for proactive disclosure. Repealing other
                      Acts (such as the Official Secrets Act) that go against the spirit of
                      transparency also needs to be done in parallel. The ICRC Act
                      would benefit immensely from the introduction of clauses that
                      provide a clear, proactive disclosure mandate for PPPs.
                      Applicability of legislation to contracts and project information
                      Elements of disclosure during the various phases of the PPP
                      project process
DETAILED GUIDANCE     Timelines for disclosure
                      Details of confidentiality provisions
                      Template for disclosure
                      Standard contract clauses
DISCLOSURE            List of projects under development
DURING PROJECT        Basic project information
IDENTIFICATION
AND PREPARATION       Project progress tracker

                      Pre-tender: Tentative procurement dates; project summary
DISCLOSURE DURING
                      Tender: Expression of interest, short-listed bidders, request for
PROCUREMENT
                      proposal, award
                      Basic project information
                      Material risks and allocation
                      Reasons for choice of PPP
                      Financing structure
DISCLOSURE            Guarantees, grants, annuity and availability payment schedule,
FOLLOWING             land and asset transfers, and other support; revenue share
CONTRACT SIGNING      Tariffs
                      Actual performance against targets, performance failures, links to
                      independent engineer, audit, and SPV reports
                      Termination and handback provisions
                      Renegotiations or changes
                      Areas or elements that could be considered confidential (subject to
CONFIDENTIAL          overarching law and project-specific circumstances), where the
INFORMATION           competitiveness of the private provider may be jeopardized
                      Exceptions and exemptions to the confidentiality clause




                                                                                            11
        AREA                                      DESCRIPTION
                     Reports, documents, and other information the private provider
                     should maintain and submit to the authority; timelines for
 STANDARD CONTRACT   submission and disclosure
 PROVISIONS
                     Language on what constitutes confidentiality, format for listing
                     confidential clauses, and clause for disclosure in public interest
                     A single platform with a user-friendly, integrated back end for use
                     by multiple entities, with a hierarchy of roles related to uploading,
 PLATFORM            validation and disclosure of information; a user-friendly front end,
                     with structured content and regular updates to registered users

                       Basic project                Within 15 days after approval of
                       information                  OBC

                                                    Within 15 days of each status
                       Project Milestones
                                                    change

                                              Procurement Documents

                       EOI                          Within 15 days of approval

                       List of short-listed
                                                    Within 15 days of approval
                       bidders

                                                    Within 15 days of issuance of FBC
                       Bid Award
                                                    Certificate of Compliance by ICRC

                       Full RFP                     Within 15 days of approval

                                        Disclosure of other documents

                                                    Within 30 days of OBC approval
 TIMELINES             OBC report
                                                    by FEC

                       Value-for-money              Within 30 days of FBC approval by
                       analysis report              FEC

                       Project summary
                       (including basic
                       contract information,
                       parties to the contract,
                       project risk matrix,
                       amounts and types of
                                                    Within 30 days of signature of
                       government support
                                                    contract
                       provided to the project,
                       and pricing, termination
                       clauses, handback
                       provisions, and key
                       performance indicators
                       with target levels

                       Financial Information        Within 30 days of financial close




12
            AREA                                               DESCRIPTION

                                                      Disclosure of other documents

                                                                  Signed PPP Contract disclosed
                                                                  within 30 days of contract signing
                                   Contract Documents
                                                                  (after redaction of confidential
                                                                  information)
 TIMELINES
                                                                  Within 30 days of the signature of
                                   Renegotiations
                                                                  the renegotiated contract

                                           Performance disclosure throughout contract period

                                                                  Within one year of financial close,
                                   Performance information
                                                                  updated annually

                                     A simple template with details of elements to be disclosed at
 TEMPLATE AND DATA                   various project phases
 STANDARDS                           Consistent, structured, machine-readable, and exploitable
                                     information

Note: EOI = expression of interest; FBC = Full Business Case; FEC = Federal Executive Council; FOI = Freedom of
Information; ICRC = Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission; OBC = Outline Business Case; PPP = Public-
Private Partnership; RFP = request for proposal; SPV = special-purpose vehicle.




                                                                                                           13
TABLE ES.2: SNAPSHOT OF RECOMMENDED DISCLOSURE FOR NSIA
        AREA                                       DESCRIPTION

                       Widen the legislative mandate as follows, for more effective
                       implementation of the FOI and NSIA Acts: (i) amend the FOI Act to
                       include institutional structure, roles, and responsibilities relating to
                       the implementation of the Act, including the creation of an
                       independent and well-funded appellate body or tribunal with
                       enforcement powers; (ii) introduce clauses that place sanctions for
                       noncompliance, with proactive disclosure clauses by public
 LEGISLATIVE MANDATE
                       officials; (iii) reduce exemption clauses; and (iv) introduce
                       timebound obligations for proactive disclosure. Repealing other
                       Acts (such as the Official Secrets Act) that go against the spirit of
                       transparency also needs to be done in parallel. The NSIA Act
                       would benefit immensely from the introduction of clauses that
                       provide a clear, proactive disclosure mandate for NSIA sponsored
                       investments.
                       Applicability of legislation to contracts and project information
                       Elements of disclosure for diverse investment portfolio
                       Timelines for disclosure
 DETAILED GUIDANCE
                       Details of confidentiality provisions
                       Template for disclosure
                       Standard contract clauses
 DISCLOSURE
 DURING PROJECT        Basic project information
 IDENTIFICATION        Project progress tracker
 AND PREPARATION
                       Pre-tender: Brief description of project, services, estimated cost,
 DISCLOSURE DURING     likely sources of revenue, and tentative procurement dates;
 PROCUREMENT           feasibility study report, project summary
                       List of vendors and advisors
                       Basic project information
                       Material risks and allocation
                       Reasons for choice of PPP
                       Financing structure
 DISCLOSURE            Guarantees, grants, annuity and availability payment schedule,
 FOLLOWING             land and asset transfers, and other support; revenue share
 COMMERCIAL CLOSE      Tariffs
                       Actual performance against targets, performance failures, links to
                       independent engineer, audit, and SPV reports
                       Termination and handback provisions
                       Renegotiations or changes
                       Areas or elements that could be considered confidential (subject to
 CONFIDENTIAL          overarching law and project-specific circumstances) where the
 INFORMATION           competitiveness of the private provider may be jeopardized
                       Exceptions and exemptions to the confidentiality clause




14
             AREA                                                  DESCRIPTION

                                       Reports, documents, and other information the private provider
                                       should maintain and submit to the authority; timelines for
 STANDARD CONTRACT                     submission and disclosure
 PROVISIONS
                                       Language on what constitutes confidentiality, format for listing
                                       confidential clauses, and clause for disclosure in public interest
                                       A single platform with a user-friendly integrated back end for use
                                       by multiple entities with a hierarchy of roles related to uploading,
 PLATFORM                              validation, and disclosure of information; a user-friendly front
                                       end with structured content and regular updates to registered
                                       users
                                       Timelines for disclosure of information elements will depend on
                                       NSIA’s role (investor, sponsor, or developer) and type of
 TIMELINES
                                       investment (public-public, public-private, or regular PPP
                                       projects) (see annex D for details.)
                                       A simple template with details of elements to be disclosed at
 TEMPLATE AND DATA                     various project phases
 STANDARDS                             Consistent, structured, machine-readable, and exploitable
                                       information

Note: FOI = Freedom of Information; NSIA = Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority; PPP = Public-Private Partnership;
SPV = special-purpose vehicle.




                                                                                                                15
1. Introduction
Based on research and analysis over the past few years, the World Bank Group Public-
Private Partnerships (PPP) Cross-Cutting Solution Area (CCSA) has worked on creating a
Framework for Disclosure in Public-Private Partnerships, which suggests a systematic
structure for disclosing information proactively at different phases of the PPP process. Two
documents, “Jurisdictional Studies” and “Good Practice Cases,” have been developed to
provide relevant background and resources complementing the goals of the Framework.
The Framework has undergone a public consultation process, and is now being piloted in
four countries—Ghana, Honduras, Kenya, and Nigeria. The work in Nigeria involves two
projects—with the Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission (ICRC), and the
Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority (NSIA).
The Framework suggests the initiation of work with a PPP Disclosure Diagnostic (the
Diagnostic) in countries. The objective of the PPP Disclosure Diagnostic is to help PPP
policy makers and practitioners to assess the status of PPP disclosure in the jurisdiction
and identify customized PPP disclosure solutions for all PPP types, to enable better
disclosure. The Diagnostic can also be used by World Bank teams.
The Diagnostic includes an examination of each of the following areas in a country:
     •   Preliminary overview of the general transparency environment
     •   History and outlook for PPP disclosure
     •   Political environment for disclosure
     •   Legal and policy framework
     •   Process and institutions
     •   Guidance on confidential information
     •   Information systems
     •   Technology and data standards
Under each of the areas identified, the Diagnostic provides the key questions policy makers
and practitioners should ask, analysis and techniques for assessing gaps, resources for
learning more, and tools for establishing a customized PPP disclosure framework for the
jurisdiction. The relevance of each of the above areas varies based on the unique
circumstances within the country.
This Diagnostic Report is structured around the key themes that are relevant to Nigeria’s
disclosure environment, as summarized in table 1. The table has a few additional questions
pertaining to NSIA, which go beyond PPPs and include two other categories of
investments.




16
TABLE 1: DISCLOSURE ENVIRONMENT IN NIGERIA
               THEME                                          KEY QUESTION                              SECTION

 TRANSPARENCY AND                          Is there a transparent and open governance
                                                                                                             2
 OPENNESS IN GOVERNANCE                    environment in Nigeria?

                                           Does the government have substantial
                                           experience in PPPs?
 PPP EXPERIENCE                                                                                              3
                                           Does the government have an ongoing PPP
                                           program?
                                           What are the institutions supporting the
                                           preparation, procurement, and implementation
 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK                   of PPPs?                                                          4
 FOR PPPs
                                           What are the respective roles of the ICRC,
                                           NSIA, FMOF and others?
                                           Is the legal and regulatory environment
                                           sufficiently conducive to PPP disclosure?
                                           Is there FOI legislation that supports proactive
                                           disclosure?
                                           Do PPP legislation/regulations provide clarity
                                           on the elements, timing, institutional structure,
                                           and processes for disclosure?
                                           Do other related legislation and regulation
                                           support disclosure?
 LEGAL AND POLICY
                                           Are there guidelines and processes in place to
 FRAMEWORK FOR PPP                                                                                           5
                                           guide disclosure?
 DISCLOSURE
                                           Are there standardized disclosure contract
                                           clauses and templates?
                                           Is there a web portal(s) available with a user-
                                           friendly back end and front end design in
                                           machine readable format?
                                           What are the provisions of the NSIA Act
                                           relevant to disclosure?
                                           Does NSIA have a disclosure policy or
                                           guidelines that apply to its investments?

 DISCLOSURE IN PRACTICE                    What information is disclosed in practice?
                                                                                                             6
 AND KEY CHALLENGES                        What are the key challenges to disclosure?

Note: FOI = Freedom of Information; NSIA = Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority; PPP = Public-Private Partnerships.




Based on the findings in these areas, an assessment of the specific gaps in the political,
legislative, and institutional contexts is detailed in section 7. Section 8 provides specific
recommendations. Annexes A and C provide the legal drafting for the suggested
amendments to the ICRC and NSIA Acts respectively. Annexes B and D provide the text
of the suggested Framework for Disclosure of Information in PPPs in Nigeria, and the
Framework for Disclosure of Information for NSIA, respectively. The Frameworks also
contain standard contractual clauses and templates for disclosure. Annexes E and F provide
a comparison of the World Bank’s recommended disclosure framework, the current
disclosure and the agreed disclosure framework of ICRC and NSIA respectively. The key
material that was reviewed in the preparation of this Diagnostic is listed in section 9.



                                                                                                                  17
2. Transparency and Openness
   in Nigeria
Introduction

Nigeria has taken several steps to move toward lower levels of corruption and greater
transparency and accountability. The Constitution of Nigeria (1999) provides a clear
directive through Section 15(5) that the “Government must eradicate all corrupt practices
and abuse of power”. Several enabling laws have been enacted to implement this directive,
including the Code of Conduct Bureau and Tribunal Act 1990, Independent Corrupt
Practices & Other Related Offences Act 2000, Economic and Financial Crimes
Commission Act 2004, Fiscal Responsibility Act 2010, and Money Laundering Prohibition
Act 2011.
In the past decade, the Federal Government of Nigeria has enacted two major legislations
specifically impacting transparency and accountability in governance: the Nigeria
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (NEITI) Act 2007, and the Freedom of
Information (FOI) Act 2011. Although these Acts have resulted in gradual improvement in
disclosure at the national level, institutional hurdles remain. For example, the civil service
financial and operational guidelines have not been aligned with the new disclosure regime
yet. In addition, although the FOI Act overrides the Official Secrets Act (which sanctioned
public officers who disclosed information without authorization), a culture of secrecy
remains entrenched in government functioning. Another hindrance to the effective
implementation of the FOI Act has been the resistance of subnational governments to its
aims and principles. Currently, there are at least six different litigations pending on appeal
on whether the FOI Act applies to subnational governments in Nigeria. Of the 36
subnational governments in the country, only Ekiti state has passed its own FOI law, and
Anambra state has developed guidelines for implementing the federal FOI Act. However,
none of the 36 states has shown an inclination to implement the FOI regime. This is not
surprising, as even the compliance of public authorities with the mandate of constitutional
oversight bodies, such as the Attorney General of the Federation (AGF), remains low.1
Despite systemic institutional challenges, Nigeria has consistently made efforts to
incorporate international frameworks that promote transparency and anti-corruption in its
governance processes. Nigeria was one of the first signatories to the United Nations
Convention against Corruption (UNCAC) in 2003, and is one of the few countries that has
also subjected itself to the UNCAC country peer review process.2 UNCAC states that
“transparency and accountability in matters of public finance must [also] be promoted, and

1 State of Right to Information Report in Africa 2014; http://r2knigeria.org/index.php/publications/foi-
assessments-reports.
2 https://www.unodc.org/documents/treaties/UNCAC/CountryVisitFinalReports/2014_10_14_

Final_Country_Report_Nigeria.pdf.


18
specific requirements are [to be] established for the prevention of corruption, in the
particularly critical areas of the public sector, such as the judiciary and public
procurement”.3 Nigeria is also a signatory to the African Union Convention on Preventing
and Combating Corruption, the Economic Community of West African States Protocol on
the Fight against Corruption, the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, the
African Union Youth Charter, and the African Statistics Charter, each of which recognizes
access to information as a basic right. In addition, Nigeria is a member of the global
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. Most recently, the current government has
formally expressed its intent to join the Open Government Partnership, and has committed
to implementing the Open Contracting Data Standard across several sectors, including oil,
transportation, power, health, and education.4


Open Data and eGovernment Initiatives

Nigeria introduced the Government Integrated Financial Management Information System
(GIFMIS) in 2012. GIFMIS was initially implemented within the Budget Office, AGF, and
six pilot ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs). This initial rollout was to be
followed by its implementation across all MDAs and subnational governments in a phased
manner. However, it remains unclear how many MDAs, subnational governments and
public authorities have been covered under GIFMIS so far. In August 2016, the government
announced the introduction of e-procurement on a pilot basis in six sectors, including
health; education; agriculture; transport; water resources; and works, power, and housing.
Nigeria has also made some efforts to offer government services online. The Nigeria
Immigration Service has a functioning website where certain services, such as passports
and visas, can be requested. In 2004, the federal government, through the National
Information Technology Development Agency, established the National eGovernment
Strategies as a PPP project, with the mandate to facilitate, drive, and implement the
Nigerian eGovernment Program. The achievements of this special-purpose vehicle (SPV)
so far are unclear.
Nigeria announced the commencement of the Open Data Development Initiative in 2014,
under which the country seeks to “open up high -value data sets from across government
ministries to Nigerian citizens, businesses, and the rest of the world, for free” .5 However,
the implementation of the initiative has been patchy and inconsistent. Some data sets are
publicly available, but these are restricted to the websites of specific MDAs, such as the
National Bureau of Statistics and the Budget Office. The data that have been made
available are not comprehensive and well-organized. Some civil society organizations
(such as the Public and Private Development Centre through Budeshi) have attempted to


3 https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/treaties/CAC/convention-highlights.html.
4 The current government (which came to power in 2015) has declared anti-corruption and transparency as its
priority, and has carried out several investigations on and court indictments of high-profile public servants as
part of its drive against corruption.
5 See http://commtech.gov.ng/index.php/videos/news-event/128-fg-kicksoff-opendata-initiative.




                                                                                                             19
present government data in a structured way, but the content remains dependent on the data
sets made available by the government.
Apart from these specialized services, the extent and relevance of the information disclosed
through websites remain low. The 2014 State of Right to Information in Africa report found
that “many public institutions in Nigeria have very interactive websites, but these sites do
not contain information beyond the most basic classes, mostly confined to institutional
organograms and mandate. They exclude more ‘sensitive’ disclosures.”6
The legal and policy initiatives highlighted here indicate that transparency- and disclosure-
related reforms are being driven by the top echelons of the government. This situation
suggests that there is significant buy-in at the political level to make government
functioning more transparent and accountable.
However, corruption and opacity in decision making continue to feature in public
discourse, and a culture of secrecy within government functioning remains a matter of
concern. Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index ranked Nigeria 136 of
175 countries in 2015. Other indicators support this assessment. The Rule of Law Index
ranked Nigeria 96 of 104 countries in 2015.7 The Global Competitiveness Report 2015-16
cited corruption as the second most important factor that hindered business in the country.8
Apart from external assessments, 72 percent of Nigerian citizens believe that corruption in
the country has worsened over recent years.9




6 See http://www.africafoicentre.org/index.php/reports-publications/139-state-of-right-to-information-in-

africa-report-2014, page 48.
7 See http://worldjusticeproject.org/blog/wjp-open-government-index-2015-launches.
8 Global Competitiveness Report 2015-16, World Economic Forum, Geneva, p. 282.
9 See http://www.transparency.org/gcb2013/country/?country=nigeria.




20
3. PPP Experience
Nigeria has significant experience in PPPs. Port infrastructure concessions that were
awarded around 15 years ago were the first set of PPPs that gained visibility. These projects
led to the emergence of 25 private terminal operators and one build, operate, and transfer
initiative. The World Bank’s Private Participation in Infrastructure database lists 56
projects as having achieved financial close between 1990 and 2015, with a total investment
of US$ 39 billion. The ports sector has 25 projects, the largest number for any single sector,
and the information and communication technology sector has the highest proportion of
investment, at US$ 28 billion (figures 1 and 2). Currently, the ICRC website lists
51 projects at various stages of implementation10 (table 2), 90 projects under
development,11 and 77 projects as having been identified for future development.12


FIGURE 1: NUMBER OF PPP PROJECTS, BY SECTOR




Note: ICT = Information and communication technology; PPP = public-private partnership.




10 See http://www.icrc.gov.ng/projects/projects-under-icrcs-custody/.
11 As of 31 May 2017. See http://www.icrc.gov.ng/projects/projects-under-conceptualization-development-
and-procurement/.
12 See http://www.icrc.gov.ng/projects/ppp-projects-pipeline/.




                                                                                                      21
FIGURE 2: PPP INVESTMENTS, BY SECTOR (US$, MILLIONS)




Note: ICT = Information and communication technology; PPP = public-private partnership.

The Nigerian government’s Vision 2020 aims to make Nigeria one of the top 20 economies
in the world by 2020. To achieve this goal, the government has recognized the importance
of investment in infrastructure as a prerequisite for accelerating Nigeria’s growth and
development. The country’s infrastructure requirements are likely to grow to
US$ 3.1 trillion in the next 30 years, which would need to be financed substantially through
private financing.13
The ICRC Act 2005 is the most important national legislation relevant to PPPs. Other key
legislation includes the Debt Management Office (Establishment, Etc.) Act 2003, and the
Public Procurement Act 2007. Sector-specific legislation, such as the Highways Act 1971,
the Utilities Charges Commission Act 1992, the Bureau of Public Enterprises (Privatization
and Commercialization) Act 1999, and the Electric Power Sector Reforms Act 2005,
provide some guidelines that are relevant to the operationalization and management of
PPPs in the country. At the subnational level, several states have PPP laws, while most
others have an existing framework and/or a bill under consideration.14 This overall
regulatory ecosystem provides the legal capacity for government bodies to enter into PPP
contracts, address legal gaps and remove conflicts in existing laws, clarify the roles and
responsibilities of various bodies involved in PPPs, and establish legal institutions to
prepare and approve PPP projects.




13 NationalIntegrated Infrastructure Master Plan (NIIMP)
14 Abia,Anambra, Bauchi, Bayelsa, Cross River, Delta, Ebonyi, Edo, Ekiti, Kaduna, Kogi, Kwara, Lagos,
Niger, Oyo, Rivers, Sokoto, and the Federal Capital Territory of Abuja (FCT) have a PPP law and/or an
existing PPP framework, while Akwa Ibom, Benue, Enugu, Osun and Plateau have PPP bills under
consideration.


22
TABLE 2: PPP PROJECTS UNDER IMPLEMENTATION IN THE CUSTODY
OF ICRC
                              GOVERNMENT      DURATION
 #        PROJECT                                                   STATUS
                                AGENCY         (YEARS)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports                  Under
 1                                                25
     Operation, and          Authority                       implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Apapa)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports                  Under
 2                                                25
     Operation, and          Authority                       implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Apapa)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports        10        Under
 3
     Operation, and          Authority         (initially)   implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Apapa)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports        10        Under
 4
     Operation, and          Authority         (initially)   implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Apapa)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports                  Under
 5                                                25
     Operation, and          Authority                       implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Apapa)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports                  Under
 6                                                25
     Operation, and          Authority                       implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Apapa)
                                                             Expired in February
     Concession for the
                                                             2017; Commission
     Development,
                                                             liaising with parties to
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports
 7                                                10         ensure renewal or
     Operation, and          Authority
                                                             handback of leased
     Transfer of Port
                                                             property to
     Terminal (Ijora)
                                                             government
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,
                             Nigerian Ports        15        Under
 8   Operation, and
                             Authority         (initially)   implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Tincan
     Island)




                                                                                        23
                                  GOVERNMENT      DURATION
     #        PROJECT                                                 STATUS
                                    AGENCY         (YEARS)
         Concession for the
         Development,
         Finance, Maintenance,
                                 Nigerian Ports                  Under
     9   Operation, and                               25
                                 Authority                       implementation
         Transfer of Port
         Terminal (Tincan
         Island)
         Concession for the
         Development,
         Finance, Maintenance,
                                 Nigerian Ports                  Under
 10      Operation, and                               10
                                 Authority                       implementation
         Transfer of Port
         Terminal (Tincan
         Island)
         Concession for the
         Development,
         Finance, Maintenance,
                                 Nigerian Ports       15         Under
 11      Operation, and
                                 Authority                       implementation
         Transfer of Port
         Terminal (Tincan
         Island)
         Concession for the
         Development,
         Finance, Maintenance,                         10
                                 Nigerian Ports                  Under
 12      Operation, and                            (initially)
                                 Authority                       implementation
         Transfer of Port
         Terminal (Tincan
         Island)
         Concession for the
         Development,
         Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports       25         Under
 13
         Operation, and          Authority                       implementation
         Transfer of Port
         Terminal (Onne)
         Concession for the
         Development,
         Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports       25         Under
 14
         Operation, and          Authority                       implementation
         Transfer of Port
         Terminal (Onne)
         Concession for the
         Development,
         Finance, Maintenance,
                                 Nigerian Ports       20         Under
 15      Operation, and
                                 Authority                       implementation
         Transfer of Port
         Terminal (Port
         Harcourt)
         Concession for the
         Development,
         Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports       25         Under
 16
         Operation, and          Authority                       implementation
         Transfer of Port
         Terminal (Onne)
         Concession for the
         Development,
         Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports       25         Under
 17
         Operation, and          Authority                       implementation
         Transfer of Port
         Terminal (Onne)




24
                              GOVERNMENT      DURATION
#         PROJECT                                             STATUS
                                AGENCY         (YEARS)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports      25      Under
18
     Operation, and          Authority                   implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Calabar)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports      25      Under
19
     Operation, and          Authority                   implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Warri)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports      25      Under
20
     Operation, and          Authority                   implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Warri)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,
                             Nigerian Ports      15      Under
21   Operation, and
                             Authority                   implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Port
     Harcourt)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports              Under
22                                               25
     Operation, and          Authority                   implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Calabar)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports      25      Under
23
     Operation, and          Authority                   implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Calabar)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports      10      Under
24
     Operation, and          Authority                   implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Warri)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,
                             Nigerian Ports      10
25   Operation, and                                      Terminated
                             Authority
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Koko Port,
     Delta State)
     Concession for the
     Development,
     Finance, Maintenance,   Nigerian Ports      25      Under
26
     Operation, and          Authority                   implementation
     Transfer of Port
     Terminal (Warri)




                                                                          25
                                    GOVERNMENT         DURATION
     #         PROJECT                                                      STATUS
                                      AGENCY            (YEARS)
         Concession for the
         Operation,
         Management, and
                                   Federal Capital
         Provision of Primary,                             15        Under
 27                                Territory
         Secondary, and                                              implementation
                                   Administration
         Tertiary Health Care at
         the Garki Hospital
         Abuja
         Concession for the
         Lease of Real
         Property, Purchase of
         Moveable Assets,
                                   Tafawa Balewa                     Under
         Improvements to
                                   Square                  30        implementation,
 28      Leased Property, and
                                   Management                        although with
         Performance of
                                   Board                             challenges
         Operations and
         Maintenance of the
         Building Complex and
         Trade Centre (Lagos)
         Building Complex and      Lagos
         Trade Centre–             International                     Under
 29      Finance, Maintain, and    Trade Fair              30        implementation,
         Development Contract      Management                        although with dispute
         (Lagos)                   Board
         Concession for Build,                                       Implementation
         Own, and Operate a                                          stalled due to
         Container Freight         Nigerian                 30       absence of legal
 30
         Station of Inland         Shippers’ Council   (from 2007)   status and inability of
         Container Depot (Abia                                       private partner to
         State)                                                      reach financial close
         Concession for Build,                                       Implementation
         Own, and Operate a                                          stalled due to
         Container Freight         Nigerian                 25       absence of legal
 31
         Station of Inland         Shippers’ Council   (from 2007)   status and inability of
         Container Depot (Oyo                                        private partner to
         State)                                                      reach financial close
         Concession for Build,                                       Implementation
         Own, and Operate a                                          stalled due to
         Container Freight         Nigerian                 25       absence of legal
 32
         Station of Inland         Shippers’ Council   (from 2007)   status and inability of
         Container Depot                                             private partner to
         (Plateau State)                                             reach financial close
         Concession for Build,                                       Implementation
         Own, and Operate a                                          stalled due to
         Container Freight         Nigerian                 25       absence of legal
 33
         Station of Inland         Shippers’ Council   (from 2007)   status and inability of
         Container Depot                                             private partner to
         (Kano State)                                                reach financial close
         Concession for Build,                                       Implementation
         Own, and Operate a                                          stalled due to
         Container Freight         Nigerian                 25       absence of legal
 34
         Station of Inland         Shippers’ Council   (from 2007)   status and inability of
         Container Depot                                             private partner to
         (Katsina State)                                             reach financial close




26
                                GOVERNMENT          DURATION
#          PROJECT                                                       STATUS
                                  AGENCY             (YEARS)
     Concession for Build,                                        Implementation
     Own, and Operate a                                           stalled due to
     Container Freight         Nigerian                  25       absence of legal
35
     Station of Inland         Shippers’ Council    (from 2007)   status and inability of
     Container Depot                                              private partner to
     (Borno State)                                                reach financial close
     Provision of Data
     Capture Services,
     Personalization,
     Issuance, and             National Identity
                                                                  In dispute, matter
36   Distribution of General   Management               10
                                                                  before arbitration
     Multipurpose Cards,       Commission
     and Deployment of
     Card Acceptance
     Devices–Nationwide
     Provision of Data
     Capture Services,
     Personalization,
     Issuance, and             National Identity
                                                                  In dispute, matter
37   Distribution of General   Management               10
                                                                  before arbitration
     Multipurpose Cards,       Commission
     and Deployment of
     Card Acceptance
     Devices–Nationwide
     Concession
     Agreement for Design,
     Build, Finance, and
     Operate TCN’s Fibre       Transmission              15
                                                                  Under
38   Optic Cable               Company of           (from March
                                                                  implementation
     Telecommunications        Nigeria                  2006)
     Infrastructure for the
     Western Part of
     Nigeria
     Concession
     Agreement for Design,
     Build, Finance, and
39                             Transmission              15
     Operate TCN’s Fibre                                          Under
                               Company of           (from March
     Optic Cable                                                  implementation
                               Nigeria                  2016)
     Telecommunications
     Infrastructure for the
     Eastern Part of Nigeria
     Concession to Design,
     Develop, Finance,                                            Under
     Construct, Complete,                                         implementation,
                               Federal Airports
     Test, Commission,                                  12        although faced with
40                             Authority of
     Operate, Manage,                                             challenges and
                               Nigeria
     Maintain, and Transfer                                       currently under
     the MMA2 Terminal                                            dispute
     (Lagos)
     Concession for the
                               Federal Ministry
     Construction and                                             Under
                               of Transportation,
     Development of a                                   40        implementation,
41                             Federal Airports
     Hotel and Conference                                         although faced with
                               Authority of
     Centre at MMA2,                                              challenges
                               Nigeria
     Ikeja–Lagos




                                                                                            27
                                     GOVERNMENT          DURATION
     #         PROJECT                                                          STATUS
                                       AGENCY             (YEARS)
         Concession for the
         Acquisition,
         Installation, Operation,
         and Management of          Federal Airports
                                                              10          Terminated; case in
 42      World-Class                Authority of
                                                                          court
         Integrated System in       Nigeria
         Designated Airports
         (MMA–Lagos, Abuja,
         and Kano)
         Concession for
         Development of
                                    Federal Capital
         Engineering                                          5           Under
 43                                 Development
         Infrastructure for                                               implementation
                                    Authority
         Katampe District,
         Phase II (FCT–Abuja)
         Concession for
         Tracking of Ships and
         Cargo, Enforcing           Nigerian Maritime
         Regulatory                 Administration            10
 44                                                      (from 2010)      Suspended
         Compliance, and            and Safety
         Surveillance of the        Agency
         Entire Nigeria Maritime
         Domain–Lagos
         Development and                                       45         Efforts being made to
                                    Lekki Port Lagos    (April 21, 2011
         Operation of Deep                                                achieve financial
 45                                 Free Trade Zone       to April 21,
         Water Port (Lekki,                                               close and fulfill
                                    Enterprise               2056)
         Lagos)                                                           conditions precedent
         Concession
         Agreements for the
         Operation,                                            30
                                    Federal Ministry
         Maintenance, Design,                           (from February    Under
 46                                 of Power, Works
         and Sales of Electricity                          21, 2013)      implementation
                                    and Housing
         Produced–
         Kainji/Jebba (Niger
         State)
         Concession
         Agreements for the
         Operation,                 Federal Ministry           30
                                                        (from February    Under
 47      Maintenance, Design,       of Power, Works
                                                           21, 2013)      implementation
         and Sales of Electricity   and Housing
         Produced–Shiroro
         (Niger State)
         Concession
         Agreement for the
                                    Federal Ministry
         Reclamation and
                                    of Lands, Housing        30
         Infrastructural
                                    and Urban              (from          Currently stalled as a
 48      Development of
                                    Development;        September 8,      result of a court case
         FESTAC Phase II
                                    Federal Housing        2014)
         Housing Development
                                    Authority
         Project–FESTAC
         Town, Lagos
         Concession for the
         Design, Finance,
                                                                          Efforts ongoing to
         Build, Operate,            Debt                      30
                                                                          achieve financial
 49      Maintain, and Transfer     Management          (from effective
                                                                          close and fulfill
         the Debt Management        Office                   date)
                                                                          conditions precedent
         Office’s Corporate
         Office Building, Abuja




28
                                         GOVERNMENT               DURATION
   #             PROJECT                                                                     STATUS
                                           AGENCY                  (YEARS)
          Concession for the
          Design, Construct,
          Install, Operate and
          Maintain the Dadin
          Kowa Multi-purpose
                                       Federal Ministry                25
          Hydro Dam for the                                                          Under
  50                                   of Water                   (from July 4,
          purpose of Electricity                                                     implementation
                                       Resources                      2005)
          Generation with a
          capacity of 39 MW,
          Irrigation and Urban
          Water Supply –
          Gombe State
          Concession for the                                    First entered
          Rehabilitation,                                       into February
          Completion,                                           17, 2005;
          Management, and                                       Following
                                       Federal Ministry
          Operation of the                                      international
                                       of Solid Minerals
          National Iron Ore                                     settlement,
                                       Development;                                  Under
  51      Mining Company Ltd.,                                  entered into
                                       National Iron Ore                             implementation
          Including the Right to                                modified
                                       Mining Company
          Expand, Prospect,                                     concession
                                       Ltd.
          Explore, Excavate,                                    agreement;
          Extract, and Sell the                                 Commencemen
          Ore and Products                                      t date: August
          Therefrom                                             1, 2016

Note: See http://www.icrc.gov.ng/projects/projects-under-icrcs-custody/. FCT = Federal Capital Territory; FESTAC =
Festival of Arts and Culture; ICRC = Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission; MMA2 = Murtala Muhammed
Airport Terminal Two; MW = megawatts; PPP = Public-Private Partnerships; TCN = Transmission Company of Nigeria.




                                                                                                              29
4. Legal and Institutional Framework
   for PPPs
Procurement and Institutional Framework

The ICRC Act 2005 enables private sector participation in infrastructure or development
projects of the federal government. The Act also establishes ICRC as a regulatory body
that is mandated to issue general policy guidelines, rules, and regulations, ensuring efficient
execution of concession agreements and taking custody of all contracts. The Act defines
the high-level institutional framework through which PPPs are identified, prepared,
procured, and implemented in Nigeria. Key institutional actors in the project identification,
development, and procurement phases include the MDAs, ICRC, and Federal Executive
Council (FEC). In addition, a PPP Unit was established within the Technical Services
Department of the Federal Ministry of Finance (FMOF), which is mandated with the
responsibility to track, monitor, and manage contingent liabilities arising from PPPs.15
Apart from the ICRC Act, the Public Procurement Act (PPA) 2007 established the Bureau
of Public Procurement (BPP) as the regulatory authority responsible for monitoring and
oversight of public procurement, harmonizing the existing government policies and
practices by regulating, setting standards, and developing the legal framework and
professional capacity for public procurement in Nigeria. BPP issued regulations in 2007
that set out procedures for public procurement generally, and have a provision for certain
types of public procurement that are typically found in PPP arrangements (such as build,
own, and operate; build, operate, and transfer; build, own, operate, and transfer; and so
forth).16 Although these regulations suggest an overlap between the roles of ICRC and BPP
in the PPP procurement process, in practice BPP has remained aloof from the PPP
procurement process (except for the procurement of transaction advisors by MDAs, which
is carried out within the framework of the PPA), and refers any PPP proposals it receives
from MDAs to ICRC. In addition, the BPP also issued the second edition of the
Procurement Procedures Manual for Public Procurement in Nigeria in 2011. The manual
provides specific details of how any type of public procurement must be carried out by
MDAs (for example, procedures and timelines for bidding and evaluation processes).
However, in practice and within the current PPP process, this public procurement manual
applies only to the procurement of transaction advisors.




15 Circular from the office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation, dated September 10, 2013,
available at https://drive.google.com/file/d/0BzaBhwB6XxLWUWh2VU0wSXBqZTg/view.
16 Section 69, Public Procurement Regulations for Goods and Works, 2007, Bureau of Public Procurement,

Government of Nigeria.


30
In practice, PPP procurement in Nigeria broadly follows the process as delineated by ICRC
in a guideline document for solicited proposals.17 Each MDA or contracting authority
initiates its own PPP projects, taking into consideration the priorities set out in the National
Integrated Infrastructure Master Plan (NIIMP). The contracting authority conducts
preliminary project appraisals to identify viable projects, and prepares Project Concept
Notes for each proposed project in line with ICRC guidelines. The concept note provides
preliminary details on the proposed project including background, objectives, scope,
description, and recommendations. Following ICRC’s review and concurrence, the project
is included in the PPP Project Pipeline list which must be approved by the FEC. The
approved PPP Project pipeline is thereafter published in the print and other media (such as
the ICRC website). Currently, there are 77 such projects listed for 2016–17 (see table 2).
Once in the list, MDAs must put together a Project Delivery Team (which works on the
project on a day-to-day basis), and a Project Steering Committee (which provides high-
level guidance and approvals at various stages of the procurement process). The Project
Steering Committee includes a representative of ICRC. MDAs must then engage
transaction advisers within the framework of the PPA, and work with the transaction
advisors to develop an Outline Business Case (OBC), based on a template developed by
ICRC. Broadly, the OBC must establish the need for the project and its outline parameters
and scope, including costs and bankability demonstration. Elements that form a part of the
OBC typically include a public sector comparator and a value-for-money report.
Representatives from ICRC and FMOF may participate in key meetings of the Project
Delivery Team as observers, to ensure that the OBC development process remains in line
with the objectives of ICRC and FMOF.
The OBC is then sent to ICRC for review, and ICRC assesses each OBC on a case-by-case
basis (along with inputs from FMOF on contingent liability aspects). If satisfied, ICRC
issues an OBC Certificate of Compliance to the proposed project. MDAs must then submit
the OBC along with this certificate to FEC (the Cabinet of the federal government) through
the concerned line ministry for approval. Without the Certificate of Compliance for the
OBC (and later the Full Business Case (FBC)) from ICRC, the project cannot move
forward. If the project is approved by FEC, the MDA’s transaction advisors commence a
procurement process leading to a competitive bidding process from which a preferred PPP
project proponent (investor) emerges.
Pending the finalization of comprehensive guidelines and regulations for procurement /
bidding processes that ICRC is currently developing, transaction advisors have been setting
out a detailed procurement method in the OBC for competitive procurement of a PPP
proponent. (The OBC template shared by ICRC with MDAs does not contain any
guidelines for structuring the procurement process.) The procurement process that is
typically followed includes preparation of procurement documents by the transaction
advisors, and marketing the project to potential investors and other stakeholders through
road shows, followed by the issuance of a call for prequalification or expression of interest
in local and international media (except for unsolicited proposals). After prequalification,

17 See   https://drive.google.com/file/d/0BzaBhwB6XxLWc3JsUEVkVUFEajg/view?usp=sharing.


                                                                                             31
bidding documents are issued to prequalified bidders, including information memoranda
or other project specification documents. Bids are then received from prequalified bidders
before a specified submission deadline. The bids received are examined and evaluated by
an evaluation committee of the MDA (which is supported by the transaction advisors). This
committee selects the preferred and reserve bidders according to the criteria for selection
set out in the bidding documents.
Once the preferred bidder has been identified, negotiations ensue, leading to the
development of an FBC. The FBC is prepared by the MDA’s transaction advisors prior to
financial close and award of the contract. The FBC provides all the information that is
needed to support a decision to award a contract and commit actual funding, as well as to
provide a basis for the necessary project management, monitoring, evaluation, and benefits
realization. ICRC provides a template of the FBC to the concerned MDA, to support its
development. ICRC and FMOF participate in the negotiation process to provide technical
support to the MDA as well as ensure public interest.
The FBC must then be submitted to ICRC, which then reviews it (along with input from
FMOF on the contingent liability aspects). If the FBC is approved by ICRC, it issues an
FBC Certificate of Compliance to the concerned MDA, following which the MDA can
submit it to FEC for final approval. Once FEC approves the FBC, the contract between the
MDA and the preferred PPP project proponent is signed. ICRC thereafter takes custody of
the contract, as required under Section 20 of the ICRC Act. The project commences once
financial close is achieved. Concerned MDAs are required to supervise the project
diligently throughout its life cycle, and ICRC as well as the MDA are required to conduct
regular joint inspections until the end of the contract duration.
Overall, although ICRC and FMOF support and advise the concerned MDA throughout
the PPP procurement process, this is not done in an institutionalized or systematized way.
In practice, MDAs engage with and seek the support of ICRC and FMOF (often
independent of the other) at various stages of the process, and on a case-by-case basis.
In the case of unsolicited proposals, no guidelines or regulations currently exist. In practice,
MDAs directly receive unsolicited proposals, but still require approval from ICRC to
proceed with such projects. In these cases, ICRC typically recommends the concerned
MDA to initiate a “Swiss Challenge” process for procurement. However, no guidelines or
regulations have been issued so far that could systematize the process.
In sum, in the PPP process, MDAs are the project owners throughout the life cycle of the
project; ICRC plays the role of the pre- and post-contract regulatory authority (additionally
providing technical support at some stages); and FMOF ensures that government risks and
liabilities are kept to a minimum.
The process and institutional framework described above are summarized in tables 3 and
4, respectively.




32
TABLE 3: PROCESS FOR PPP PROCUREMENT IN NIGERIA
 NO                     INSTITUTION(S)                                             ACTIONS

                                          Project Identification Phase

                                                               Project identification and initiation;
   1     MDA                                                   Preparation and submission of Project
                                                               Concept Note to ICRC
                                                               MDA consults ICRC to ensure viability and
                                                               bankability of proposed projects; If project
                                                               considered viable, ICRC advises MDA to
   2     MDA and ICRC
                                                               initiate project development; MDA
                                                               constitutes Ministerial Project Steering
                                                               Committee and a Project Delivery Team.
                                                               ICRC includes project in the pipeline of
   3     ICRC and FEC
                                                               eligible projects for approval by FEC

                               Project Development and Preparation Phase

                                                               Where internal capacity is not available,
                                                               Transaction Advisors engaged by the MDA
   4     MDA
                                                               through a competitive bidding process to
                                                               produce the OBC
                                                               OBC reviewed by ICRC (with input from
   5     ICRC
                                                               FMOF); Certificate of Compliance issued
                                                               OBC and Certificate of Compliance
   6     ICRC and FEC
                                                               submitted to FEC for approval

                                              Procurement Phase

                                                               Procurement commences with a
                                                               competitive bidding process leading to
   7     MDA (through its transaction advisors)
                                                               identification of a preferred PPP project
                                                               proponent
                                                               After negotiations between the MDA and
                                                               the proponent, the FBC is submitted to and
   8     MDA, proponent, ICRC
                                                               reviewed by ICRC; Certificate of
                                                               Compliance issued
                                                               FBC and Certificate of Compliance
   9     MDA and FEC
                                                               submitted to FEC for approval
                                                               Contract signed between MDA and
  10     MDA, proponent and ICRC                               preferred PPP project proponent; ICRC
                                                               takes custody of the contract

                                            Implementation Phase

                                                               Financial close achieved; project
  11     Proponent and MDA
                                                               commences
                                                               MDA and ICRC supervise and monitor the
  12     MDA and ICRC
                                                               project throughout its life cycle

Source: ICRC.

Note: FBC = Full Business Case; FEC = Federal Executive Council; FMOF = Federal Ministry of Finance; ICRC =
Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission; MDA = ministry, department, or agency; OBC = Outline Business Case;
PPP = Public-Private Partnership.




                                                                                                                33
TABLE 4: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR PPPs IN NIGERIA
                                             NATURE OF INSTITUTION AND ROLE IN THE PPP
             INSTITUTION
                                                             PROCESS
                                         Initiates all PPP projects; conducts project appraisals,
                                         identifies possible projects, and prepares project briefs for
     MDA or contracting authorities      FMOF and ICRC; develops OBC and FBC; carries out the
                                         procurement process; and monitors progress and
                                         implementation.
                                         Evaluates and accepts project briefs, OBC, and FBC; issues
       Infrastructure Concession         regulations and guidelines, ensures efficient execution of
        Regulatory Commission            contracts, and takes custody of contract documents; and
                                         monitors progress and implementation.
                                         Evaluates project proposals; tracks, monitors, and manages
 Federal Ministry of Finance (PPP
                                         contingent liabilities arising from PPP projects; and provides
    Division of the Technical
                                         MDAs with technical support in negotiating financial aspects
      Services Department)
                                         of PPP transactions.
                                         Provides oversight in the procurement of the transaction
     Bureau of Public Procurement
                                         advisors by MDAs.
       Federal Executive Council         Evaluates and approves the OBC and FBC.

Note: FBC = Full Business Case; FMOF = Federal Ministry of Finance; ICRC = Infrastructure Concession Regulatory
Commission; MDAs = ministries, departments, and agencies; OBC = Outline Business Case; PPP = Public-Private
Partnership.



Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority (NSIA)

NSIA is a national agency that was set up by statute to manage Nigeria’s Sovereign Wealth
Fund. Statutorily, NSIA is set up to receive, manage, and invest in a diversified portfolio
of medium- and long-term revenues of the federal government, state government, Federal
Capital Territory, local governments, and area councils, to prepare for the eventual
depletion of Nigeria’s hydrocarbon resources.
NSIA’s operations are guided by the Santiago Principles. It has developed frameworks for
good corporate governance and risk management, and this has manifested in its early
attractiveness as a credible partner to leading private investors, private equity funds, and
development finance institutions.
The Nigeria Infrastructure Fund (NIF) is one of NSIA’s three investment mandates, which
focuses on investments in infrastructure. NIF is tasked with undertaking project
development for potential investments and recommending to the Board projects for
investment. By virtue of the NSIA Act and the NIF investment policy, NIF can take on the
role of an investor and/or developer and/or project sponsor in any type of infrastructure
project.
For PPPs, NSIA has so far been involved as an investor and a developer, where its
investment policy obliges it to partner with MDAs to develop infrastructure projects. Given
the nature of NSIA, such projects need to be financially viable, and must have development
impact. Currently, for public-to-public projects and PPPs, NSIA enters the process after
procurement (for example, where an MDA is seeking additional investment) or as the



34
project sponsor and developer. In the former case, NSIA does not directly bid for the
project, but it enters the process as an investor once the preferred bidder has already been
selected. To do so, NSIA must carry out its own due diligence before co-funding it through
an SPV, and subsequently participate in the negotiations prior to commercial and financial
close. In such projects, NSIA plays the role of an investor or project developer.
The latter case (where NSIA plays the role of project sponsor and developer) typically
takes place in sectors that have been deemed high-priority by the government. In such
instances, NSIA initiates the project and, together with the relevant MDA, carries out the
initial project appraisals and studies. NSIA and the MDA then sign a binding memorandum
of understanding (MOU) to develop the project together, and may invite private co-
developers to participate in the project. The project then follows the same process for
approvals and implementation as described in the previous section. In the end, the project
may or may not end up as a PPP, as the asset being developed is for the government.
For public-to-private projects, NSIA is empowered under the NSIA Act to enter into
transactions as a joint venture. NSIA can therefore receive unsolicited investment
proposals, which could be in an infrastructure priority sector, or fall within other sectors in
which NSIA seeks to invest. The NIF team then carries out a preliminary analysis of the
commercial viability of the project vis-à-vis its development objectives. If the management
approves, NSIA carries out due diligence on the project, and then presents it to the Board
for approval. In such cases, NSIA is an investor and a co-developer in the project, and
remains involved with it from the initial stages to its completion.
For other public-to-private investments, NSIA is merely an investor and not involved in
project development or sponsorship. For example, where it acquires stakes in companies
investing in infrastructure, it is not involved in the development of the projects, but has
equity in the company.
The activities that NSIA is currently carrying out through its three types of investments in
infrastructure development are summarized in table 5.




                                                                                            35
TABLE 5: NSIA ACTIVITIES, BY TYPE OF INVESTMENT
      TYPE OF INVESTMENT                                        NSIA ACTIVITIES
                                         Identify possible projects, prepare project briefs for the NSIA
                                         Management Board, initiate projects, conduct project
                                         appraisals, prepare due diligence studies, submit potential
                                         development projects to the committee set up by the
           NSIA-to-public
                                         National Economic Council, seek co-developers and
                                         investors, carry out procurement of advisors and
                                         consultants, sign MOUs with MDAs, develop projects, and
                                         monitor progress and implementation
                                         Evaluate project proposals, present to the Board for
                                         approval, sign MOUs, conduct preparatory due diligence,
           NSIA-to-private
                                         enter negotiations, disburse funds, enter into contracts, and
                                         monitor progress
                                         Conduct project appraisals, prepare due diligence studies,
                                         negotiate with preferred bidder as co-developer or investor,
            Regular PPPs                 form SPVs, seek other co-developers and investors, carry
                                         out procurement of advisors and consultants, develop
                                         projects, and monitor progress and implementation

Note: MDAs = ministries, departments, and agencies; MOU = memorandum of understanding; NSIA =Nigeria Sovereign
Investment Authority; PPP = Public-Private Partnership; SPV = special-purpose vehicle.




36
5. Legal and Policy Framework for PPP
   Disclosure
Current Framework

Several laws in Nigeria directly and indirectly impact PPP disclosure. The first major
legislation, the FOI Act of 2011, establishes the right of any person to request and receive
information that is in the custody or possession of any public official or institution. The
Act defines public institutions to include “all authorities whether executive, legislative or
judicial agencies, ministries, and extra ministerial departments of the government, together
with all corporations established by law and all companies in which government has a
controlling interest, and private companies utilizing public funds, providing public services
or performing public functions”.18 This definition therefore places the same level of
obligations for proactive and on-demand disclosure imposed on public bodies to every
private partner in a PPP contract with a public institution. The Act requires public entities
to proactively disclose “materials containing information relating to any grant or contract
made by or between the institution and another public institution or private organization,”
which brings PPPs directly within its ambit.
However, the Act has several limitations, and, as a result, it ranks 53 among 111 FOI laws
in the world.19 First, the main constraint of the Act relates to its implementation. Although
the Attorney General’s Office is mandated to oversee the implementation of the Act, the
office does not have any enforcement powers. Second, although the law provides for the
imposition of monetary fines where information that has been requested is not provided,
no administrative or penal sanction can be imposed against any institution or individual for
failing to disclose information proactively as required by the Act.
The only appeal mechanism available under the Nigerian FOI Act in the case of denial of
information is an action in court within 30 days of the denial.20 The law allows the court to
examine the information sought by the complainant, and places the burden of justification
on the institution that denies the information. Although a few citizens’ organizations
continue to use this process effectively,21 the cost and time required to undertake a court
action in Nigeria remains a huge constraint for any ordinary citizen. Civil society
organizations (CSOs) point to the tendency for public institutions to appeal high court
rulings, therefore imposing even higher costs and delays on requesters in a context where
most citizens cannot afford such litigation.




18 Section   2 (7) of the FOI Act 2011.
19 See http://www.rti-rating.org/country-data/.
20 Section   20 of the FOI Act 2011.
21 Details   of such cases are available at http://www.r2knigeria.org/index.php/foicasetracker.


                                                                                                  37
The AGF issued implementation guidelines in 2013, which identify the following three
categories of information that all public authorities should proactively disclose. All these
categories of information have a direct or indirect bearing on PPP disclosure, especially
given the inclusion of private companies providing public services under the FOI Act.
     i.   Information about the institution’s functions and responsibilities, and its
          organogram;
  ii.     Lists and enumeration of records held by the institution, including manuals,
          guidelines, and other documents used in performing its functions, as well as lists
          of files that contain applications for contracts, permits, licenses, and agreements
          with other public or private parties; and
 iii.     Information relating to the income and expenditure of the institution; its final
          planning policies, recommendations, and decisions; factual reports, inspection
          reports, studies, and other publications undertaken by the institution directly or
          done on its behalf by others contracted by it; and statements and interpretation of
          policies that have been adopted by the institution.
These guidelines make it very clear that information related to all stages of the PPP
procurement process is included in the list of information to be proactively disclosed. This
would include feasibility reports and studies, as well as the OBC, procurement-related
documents, and FBC documents. Similarly, information related to decisions and
recommendations of the implementing agency, ICRC, and the Federal Executive Council
on PPPs would need to be proactively disclosed as per these guidelines.
The FOI Act 2011 also provides a regime of exceptions to publicly held information that
can be disclosed to any persons pursuant to a request. From the perspective of PPPs,
Section 15(1) of the FOI Act exempts trade secrets and commercial or financial information
obtained from a person or business that are proprietary, privileged, or confidential, or
where such disclosure would cause harm to the interest of a third party. However, this
exemption is subject to a public interest consideration, where the public institution must
evaluate and weigh the wider public interest benefits of disclosure against the harm that
might be caused. At the same time, two types of information are not subject to the public
interest consideration; they are to be considered completely exempt under all
circumstances, and may have a bearing on certain specific PPP projects. These include the
results or products of environmental testing carried out by or on behalf of a public
institution, and information that contains course or research materials prepared by any
research faculty.
The second major legislation that has a direct impact on PPP disclosure is the ICRC Act
2005. With transparency stated as one of ICRC’s core values, it requires that the selection
of PPP partners by government agencies should be through open competitive bidding. This
imposes an obligation on implementing agencies to advertise calls for private participation
and implement a competitive bidding system. Inherent in this obligation is the requirement
for a simultaneous distribution of information on the scope of the project, expected
deliverables, conditions for qualification, and criteria for selection. By virtue of its
regulatory role, ICRC has clear disclosure obligations, as it creates PPP-related information


38
and records, makes recommendations for approvals, and provides guidance to public
institutions in the process. Sections 34(1) and 34(2) of the ICRC Act also empower ICRC
to issue regulations with the approval of the President, and to issue guidelines to give full
effect to the provisions of the Act. In addition, the ICRC Charter, March 18, 2013, states
the mission of ICRC as “issuing PPP regulations and guidelines that promote transparency,
competition and value for money while ensuring compliance”.
In consonance with this mandate and its charter, ICRC has recently released guidelines for
PPP contract disclosure.22 The document includes clear and concise guidance for
systematic disclosure of PPP project and contract information, formats for presentation of
PPP contract information, guidelines to ensure clarity of information to be disclosed and
timelines for disclosure, and validation of information prior to disclosure. The guidelines
also identify which information must be disclosed, including performance indicators and
abatements or penalties for events of failure, information on actual performance against
agreed levels, and information on contract variations. However, these guidelines do not
extend to disclosure in the pre-contract phase of the PPP process.
The Fiscal Responsibility Act 2007 requires the Federal Government of Nigeria to ensure
that its fiscal and financial affairs are conducted in a transparent manner. It further provides
for full and timely disclosure and wide publication of all transactions and decisions
involving public revenues and expenditures, and their implications for government
finances.23
The NEITI Act 2007 creates a framework for transparency and accountability in reporting
and disclosure, by all extractive industry companies, of revenue due or paid to the
Government of Nigeria. The Act focuses primarily on ensuring transparency in extractive
industry payments and receipts by government, and in the utilization of receipts by the
government.
The PPA 2007 establishes a new regulatory framework for public procurement, which
includes provisions related to public access to information, including public advertising of
national and international competitive bids. In addition, the Act’s requirement for the use
of standard bidding documents has ensured improved disclosure of information, such as
conditions for qualification; technical specifications of goods, works, and services to be
procured; and the criteria for the selection of winning bids and bidders. This framework
directly impacts and requires publication of PPP procurement-related information and
documents.
For NSIA, Section 4(2)(d) of the NSIA Act 2011 states that NSIA must “implement best
practices with respect to management independence and accountability, corporate
governance, transparency and reporting on performance as provided in this act, including
with due regard as appropriate for the Santiago Principles”, which obliges NSIA to disclose
proactively several broad categories of information related to its governance and

22 Developed  with the support of the World Bank Institute, the guidelines took into consideration the FOI Act
2011, Public Procurement Act 2007, and ICRC Act 2005, as well as PPP contract disclosure guidelines from
11 other jurisdictions. The document is available at: http://www.icrc.gov.ng/services/contracts-disclosure-
document/.
23 Section 48 of the Fiscal Responsibility Act 2007.




                                                                                                           39
investments. More specifically, Section 37 of the NSIA Act provides the reporting
obligations of NSIA to the government as well as to the public, in the form of submission
and publication of its annual reports.
A summary of the relevant clauses of existing laws and their potential implications for PPP
disclosure is provided in table 6.


TABLE 6: LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR DISCLOSURE AND IMPLICATIONS
FOR PPP DISCLOSURE
                                                                   IMPLICATIONS FOR PPP
      SECTION              TEXT DESCRIPTION
                                                                        DISCLOSURE
                                 Freedom of Information Act 2011
                    MDA Public institutions to               Places proactive disclosure obligations
  SECTION 2(4)
                    proactively publish information.         on all public institutions.
                    Public institutions to proactively
                    publish “materials containing
                    information relating to any grant or     This can be extended to all project
  SECTION 2(4)
                    contract made by or between the          documents related to PPP projects.
                    institution and another public
                    institution or private organization.”
                    Public institutions are defined as
                    “all authorities whether executive,
                    legislative or judicial agencies,
                    ministries, and extra ministerial        This definition clearly incorporates
                    departments of the government,           PPP SPVs and project proponents,
                    together with all corporations           as well as ICRC, NSIA, and line
  SECTION 2(7)
                    established by law and all               ministries and agencies, all of which
                    companies in which government            hold project-related information on
                    has a controlling interest, and          various PPPs.
                    private companies utilizing public
                    funds, providing public services or
                    performing public functions.”
                                                             Access to be granted where public
                                                             interest in disclosing information
     SECTIONS
                    Public interest override.                outweighs whatever injury that
     12(2), 14(3)
                                                             disclosure would cause, which is likely
                                                             to apply to PPP information requests.
                    Exemptions to disclosure of trade
                    secrets, commercial information, or
                                                             This clause could be used to exempt
                    financial information obtained from
 SECTION 15(1)                                               portions of bid documents, evaluation
                    a person or business that is
                                                             reports, and contracts from disclosure.
                    proprietary, privileged, or
                    confidential.
                    Unqualified exemption to any part
                    of a record that contains the result
                                                             In cases where PPP projects involve
                    or product of environmental testing
                                                             environmental testing and/or other
 SECTION 15(2)      carried out by or on behalf of a
                                                             research, this blanket exemption could
                    public institution, and to information
                                                             be invoked.
                    that contains course or research
                    materials prepared by faculty.
                    Reporting obligations of public          PPPs must also fulfill these
     SECTION 29
                    institutions                             obligations.




40
                                                                IMPLICATIONS FOR PPP
  SECTION              TEXT DESCRIPTION
                                                                     DISCLOSURE
                Attorney General’s Guidelines on FOI Implementation 2013
                Public institutions to publish
                                                          Places obligation on MDAs and PPPs
SECTION 1.4.2   information about their functions,
                                                          to disclose this information proactively.
                responsibilities, and organogram.
                Public institutions to publish lists of
                records held; manuals, guidelines,
                and other documents used in
                performing their functions; lists of
                files containing applications for
                                                          Places obligation on MDAs and PPPs
SECTION 1.4.2   contracts, permits, licenses, and
                                                          to disclose this information proactively.
                agreements with other public or
                private parties; and study reports
                and other publications of the
                institution, even if prepared by
                private contractors.
                Public institutions to publish
                substantive rules; information
                relating to the income and
                expenditure of the institution; final
                planning policies,
                recommendations, and decisions of         Disclosure obligations can therefore be
                the institution; factual reports,         extended to information related to PPP
SECTION 1.4.2
                inspection reports, studies, and          projects held by MDAs, ICRC, and
                other publications undertaken by          NSIA.
                the institution directly or done on its
                behalf by others contracted by it;
                and statements and interpretations
                of policies that have been adopted
                by the institution.
                                                          Obliges public authorities to provide a
                                                          specific rationale within the scope of
                Provides guidelines for refusing          the FOI Act when refusing information.
 CHAPTER 2
                information.                              In the context of PPPs, this could
                                                          relate to exemption clauses listed in
                                                          the FOI Act.
                Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission Act 2005
                Requires ICRC to publish the list of
                projects qualified to be undertaken
SECTION 2(4)    through the PPP model in the              As stated.
                Gazette and three national
                newspapers.
                Requires that selection of PPP
                                                          Obliges MDAs to disclose basic project
                partners by government agencies
SECTION 4(1)                                              information, conditions for qualification,
                should be through open
                                                          criteria for selection, and so forth.
                competitive bidding.
                               Fiscal Responsibility Act 2007
                Provides for full and timely              Obligation extends to MDAs, ICRC,
                disclosure and wide publication of        and NSIA, as these are public
                all transactions and decisions            institutions, and covers PPPs, as these
 SECTION 48
                involving public revenues and             have implications for government
                expenditures, and the implications        finances and involve public revenues
                for government finances.                  directly or indirectly in most instances.




                                                                                                  41
                                                                 IMPLICATIONS FOR PPP
     SECTION              TEXT DESCRIPTION
                                                                      DISCLOSURE
                  Nigeria Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Act 2007
                   Requires disclosure of revenue due
                   or paid to the Government of            Extends to MDAs or PPPs in the
 SECTION 2(A)
                   Nigeria by all extractive industry      extractive industries.
                   companies.
                   Requires NEITI to develop a
                   framework for transparency and
                   accountability in reporting and
   SECTIONS                                                The annual extractive industry audit
                   disclosure by all extractive
 3(A), 3(C) AND                                            framework applies to MDAs and PPP
                   industries for payments made by
       3(H)                                                projects in the extractive sector.
                   and due to the federal government,
                   and to disseminate such
                   information publicly.
                                  Public Procurement Act 2007
                                                           This would extend to PPPs, especially
                                                           given that the PPA mentions or covers
                                                           several types of PPP projects. In
                   Obliges the procurement regulatory      addition, since ICRC has not issued
                   body to publish details of all major    separate guidelines or processes, by
 SECTION 5(F)
                   contracts in the procurement            default PPA would apply, as it does in
                   journal.                                similar situations in other countries.
                                                           Currently, this is being used for hiring
                                                           transaction advisors for PPP projects
                                                           by MDAs.
                                                           This would extend to PPPs, especially
                   Requires public institutions to use
                                                           given that PPA mentions or covers
                   standard bidding documents issued
                                                           several types of PPP projects. In
                   by the Bureau of Public
                                                           addition, since ICRC has not issued
                   Procurement, which includes
                                                           separate guidelines or processes, by
 SECTION 5(M)      conditions for qualification;
                                                           default PPA would apply, as it does in
                   technical specifications of goods,
                                                           similar situations in other countries.
                   works, and services to be procured;
                                                           Currently, this is being used for hiring
                   and criteria for selection of winning
                                                           transaction advisors for PPP projects
                   bids and bidders.
                                                           by MDAs.
                                                           This would extend to PPPs, especially
                                                           given that PPA mentions or covers
                   Requires unclassified public
                                                           several types of PPP projects. In
                   procurement records to be
                                                           addition, since ICRC has not issued
                   disclosed on request, and records
  SECTIONS                                                 separate guidelines or processes, by
                   of procurement processes to be
 18(14) AND 38                                             default PPA would apply, as it does in
                   disclosed after a winner is selected
                                                           similar situations in other countries.
                   or if the process is terminated
                                                           Currently, this is being used for hiring
                   without a winner.
                                                           transaction advisors for PPP projects
                                                           by MDAs.




42
                                                                            IMPLICATIONS FOR PPP
     SECTION                    TEXT DESCRIPTION
                                                                                 DISCLOSURE

                                                                    This would extend to PPPs, especially
                                                                    given that PPA mentions or covers
                         Requires open competitive bidding
                                                                    several types of PPP projects. In
                         as the primary method of
                                                                    addition, since ICRC has not issued
                         procurement, and mandates
  SECTIONS 24                                                       separate guidelines or processes, by
                         compulsory publication in national
    AND 25                                                          default PPA would apply, as it does in
                         media for national competitive
                                                                    similar situations in other countries.
                         bidding and international media for
                                                                    Currently, this is being used for hiring
                         international competitive bidding.
                                                                    transaction advisors for PPP projects
                                                                    by MDAs.

Note: FOI = Freedom of Information; ICRC = Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission; MDAs = ministries,
departments, and agencies; NEITI = Nigeria Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative; NSIA = Nigeria Sovereign
Investment Authority; PPA = Public Procurement Act; PPP = Public-Private Partnership; SPV = special-purpose vehicle.



Emerging Jurisprudence

Jurisprudence specific to PPP disclosure is in its infancy in Nigeria. So far, there have not
been any appeal court or apex court decisions specific to PPP disclosure. However, some
High Court decisions that relate directly or tangentially to PPP disclosure have been made.
In an application for disclosure of PPP-related documents related to a “Park and Pay
Scheme” granted by the Federal Capital Territory (FCT) Administration to private parties,
the court held that the public authority, having failed to formally communicate a denial,
notice for extension of time, or transfer of request to another department in accordance
with Section 6 of the FOI Act, was liable to disclose the information requested. It also held
that the public authority failed to discharge its duty to prove that the information sought
contained any trade secrets, proprietary, and/or privileged or confidential information
exempted under Section 15 of the Act, or that the disclosure of the requested information
would cause harm to the interest of any third party.24
In another case, the Abuja Federal High Court ordered a private company that had been
granted operational rights under a “Park and Pay Scheme” by the FCT Administration to
release information on: (a) how much the company had realized from the inception of its
engagement by FCT until date of judgement; (b) how much the company had remitted to
the FCT Administration; and (c) certified accounts of the company showing the monies
realized, as well as a certified copy of the PPP contract of the engagement.25
In a third case, the Federal High Court held that by executing a contract for reconstruction
and maintenance of the Ibadan Highway, the private party involved (the respondent in the
case) was performing a public function, and was therefore bound to disclose information
under the FOI law as any public authority. However, the court also held that the information
sought would prejudice the respondent and embarrass third parties, and was therefore


24 Suit   N0 FCT/HC/CV/M/3057/13; PPDC vs. Hon Minister of FCT.
25 Motion   N0; M/3059/13; Public and Private Development Centre vs. Integrated Parking Services Ltd.


                                                                                                                43
exempt from disclosure under Sections 15 (a) and (b) of the FOI Act.26 This decision was
not appealed.
Only a few cases related to PPP disclosure have been brought to the courts so far. The body
of jurisprudence remains too small to be able to ascertain the direction the courts appear to
be taking on this issue. As this body of cases builds up over time, it is likely to have a
critical impact on the trajectory that PPP disclosure will take in Nigeria, legally, as well in
improving public awareness on this subject.




26 FCT/HC/M/3829/2014;   Public and Private Development Centre (PPDC) vs. Julius Berger Nigeria Plc.


44
6. Disclosure in Practice and Key
   Challenges
Overview

Public disclosure of information had been limited until the establishment of the Nigeria
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Act 2007, which resulted in the publication
of several audit reports related to the extractive industries. Gradually, more information on
private investment in infrastructure and other development projects in Nigeria is beginning
to appear in the public domain. However, progress on proactive PPP disclosure remains
slow and faces major challenges.
ICRC is the main repository of information of Federal PPP projects in the country.27 ICRC
regularly publishes news and general information on its website, on PPP activities,
workshops, events, and basic information on legacy, ongoing, and under-consideration
PPPs. However, the information provided is limited to the project title and type,
government agency responsible, name of the private concessionaire (where selected), and
duration of the concession for the projects. There are no further documents or project
details. Annual reports and statements of accounts, national PPP policy, and contract
disclosure standards and guidelines are other documents that are available on the ICRC
website. Most recently, ICRC has begun to place project summaries of the projects under
its custody on its website.28
Another source of PPP information is through occasional press releases by MDAs in
implementing their PPP programs.29 In some instances, MDA websites may convey
information related to PPPs being undertaken by them. However, this information or
process of disclosure is neither detailed nor structured. For example, the Nigeria Ports
Authority website provides the names and lease terms of the terminal operators that have
been granted concessions, the names of its joint venture programs, and a list of upcoming
greenfield projects. Some of this information is also available on the ICRC website.
Cognizant of these limitations, ICRC has been making efforts to improve PPP disclosure
in Nigeria. Several consultation meetings have been held, and a consensus has been
developed around the need to establish PPP disclosure standards. Consequently, ICRC has
developed a draft technical guidance note on project and contract information disclosure
in PPPs.30 The document provides templates that identify which elements of information


27 While it does not play a similar role in state PPPs, it has a close working relationship with state level PPP
Units and keeps abreast of PPP activity in states.
28 See http://www.icrc.gov.ng/services/contracts-disclosure-document/.
29 For example, a press release from the National Inland Waterways Authority, which provides details of

progress in awarding concessions for four river ports, is available at http://niwa.gov.ng/niwa-moves-
concession-four-river-ports/.
30 See http://www.icrc.gov.ng/services/contracts-disclosure-document/.




                                                                                                            45
should be disclosed, at what point in the PPP life cycle, using which media, and the process
to do so.
The current practices related to PPP disclosure are summarized in table 7.


TABLE 7: CURRENT PPP DISCLOSURE PRACTICES
                                                                                       PUBLISHED ON
                                                    PUBLISHED ON ICRC
  DOCUMENT/INFORMATION                                                                 RELEVANT MDA
                                                         WEBSITE
                                                                                         WEBSITE

  Basic project information                                    Yes                       In some cases
  Project appraisal report                                     No                               No
  Outline Business Case                                        No                               No
  ICRC/FEC reports at Outline Business
                                                               No                               No
  Case stage
  Full business case                                           No                               No
  ICRC/FEC reports at Full Business
                                                               No                               No
  Case stage
  Name of successful bidder                                    Yes                       In some cases
  Contract documents                                           No                               No
  Performance reports                                          No                               No

Note: FEC = Federal Executive Council; ICRC = Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission; PPP = Public-Private
Partnership.

A comparison of the World Bank Framework for disclosure, current PPP disclosure
practices in Nigeria, and the proposed disclosure framework for Nigeria is provided in
annex E.
NSIA is a statutory government agency. It publishes its annual audited reports,31
investment policies, and primary project development documents as scoping32 and
environmental impact reports of its PPP projects. Although NSIA is a relatively new
institution, it has supported the initiation of a few PPP projects, which are at their early
stages. NSIA is also already disclosing partial information arising from the PPPs in which
it is engaged,33 and aims to strengthen its transparency processes by introducing disclosures
in a structured and consistent manner. NSIA subscribes to the Santiago Principles, which
lay a great deal of emphasis on proactive disclosure of several categories of information.

31 Annual  reports include information such as the aggregated and consolidated information on its investment
returns, including risk management; statement of financial position; statement of changes in equity;
consolidated and separate financial statements; NIF’s statement of comprehensive income; statement of
financial position; list of approved hedge fund managers; highlights of NIF’s investment activities across
sectors; MOUs signed and names of parties signed; brief descriptions of projects; and project milestones and
expected dates.
32 Scoping reports typically include the project description, legislative requirements, purpose of the report,

roles and responsibilities, detailed description of the project, project need and desirability, project
components, construction activities, operational activities, process for conducting environment and social
impact assessment, stakeholder engagement, stakeholder database, name and address of independent
engineer, issues and impacts, methodologies for assessing impacts, mitigation measures, and timelines.
33 See http://nsia.com.ng/downloads/.




46
NSIA receives regular requests for information from the National Assembly and its
committees, and has been summoned several times for questioning at the National
Assembly. However, NSIA has yet to receive any citizen’s request for information.
The NSIA website achieves a better level of disclosure on its PPP investments compared
with other public agencies. Its website provides a wealth of information on its activities
and investments. This information includes a summary on all its funds; all its annual
reports; investment policy documents, where applicable; and regular news on investment
agreements it has entered. More specifically, NSIA has disclosed the Scoping Report for
the Second Niger Bridge PPP Project, in which NSIA is one of the consortium partners.
Although NSIA does not have a formal disclosure policy yet, its outlook for project and
investment disclosure is ambitious. The history of PPPs in NSIA is very recent, and its first
major direct PPP project engagement is the Second Niger Bridge project. NSIA has already
provided detailed scoping reports as well as the environment and social impact reports of
the Second Niger Bridge PPP project (in which it is an investor) on its website, despite the
project not having achieved commercial close yet. With clear support from the
management for disclosure and accountability, PPP disclosure at NSIA has a promising
outlook when compared with other agencies and ministries.
At the same time, NSIA makes three types of investments, each of which poses different
challenges in the context of disclosure. The first type of investment, public-to-public
projects, potentially allows maximum levels of disclosure, as the parties involved as well
as the project being developed are public in nature. The second type of investment, public-
to-private, would need to be treated somewhat differently, as for the purpose of assessing
business opportunities, or to monitor and evaluate existing investments, NSIA receives
information from other parties that is not publicly available. In such cases, NSIA would
need to respect the confidentiality of such information and public-private investment
disclosure will depend on the level of disclosure permitted by NSIA’s counterparties and
the nature of the project. The third type of investment would involve regular PPP projects
in which NSIA plays the role of an investor and/or is part of the SPV. In such cases, NSIA
would need to consider the larger framework for PPP disclosure, which is being developed
at the national level through ICRC. NSIA’s current disclosure practices, by type of
investment, are summarized in table 8.




                                                                                          47
TABLE 8: NSIA’S CURRENT DISCLOSURE PRACTICES, BY TYPE OF
INVESTMENT

  TYPE OF INVESTMENT                  INFORMATION DISCLOSED                      EXAMPLES (IF ANY)

                                                                            NSIA, Federal Ministry of
                                      Highlights of NIF’s investment        Agriculture and Rural
                                      activities across sectors;            Development, and KfW
                                      MOUs signed and names of              funded Agricultural Finance
  NSIA-to-Public                      parties signed; brief                 Fund Project; NSIA and
                                      description of projects; project      Federal Ministry of Health:
                                      milestones and expected               Diagnostic Centers and
                                      dates                                 Specialist Healthcare
                                                                            Facilities Project
                                      Statement of financial
                                      position; statement of
                                      changes in equity;
                                      consolidated and separate
                                                                            Consolidated across various
  NSIA-to-Private                     financial statements; NIF’s
                                                                            partnerships and investments
                                      statement of comprehensive
                                      income; statement of financial
                                      position; and list of approved
                                      hedge fund managers
                                      Infrastructure reports,
                                      including: scoping report,
                                      name and address of
                                      independent engineer, project
                                      description, legislative
                                      requirements for project
                                      development, purpose of the
                                      report, roles, detailed
                                      description of the project,
                                                                            NSIA, Julius Berger and
                                      project need and desirability,
                                                                            Federal Ministry of Works
  Regular PPPs                        project components,
                                                                            PPP for developing the
                                      construction activities,
                                                                            Second Niger Bridge
                                      operational activities, process
                                      for conducting environment
                                      and social impact
                                      assessment, stakeholder
                                      engagement, stakeholder
                                      database, issues and impacts,
                                      methodologies for assessing
                                      impacts, mitigation measures,
                                      and timelines

Note: KfW = Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau; MOU = memorandum of understanding; NIF = Nigeria Infrastructure Fund;
NSIA = Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority; PPP = Public-Private Partnership.

A comparison of the World Bank Framework for Disclosure, current disclosure practices
in NSIA, and the proposed disclosure framework for NSIA is provided in annex F.




48
Key Challenges

Lack of Implementation of and Compliance with the FOI Act
The FOI Act 2011 provides several avenues through which PPP disclosure can be realized.
However, the implementation of the Act has been limited. Most government institutions
have not developed internal policies, rules, and mechanisms to evaluate efficiently and
grant or refuse requests for information, or ensure proactive disclosure, as required by the
FOI Act. In addition, the government has yet to revise extant civil service rules and
financial instructions to bring them in compliance with the provisions of the FOI law. This
is a major gap, given that these are operational rules on which public servants rely on a
daily basis. As a result, a culture of secrecy pervades the bureaucracy, and most MDAs
have neither dedicated officers to handle requests nor adequate budget allocations targeting
FOI issues. They also lack adequate record management systems that could support easy
retrieval. Although the AGF’s Office has issued comprehensive guidelines to implement
the FOI Act, the law does not provide enforcement powers, which has resulted in very low
levels of compliance with the Act or the guidelines. According to a recent report, only
about 44 of more than 800 budget receiving agencies and departments submitted
compliance reports to AGF in 2015, and an evaluation of the websites of 43 of these
institutions shows a below average compliance level.34


Regulations and Guidelines
A key challenge in improving disclosure practices for PPPs in Nigeria and NSIA remains
that of developing and implementing detailed and comprehensive regulations and
guidelines for each step in the PPP process. Although ICRC has developed broad
guidelines for the PPP process, detailed guidelines, for example, of the actual procurement
process are currently under development and need to be finalized and implemented as a
matter of priority. Without standardized processes in place, it is difficult to implement a
consistent system to disclose information at specific times, especially during the pre-
contract phase. For NSIA as well, the lack of a formal disclosure policy that identifies
which information is to be disclosed at what point in different types of investment scenarios
makes systemic disclosure a challenge to implement.


Institutional Constraints
Improvements in proactive disclosure of PPP information have been slow, partly because
the MDAs that implement PPPs have no mechanisms to implement systemic disclosures.
In addition, nongovernmental stakeholders’ demand for improved PPP disclosure has not
been organized, coordinated, or consistent.




34 See http://www.dailytrust.com.ng/news/editorial/non-compliance-with-foi-act/165963.html.




                                                                                              49
Lack of Awareness about the PPP Process
Although Nigeria has a vibrant media and committed CSOs, it appears that their
understanding of the PPP process remains limited. Often, regular procurement is confused
with PPP procurement, with the result that all public contracting is painted with the same
brush, especially in the context of transparency and accountability. Although questioning
the government is a critical responsibility of these actors, it is imperative that the
government educates the public and those acting in the public interest about the specificity
of the PPP process and how it is fundamentally different from other procurement processes.
This knowledge will likely result in recognition that the approach and tools used to improve
the transparency of public authorities are not necessarily the most appropriate in the context
of PPPs. It will also lead to less confrontation and improved public trust in PPPs in the
longer term.




50
7. Gap Assessment
TABLE 9: GAP ASSESSMENT

COMPONENT           RAPID REVIEW                Y/N           GAP ASSESSMENT
            Clear support from the highest      Y     There is internal support. There is
            levels of government (national            agreement among external
            and subnational) to disclosure            stakeholders as well on the need to
            in general                                disclose, but the pressure on
            Agreement on PPP disclosure               government to disclose by external
                                                Y     stakeholders is still developing.
            among internal stakeholders
            (ministries, agencies, and                NSIA specifically has high-level
            subnational governments)                  support to improve and systematize
POLITICAL                                             disclosure.
ECONOMY     Sufficient agreement on the
            need to disclose and pressure             However, there is no approved plan
            to disclose among important         Y     within government or NSIA for
            external stakeholders (political          implementing disclosure
            parties, unions, private sector,          systematically.
            users, media, political                   Therefore, the political economy gap
            commentators, think tanks, civil          is assessed to be moderate.
            society organizations, and
            others)
            Are there laws, policies, and             There is coverage of contracts or
            procedures in place that include          PPP as well as proactive disclosure
            the following?                            in the FOI, ICRC, Fiscal
            •    Proactive disclosure by        Y     Responsibility, and Public
            governments or agencies                   Procurement Acts. A high-level
                                                      definition of confidential information
            •    Coverage of proactive          Y     is present in the FOI Act. However,
            disclosure relating to contracts          the main limitation of the FOI Act is
            or PPP                                    the absence of an independent
            •    High-level definition of       Y     appellate and/or oversight entity that
            confidential information, and             is empowered to ensure its
            protection for sensitive contract         implementation (through sanctions
            information                               for noncompliance, for example). As
            •    Timelines for disclosure       N     a result, there is no institutional
LAW                                                   structure with roles, responsibilities,
            •    Significant legislative or     Y
                                                      and timelines to monitor compliance
            policy impediments or
                                                      of public institutions with the
            constraints to PPP disclosure
                                                      disclosure requirements in the FOI
                                                      Act. This situation has been
                                                      compounded by the lack of clear
                                                      regulations for the implementation of
                                                      the FOI Act. Although the ICRC Act
                                                      does not contain details on
                                                      disclosure, the law enables ICRC to
                                                      issue regulations and guidelines for
                                                      effective contract execution.
                                                      Therefore, the legislative gap is
                                                      assessed to be moderate.




                                                                                           51
 COMPONENT            RAPID REVIEW                 Y/N        GAP ASSESSMENT
             Clearly established roles and         N
             responsibilities on PPP disclosure
             Processes and actions clearly
             established in guidance or internal   N
             orders
             Timelines for disclosure clearly            This gap is assessed to be
             established                           N     wide, given the absence of
                                                         guidance for all these features.
             Clear guidance available for
                                                         The ICRC guidelines on
             officials on the identification and   N
                                                         disclosure of information in
             treatment of confidential
                                                         PPPs provide for post-
             information, including the
                                                         procurement disclosure, but do
             timeframe associated with
GUIDANCE                                                 not deal with disclosure prior to
             confidentiality, and factors to be
                                                         commercial close. Although
             considered as a test of
                                                         NSIA has been proactively
             commercial sensitivity or public
                                                         disclosing many categories of
             interest
                                                         information, this has been done
             Penalties associated with failure           on an ad hoc basis, and it has
             to disclose                           N
                                                         not developed any guidelines
             Mechanisms that monitor                     related to disclosure so far.
             implementation of disclosure          N
             policies, internal and external
             Processes for checking the
             accuracy of information and           N
             validation, internal and external
             Degree of consistent, structured,     N
             and exploitable information
             disclosed across projects
             Defined common open data
             model or pattern                      N
             Guidance on improving data
             collection and data quality           N
             Simple and extensible structure             There is a template for post-
             Summary records for all available     N     procurement disclosure issued
             data at various stages and                  as a part of ICRC’s PPP
DATA,        processes                                   disclosure guidelines; however,
TEMPLATE,    Information on unit and staff               the template does not extend to
AND                                                N     disclosure prior to commercial
             managing data standards
STANDARD                                                 close. There are no standard
CONTRACT     Comprehensive and clear                     contractual provisions or data
PROVISIONS   template for disclosure that                standards. The situation is
             covers key pieces of pre- and         N
                                                         similar for NSIA. The gap is
             post-procurement information,               assessed to be moderate in this
             including financial and                     area.
             performance information
             • The template is flexible enough
             to cater to different kinds of PPPs
             and to PPPs in different sectors.
             • The template is dynamic, that is,
             suited to ongoing financial and
             performance disclosure.




52
 COMPONENT                         RAPID REVIEW                      Y/N            GAP ASSESSMENT
                        • Instructions for filling the                       There is a template for post-
                        template included as required.                       procurement disclosure issued
                        There are standard contract                          as a part of ICRC’s PPP
                        provisions that provide the                   N      disclosure guidelines; however,
                        following:                                           the template does not extend to
                                                                             disclosure prior to commercial
                        • Specific language for                              close. There are no standard
 DATA,                  confidential information                             contractual provisions or data
 TEMPLATE,              • Specified period for which the                     standards. The situation is
 AND                    information will be confidential                     similar for NSIA. The gap is
 STANDARD               • Format for listing the specific                    assessed to be moderate in this
 CONTRACT               confidentiality clauses of each                      area.
 PROVISIONS             contract
                        • Clearly stated information that
                        the private provider is expected to
                        maintain along with timelines for
                        submission
                        • Specified audit mandate with the
                        extent of disclosure to audit
                        Budget is available                           N      ICRC and NSIA have web-
                        Skilled, trained labor is available           Y      based platforms that could be
                                                                             used for disclosure, but they
                        Technology and web platform(s)                       lack many desired features.
                        compatible with easy upload and               N
                                                                             Skilled labor is available, but
                        download of information                              the ICRC and NSIA staff
                        Security systems to prevent data              Y      appear to be stretched. The
                        and information tampering                            communications team at ICRC
 RESOURCES                                                                   is currently maintaining the
                                                                             website and can continue to
                                                                             handle disclosure under a new
                                                                             policy, but further training of
                                                                             relevant staff for managing a
                                                                             more sophisticated web portal
                                                                             would be required in ICRC and
                                                                             NSIA. The gap here is
                                                                             assessed to be moderate.

Note: FOI = Freedom of Information; ICRC = Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission; NSIA = Nigeria Sovereign
Investment Authority; PPP = Public-Private Partnership.




                                                                                                                53
8. Recommendations
The direct and urgent factors that appear to induce governments to disclose, that is, the
wider government policy on transparency and whether there is supportive legislation, have
been achieved to an extent in Nigeria with the enactment of the FOI, ICRC, Fiscal
Responsibility Act, and public procurement legislation. Government policy promotes
transparency; however, there is relatively little disclosure in practice. In addition, whatever
disclosure happens is often unstructured and scattered on various websites, due to the lack
of an institutional process and clearly delineated roles and responsibilities related to
disclosure. Drafting specific clauses related to PPP disclosure in the FOI Act, strengthening
the disclosure clauses of the ICRC Act, and creating an institutional framework for
disclosure and embedding this into practice through standard contractual clauses and a
dedicated web portal could go a long way in ensuring greater disclosure in practice.
The World Bank’s Framework for Disclosure in PPPs recommends a six-layer design
(figure 3).


FIGURE 3: ELEMENTS OF THE WORLD BANK RECOMMENDED
DISCLOSURE FRAMEWORK FOR PPPs




Note: FOI = Freedom of Information; PPP = Public-Private Partnership; RFP = request for proposal.



The framework design is based on the key drivers of disclosure, major factors influencing
the drivers, challenges and benefits associated with disclosure, and uses and various
categories of users of information once it is disclosed. Linked directly to these aspects is
the issue of customizing disclosure based on specific PPP contract clauses, levels of
government support, and risk-sharing mechanisms within contracts. The Framework


54
recommends the incorporation of the following key items in a country’s disclosure
framework:
   •   Mandate to disclose, through FOI, PPP, or other legislation or policy
   •   More detailed guidance on what, when, and how to disclose
   •   Elements of disclosure in different phases, with a simple template
   •   Timelines for disclosure
   •   Guidance on confidential information
   •   Standard contractual clauses
Based on the findings of the Diagnostic and a gap assessment exercise benchmarked
against the World Bank Framework, as detailed in earlier sections, this section makes a
few focused recommendations on disclosure.
   1. Legislative mandate for disclosure. In countries with strong institutional practices,
      legislation attempts to include in the following: (a) proactive disclosure; (b)
      specific coverage, preferably by direct mention of PPPs, or contracts and contract
      information, as well as performance and procurement information as part of the
      definition of information; (c) disclosure mechanisms, that is, how the information
      will be disclosed; and (d) redactions, that is, what information will not be
      disclosed. The degree of detail to be included in the legislation depends on each
      country’s surrounding integrity risk environment, but it should provide enough
      detail to ensure sufficient accountability of public and private actors involved in a
      particular project. For example, although Section 2(4) of the FOI Act 2011 says
      that “materials containing information relating to any grant or contract made by or
      between the institution and another public institution or private organization” must
      be proactively disclosed by public institutions, and Section 2(3)d requires
      statements and interpretation of the policies adopted, final policy
      recommendations and decisions, factual reports, inspection reports, and studies
      undertaken for public institutions to be disclosed, this may not prove to be adequate
      information for citizens or potential investors to hold the relevant public authority
      to account meaningfully and at the appropriate time, especially pre-procurement.
       Feasibility studies, consultations with stakeholders prior to procurement, risk
       assessments, evaluation criteria, renegotiations, and performance indicators are
       critical pieces of information, and their disclosure can improve citizen and investor
       trust in PPP procurement. This example effectively points to a major lacuna in the
       FOI Act—the lack of an independent authority that would be responsible for
       interpreting and implementing the law. The independent authority’s mandate
       would include the following: (a) being the first port of call for interpretation of the
       law, and providing specific and binding regulations and guidelines related to
       disclosure (including for PPPs) to MDAs; (b) playing the role of an independent
       appellate authority, with clear processes in place for citizens to appeal refusal of
       information; (c) having a mandate to monitor the compliance of public authorities



                                                                                           55
         with the law (especially with respect to proactive disclosure), as well as its orders;
         and (d) having power to sanction public authorities and officials that do not comply
         with the law and/or its orders. Ideally, setting up such an institution should be
         enshrined in the law itself, which considerably enhances the effectiveness of such
         legislation. For example, national FOI legislation in countries such as Mexico,
         South Africa, and India expressly includes setting up independent national and
         subnational authorities in the form of Information Commissions or Ombudsman’s
         Offices. The subnational authorities not only serve as appellate authorities, but are
         also responsible for monitoring the implementation of the law. This arrangement
         has contributed substantially to the high level of implementation of FOI laws in
         these countries.
         Based on the findings of this Diagnostic on the higher level of risk associated with
         the integrity environment, nascent and evolving investor confidence in projects,
         the government’s ability to make payments and manage contracts, and general lack
         of institutionalization of disclosure, it is recommended that the Government of
         Nigeria should work on strengthening the disclosure clauses of the ICRC Act 2005.
         Currently, the ICRC Act provides for basic proactive disclosure of information.
         Specific advantages of more detailed coverage of disclosure in the ICRC Act
         through an amendment are that there will be a stronger mandate for disclosure and
         better clarity on what to disclose in PPP projects. Suggested legal drafting is
         included in annex A.
         It is also recommended that the NSIA should work on strengthening the disclosure
         clauses of the NSIA Act 2011. Suggested legal drafting is included in annex C.
     2. Need for detailed regulations. Given the need for a complete suite of standard
        documents which would guide the implementation of PPPs in Nigeria, it is
        recommended that ICRC builds on the efforts it has made in this direction and
        develops detailed regulations to clarify all aspects of the PPP process, including
        detailed procedure manuals for each stage of PPP procurement and
        implementation. Regulations and guidelines also need to be developed to identify
        the conditions under which there can be deviations from the standard procedures,
        for example, in the case of unsolicited proposals or projects related to national
        security. Improved clarity and guidance for actors in the PPP process will improve
        the regulatory environment and support improved disclosure.
     3. Framework for Disclosure. A full suite of instruments, as envisaged in the design
        of the World Bank Disclosure Framework, could lead to sound and better
        disclosure practices in Nigeria. These practices could take the form of regulations
        specific to PPP disclosure under Sections 20 and 34(1) of the ICRC Act 2005.
        Suggested Frameworks for Disclosure for ICRC and NSIA, based on five of the
        six layers of the World Bank Framework, are included in annexes B and D,
        respectively. A summary of the suggested contents for ICRC and NSIA,
        respectively, is provided in tables 10 and 11.




56
TABLE 10: SUGGESTED CONTENT FOR A PPP DISCLOSURE
FRAMEWORK FOR ICRC

          CONTENT                                             DESCRIPTION

                                 Specifics of disclosure at each stage of the PPP process,
                                 preferably an exhaustive list of items.
 ELEMENTS TO BE                  Given the nascent status of PPPs in Nigeria and the demands of
 DISCLOSED                       onerous PPP disclosure requirements, the elements to be
 PROACTIVELY                     disclosed should remain limited to basic project information, key
                                 milestones, procurement, key contract features, renegotiations,
                                 and performance.
                                 Common ICRC platform
                                 Responsibilities for populating and managing the platform shared
 PLACE OF
                                 between ICRC, contracting authorities and SPV
 DISCLOSURE
                                 Support is being provided for the design and creation of the web
                                 portal under World Bank technical assistance.
                                 Specifics of timelines for each element
                                 Flexible timelines that take into account the internal processes
                                 involved
 TIMELINES                       Key procurement documents, such as EOI, RFP, short-listed
                                 bidders, preferred bidder, and award disclosed upon approval
                                 Contract documents and performance information, with reasonable
                                 lag times from 15 to 30 days for internal processes, such as
                                 removal of confidential information and validation of information
                                 Guided by the FOI Act, ICRC Act, and discussions with ICRC, the
                                 following elements are considered as confidential information with
 TREATMENT OF                    the provision to revisit these in 2-3 years:
 COMMERCIAL-                     - Proposals or bids submitted by bidders
 IN-CONFIDENCE                   - Bid evaluations (summary of bid evaluations is not confidential)
 AND OTHER
                                 - Intellectual property
 CONFIDENTIALITY
 PROVISIONS                      - Trade secrets
                                 - The base case financial model submitted by the preferred bidder
                                 Suggestion for additional case-by-case analysis in each instance
                                 Given that there could be high costs with external validation, it is
 VALIDATION PRIOR TO
                                 suggested that ICRC takes the responsibility for validation of
 DISCLOSURE
                                 disclosed information.
                                 A format for ensuring ease and uniformity in disclosure
 TEMPLATE AND DATA               Uniformity can help in data aggregation by sector, risk profile,
 STANDARDS                       value, type, and so forth. A template is suggested as part of the
                                 Draft Framework.

Note: EOI = expression of interest; FOI = Freedom of Information; ICRC = Infrastructure Concession Regulatory
Commission; PPP = Public-Private Partnership; RFP = request for proposal.




                                                                                                         57
TABLE 11: SUGGESTED CONTENT FOR A PPP DISCLOSURE
FRAMEWORK FOR NSIA

          CONTENT                                             DESCRIPTION

                                  Specifics of disclosure at each stage of the PPP process,
                                  preferably an exhaustive list of items.
 ELEMENTS TO BE
 DISCLOSED                        Given the different types of investments in which NSIA is involved,
 PROACTIVELY                      the elements to be disclosed should remain limited to basic project
                                  information, key milestones, procurement, key contract features,
                                  renegotiations, and performance.
                                  Common NSIA platform
                                  NSIA may delegate limited responsibilities for populating and
 PLACE OF                         managing the platform to contracting authorities and SPV (where
 DISCLOSURE                       relevant) at their sole prerogative
                                  Support is being provided for the design and creation of the web
                                  portal under World Bank technical assistance.
                                  Specifics of timelines for each element depending on the role of
                                  NSIA (investor, sponsor, developer) and type of investment
                                  Flexible timelines that take into account the internal processes
                                  involved
                                  Key procurement documents, such as EOI, RFP, short-listed
 TIMELINES                        bidders, preferred bidder, and award disclosed within the nearest
                                  quarter of approval
                                  Contract documents and performance information within the
                                  nearest quarter of contract signing in line with other internal
                                  processes, such as removal of confidential information and
                                  validation of information
                                  Guided by the FOI Act, ICRC Act, and discussions with NSIA (and
                                  its counterparties where relevant), the following elements are
                                  considered as confidential information, with the provision to revisit
                                  these in 2-3 years:
 TREATMENT OF
 COMMERCIAL-                      - Bid evaluations (summary of bid evaluations is not confidential)
 IN-CONFIDENCE                    - Bill of quantity
 AND OTHER                        - Trade secrets
 CONFIDENTIALITY                  - Financial model
 PROVISIONS                       - Technology / inventions
                                  - Intellectual property
                                  - Internal rate of return
                                  Suggestion for additional case-by-case analysis in each instance
                                  Given that there could be high costs to external validation, it is
 VALIDATION PRIOR TO
                                  suggested that NSIA takes the responsibility for validation of
 DISCLOSURE
                                  disclosed information.
                                  A format for ensuring ease and uniformity in disclosure
 TEMPLATE AND DATA                Uniformity can help in data aggregation by sector, risk profile,
 STANDARDS                        value, type, and so forth. A template is suggested as part of the
                                  Draft Framework.

Note: EOI = expression of interest; FOI = Freedom of Information; ICRC = Infrastructure Concession Regulatory
Commission; NSIA = Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority; PPP = Public-Private Partnership; RFP = request for
proposal; SPV = special-purpose vehicle.




58
4. Standard contractual clauses. Clauses on information disclosure used in Nigerian
   contracts so far are limited to reinforcing the confidentiality of information. It is
   recommended that ICRC and NSIA create standard clauses on disclosure, to
   provide specific language that must be included in PPP contracts by public
   authorities. These clauses would help government teams to negotiate appropriate
   provisions related to the responsibility of private providers to provide information
   to the public authority, the rights and responsibilities of the public authority to
   disclose information, direct disclosure obligations on the SPV, and confidentiality
   provisions. The clauses would also enable the government entity and the private
   party to understand their respective roles in disclosure prior to contract signing.
   Inclusion of clear disclosure provisions in the standard contract is also a good way
   to disseminate and educate investors and potential bidders about the government’s
   approach to information disclosure. Standard clauses would help greatly in
   institutionalizing disclosure. Annexes B.2 and D.4 suggest texts for standard
   contractual provisions for ICRC and NSIA, respectively.

5. Template and data standards. Supply-side issues are a key impediment to timely
   and high-quality disclosure. This impediment could be mitigated by applying
   procurement strategies that provide bidders with incentives to compete on
   mechanisms to disclose information without unreasonably increasing internal
   costs. In addition, Nigeria is in a position to support the transfer of technology,
   systems, and instruments that support building, processing, and disseminating the
   required information and, therefore, could incorporate this as a substantial aspect
   of improving its disclosure framework. ICRC and the contracting authorities
   would need to work on systems for collection and aggregation of information. It is
   recommended that, to the extent possible, reports should be machine readable or
   provided as inputs into a shared information system, and able to be turned into
   structured data that can be selectively converted into open data as required.

    In addition, systems need to be built into the design of the disclosure framework
    that will enable continuous publishing of procurement and performance
    information and data, as and when key changes happen. Linking and cross-
    referencing with other existing similar information sets or databases could be
    useful. Defining or using harmonized information standards could not only reduce
    human and financial resource challenges, but also allow for comparative analysis
    of infrastructure projects. Templates for disclosure are provided in the suggested
    texts for the Framework for ICRC and NSIA in annexes B and D, respectively. A
    project portal is being created and will be provided to ICRC and NSIA over the
    next few months.

6. Strategic communication. Disclosure of information appears to be influenced by a
   host of challenges and benefits. The key challenges appear to be the reluctance of
   public bodies to share information in the absence of a clear mandate, dearth of
   practical internal guidance, non-availability and inaccuracy of data, time and cost
   of disclosure, and lack of oversight mechanisms. Sometimes disclosed information
   becomes inaccessible, especially when it consists of full contract documents in the


                                                                                     59
     public domain. Challenges such as increased litigation and consequent delays
     during or after procurement may also arise for governments that disclose
     documents, feeding back into the general reluctance to share information.

     Given the longer-term and distinct benefits of disclosing—such as greater
     accountability in expenditure, higher level of confidence in the fairness of the
     process, and better quality of bids, along with the potential for the formulation of
     improved long-term PPP policies and practice—it is essential that challenges are
     overcome. This can be done by building the right frameworks for disclosure, as
     well as by framing the discussion strategically, through well-planned
     communication with stakeholders.

     Since the Framework recommends disclosure beginning with the entry of a project
     into the approved preliminary pipeline, it is important that strategic
     communication around projects and programs is formulated at an early stage. This
     communication requires making disclosure not a one-way process, but a two-way,
     interactive process, to ensure that the feedback loops are completed, and the
     disclosed information is understood, absorbed, and used optimally by all
     stakeholders. Strategic communication also entails placing the project in the right
     context; benchmarking it in terms of tariffs (and cost) and services, using available
     regional, national, and local benchmarks of existing projects; and discussing the
     pros and cons of different alternatives for providing services, highlighting the
     relative advantages of the selected alternative. It is also important to frame the
     discussion around other key issues, such as competition and confidentiality, which
     may be of concern to the private sector.




60
9. Key Materials Reviewed
Laws, Regulations, and Policy Documents of the Government of Nigeria
Bureau of Public Enterprises (Privatization and Commercialization) Act 1999
Code of Conduct Bureau and Tribunal Act 1990
Constitution of Nigeria 1999
Debt Management Office (Establishment, Etc.) Act 2003
Draft Technical Guidance on Project and Contract Disclosure (with template) for Infrastructure Concessions
Under the ICRC Act 2005, April 11, 2013
Economic and Financial Crimes Commission Act 2004
Electric Power Sector Reforms Act 2005
Fiscal Responsibility Act 2010
Freedom of Information Act 2011
Guidelines on the Implementation of the FOI Act, Attorney General’s Office, 2013
Highways Act 1971
Independent Corrupt Practices & Other Related Offences Act 2000
Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission Act 2005
Lagos State Public Private Partnership Law, enacted in 2011
Money Laundering Prohibition Act 2011
National Integrated Infrastructure Master Plan
National Policy on Public-Private Partnerships, ICRC, 2009
Nigeria Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative Act 2007
Procurement Procedures Manual for Public Procurement in Nigeria (second edition), Bureau of Public
Procurement, 2011
Public Procurement Act 2007
Public Procurement Regulations for Goods & Works 2007
Solicited PPP Procurement Steps, ICRC
Utilities Charges Commission Act 1992


Other Documents
Corruption Perceptions Index Report, 2015, Transparency International, Berlin
Global Competitiveness Report, 2015–16, World Economic Forum, Geneva
A Framework for Disclosure in Public-Private Partnership Projects, 2015, World Bank
Rule of Law Index, Global Justice Project, 2015
Trends, Challenges and Future Outlook: Projects and Infrastructure in East, South, and West Africa,
PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2014
United Nations Convention Against Corruption, 2003




                                                                                                       61
Websites

Africa Freedom of Information Centre: http://africafoicentre.org
Budeshi: http://www.budeshi.org
Budget Office: http://www.budgetoffice.gov.ng
Centre for Law and Development: http://www.rti-rating.org
Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission, Nigeria: http://www.icrc.gov.ng/
National Bureau of Statistics: http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/
Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority: http://nsia.com.ng/
Open Contracting Data Standard: http://standard.open-contracting.org/latest/en/
Open Government Partnership: https://www.opengovpartnership.org/
Private Participation in Infrastructure Database, World Bank: https://ppi.worldbank.org/
Public and Private Development Centre: http://procurementmonitor.org/ppdc/
Right to Know, Nigeria: http://www.r2knigeria.org/
Transparency International: https://www.transparency.org/
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime: https://www.unodc.org/
World Economic Forum: https://www.weforum.org/




62
Annex A: Suggested Amendments to the
ICRC Act 2005
PART 1 OF THE ICRC ACT (PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN FEDERAL
INFRASTRUCTURE)
   (1) Any Ministry, Agency, Corporation or body under section 1 of this Act shall
   publish project and contract information related to infrastructure concessions granted
   by it on a designated website or in any other form specified in the regulations issued
   by the Commission under Section 20 below.


SECTION 20 (A) TOGETHER WITH 34 (1) (FUNCTIONS OF THE
COMMISSION)
   (1) The Commission shall, with the approval of the President, develop regulations
   regarding project and contract disclosure for infrastructure concessions, [in particular
   with regard to the elements for disclosure, responsibilities, timelines, and method for
   disclosure, confidential information and standard contractual clauses];
   (2) These regulations will be reviewed and amended from time to time.




                                                                                        63
Annex B: Suggested Text for Disclosure
Framework (ICRC)
1. Introduction

The Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission (Establishment, Etc.) Act 2005
(“ICRC Act”) provides for the participation of the private sector in financing the
construction and development of infrastructure through public-private partnerships
(PPPs).35 The Act establishes the Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission
(ICRC) to regulate, monitor, and supervise the contracts on infrastructure or development
projects. The Attorney General and Minister of Justice of Nigeria defined the mandate of
ICRC to include the responsibility of ensuring compliance with the provisions of the ICRC
Act. The Act directs ICRC to provide general policy guidelines relating to its functions.36
The Freedom of Information (FOI) Act 2011 provides for public access to public records
and information. The FOI Act provides that a public institution shall cause to be published
“materials containing information relating to any grant or contract made by or between the
institution and another public institution or private organization”.37 Section 4 of the FOI
Act provides that a public institution shall ensure that information disclosed is widely
disseminated and made available to the public through various means, including print,
electronic, and online sources.38
ICRC recognizes that sharing PPP contract information strengthens public support for
efforts made by the government to promote private financing of infrastructure. ICRC also
recognizes that a sound, practical disclosure of information policy is fundamental to
fulfilling its role in contract monitoring and supervision. Therefore, in 2013, ICRC
developed technical guidance on project and contract disclosure for PPPs. After a review
of the 2013 information disclosure guidance, ICRC seeks to expand significantly the
information that it makes available to the public. This Framework sets out the revised
disclosure template and timelines for disclosure at the pre- and post-procurement stages. It
supersedes the Technical Guidance on Project and Contract Disclosure for Infrastructure
Concessions, which was published in 2013. ICRC trusts that the expanded access to
information will enhance Nigeria’s dialogue on PPPs and infrastructure development.
The objective of this Framework is to provide guidance to enable systematic and organized
disclosure of information at different stages of the PPP process, and to bring existing


35 In this framework, “infrastructure” or development projects refer to federal government owned
infrastructure as contextualized in the Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission (Establishment,
etc.) Act 2005.
36 See Sections 19 (a) and 34 of the Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission (Establishment, etc.)

Act 2005.
37 See Section 2, FOI Act.
38 See Sections 2, 3, and 4, FOI Act 2011.




64
guidelines up to date with extant laws. The Framework and associated standardized
template presented here hold out the promise of raising the standard of transparency and
accountability around PPPs. Since disclosure is an evolving area, the Framework remains
a work in progress. It will be revisited and revised every two years, if and as required.


2. Application

This framework will apply to all PPP projects initiated under the ICRC Act 2005,
specifically federal government owned PPP projects. The framework will also apply to
state-level PPP projects that require federal support (such as guarantees) and/or move into
the federal jurisdiction at any point in their life cycle.


3. Specific Disclosures

Specific disclosures will consist of the elements included in the following subsections (a)
to (h), and will follow the template provided in annex B.1. Confidential information, as
provided under the next section, will be redacted before publication.
     a. PPP project pipeline. The approved project will be included in the published PPP
        project pipeline within 15 days from ICRC approval. The project pipeline will
        provide a brief description of the project, name of contracting authority, sector,
        and estimated project value.
     b. Basic project information. Basic project information along with estimated dates
        for key milestones would be provided within 15 days after issuance of the
        Certificate of Compliance for the Outline Business Case (OBC). Basic project
        information will include project name, location, sector, sponsoring agency,
        estimated value, project need, scope (description of asset and services to be
        provided), estimated demand to be served annually, and the rationale for selecting
        the project for development as a PPP.
     c. Project milestone tracking. Dates of achievement of key milestones will be
        provided as the project progresses in the form of a project milestones tracker.
     d. Project preparation documents. The OBC (including the value-for-money analysis
        report, feasibility study report, and environment and social impact assessment) will
        be published within 30 days after approval by the Federal Executive Council.39
     e. Procurement information. Summary procurement information and key documents
        will be provided during the procurement process. The expression of interest, list of
        short-listed bidders, and request for proposal (RFP), will be published within 15



39Ongoing legal reforms are likely to create differentiated thresholds for approval so that each project does not
necessarily have to be approved by the FEC.


                                                                                                             65
            days after approval for publication, and the list of preferred and reserved bidders
            will be published after the FBC Certificate of Compliance is issued by ICRC.
     f.     Project summary. Summary information on the PPP contract will be provided
            within 30 days of signature of the contract. The project summary will include basic
            contract information, including parties to the contract, project risk matrix, amounts
            and types of government support provided to the project, information on tariffs and
            pricing, termination clauses, handback provisions, and key performance indicators
            with target levels. Information on the financial structure of the special-purpose
            vehicle (SPV) will be provided within 30 days of financial close.
     g. Contract documents. ICRC will place the signed PPP contract40 in the public
        domain within 30 days of signing of contract, after the redaction of confidential
        information as provided in clause 4.
     h. Renegotiations. Summary information relating to each renegotiation will be
        published within 30 days of the signature of the renegotiated agreement. The
        approved renegotiated PPP contract will be placed in the public domain within 30
        days of such variation, having been agreed to and signed into contract by the
        parties.
     i.     Performance information. Information on the performance of the private party on
            five to 10 selected key performance indicators against agreed target levels will be
            published within one year of commissioning the project, with annual updates.
            Performance information will include details relating to performance failures, and
            will be updated annually. Links to performance assessments, such as audit reports,
            private party reports (SPV self-reporting), and independent engineer reports, will
            be provided and updated annually.




40 The   term will also include concessions, leases, and any other form of PPP.


66
TABLE B.1 SUMMARY OF SPECIFIC DISCLOSURES
                                                      APPROVER
                                                                    TIME OF
 #   DOCUMENT           CONTENTS           CREATOR   FOR PUBLIC
                                                                  DISCLOSURE
                                                     DISCLOSURE

                     List of projects
                     approved for
                     development by
                                                                  Within 15 days
                     ICRC, including
                                                                  of approval for
     PPP projects    brief project
 1                                          ICRC        ICRC      inclusion in the
     pipeline        description,
                                                                  PPP projects
                     contracting
                                                                  pipeline
                     authority, sector,
                     and estimated
                     project cost
                     Project name
                     Location
                     Sector
                     Sponsoring
                     agency
                     Estimated project
                     value
                     Project need
                     Description of                               Within 15 days
                     asset and                                    of issuance of
     Basic project   services to be
 2                                           CA         ICRC      the OBC
     information     provided                                     compliance
                     Rationale for                                certificate
                     selecting the PPP
                     mode
                     Estimated dates
                     of key milestones
                     Estimated
                     demand to be
                     served annually
                     Project
                     additionality
                     A section on the
                     web-based
                     platform that will
                     reflect actual
                     dates of
                     achievement of
                     key milestones
                     such as:                                     Within 15 days
     Project         - Date of inclusion                          from the
 3   milestones      in the published        CA       CA/ICRC     achievement
     tracking        projects pipeline                            of the
                     - Date of                                    milestones
                     appointment of
                     transaction
                     advisors
                     - Date of issuance
                     of OBC
                     compliance
                     certificate




                                                                                 67
                                                        APPROVER
                                                                      TIME OF
 #   DOCUMENT            CONTENTS            CREATOR   FOR PUBLIC
                                                                    DISCLOSURE
                                                       DISCLOSURE

                      - Date of OBC
                      FEC approval
                      -Date of
                      procurement
                      milestones, such
                      as EOI,
                      prequalification of
                      bidders, RFP,
                      selection of
                      preferred and
                      reserved bidder,
                                                                    Within 15 days
                      date of issuance
                                                                    from the
                      of FBC
                                                                    achievement
                      compliance
                                                                    of the
     Project          certificate, date of
                                                                    milestones
 3   milestones       FBC FEC                  CA       CA/ICRC
     tracking         approval, and so
                      forth
                      - Date of contract
                      signing
                      - Date of financial
                      close
                      - Beginning of
                      construction
                      - End of
                      construction
                      -Commencement
                      of operation and
                      maintenance
                      - Expiry of
                      contract
                      OBC (OBCs
                      pertaining to                                 Within 30 days
     Project
                      unsolicited                                   of OBC
 4   preparation                               CA         ICRC
                      proposals will be                             approval by
     documents
                      subject to                                    FEC
                      redactions)

                                                                    Within 15 days
 5   EOI                                       CA       CA/ICRC
                                                                    after approval

     List of short-                                                 Within 15 days
 6                                             CA         ICRC
     listed bidders                                                 after approval
                                                                    Within 15 days
 7   RFP                                       CA         ICRC
                                                                    after approval
                                                                    Within 15 days
     Disclosure of
                                                                    after FBC
     the preferred
                                                                    Certificate of
 8   bidder and                                CA       CA/ICRC
                                                                    Compliance is
     the reserved
                                                                    issued by
     bidder
                                                                    ICRC




68
                                                      APPROVER
                                                                    TIME OF
#    DOCUMENT           CONTENTS           CREATOR   FOR PUBLIC
                                                                  DISCLOSURE
                                                     DISCLOSURE

     Disclosure of
     FEC approval                                                 Within 30 days
9    of the                                  CA       CA/ICRC     after FEC
     preferred                                                    approval
     bidder
     Value-for-
     money                                                        Within 30 days
     analysis                                                     of FEC
10                                           CA         ICRC
     report                                                       approval of
     (extracted                                                   FBC
     from FBC)
                     Parties to the PPP
                     contract
                     Project risk matrix
                     Government
                     support
                     Tariffs and pricing
                                                                  Within 30 days
     Project         Termination
11                                           CA         ICRC      of signing of
     summary         clauses                                      contract
                     Handback
                     provisions
                     Key performance
                     indicators with
                     agreed target
                     levels
                     Equity-debt ratio
                     Shareholders with
                     proportion held
                     and voting rights
                     Caps on equity
                     transfer (if any)
     Financial       Debt and equity                              Within 30 days
12   structure of    providers               CA         ICRC      of financial
     SPV             Category of debt                             close
                     Amount and tenor
                     of each, fixed or
                     floating rate
                     Security and step-
                     in arrangements
                     Forecast IRR
                                                                  Within 30 days
     Contract        PPP contract
13                                           CA         ICRC      of signing of
     documents       (with redactions)
                                                                  contract




                                                                                   69
                                                                            APPROVER
                                                                                                    TIME OF
   #       DOCUMENT               CONTENTS              CREATOR            FOR PUBLIC
                                                                                                  DISCLOSURE
                                                                           DISCLOSURE

                                Summary
                                information
         Renegotiations         relating to each                                                 Within 30 days
         and                    renegotiation                                                    of signature of
  14                                                        CA                  ICRC
         renegotiated                                                                            renegotiated
         contracts              Renegotiated                                                     contract
                                contract
                                documents
                                Performance of
                                                       Private
                                the private party
                                                       Party/CA;
                                on 5 to 10
                                selected key           Link to audit
                                performance            report
                                indicators             provided by                               Within one year
                                against agreed         the ICRC;                                 of
         Performance
  15                            targets                Private party            ICRC             commissioning
         information
                                Audit report           reports                                   of project, with
                                                       uploaded by                               annual updates
                                Private party
                                                       the SPV;
                                (SPV) reports
                                                       IE reports
                                Independent
                                                       uploaded by
                                engineer
                                                       the ICRC
                                reports

Note: CA = contracting authority; EOI = expression of interest; ICRC = Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission;
FBC = Full Business Case; FEC = Federal Executive Council; OBC = Outline Business Case; PPP = Public-Private
Partnership; RFP = request for proposal; SPV = special-purpose vehicle.



4. Confidential Information

Section 15 of the FOI Act 2011, provides for the exemption of confidential information
from public disclosure. It defines confidential information to include trade secrets and
commercial or financial information obtained from a person or business, which are
proprietary or privileged, the disclosure of which would, or would be likely to, prejudice
the commercial interests of any person, trade secrets, commercially sensitive intellectual
property rights, and know-how of either of a third party.
       a. For the purposes of this Framework, the following elements will be considered as
          confidential. However, these elements will be reviewed every 2-3 years for any
          modifications:
          1. Proposals or bids submitted by bidders
          2. Intellectual property
          3. The base case financial model by bidders
          4. Bid evaluation
          5. Trade secrets




70
5. Method of Disclosure

All information and documents will be published on a web-based platform owned by the
ICRC, and any other form of communication and dissemination.


6. Responsibilities for Disclosure

    1. The onus for information generation and uploading on the web-based platform will
       be shared by ICRC, the contracting authority, and the private party to the contract.
    2. Information will be uploaded by the contracting authority and ICRC after redacting
       confidential information.
    3. The contracting authority will upload all information and documents in the web-
       based platform, so as to leave at least 7 days within the given timelines for ICRC
       to validate and approve the information for public disclosure. Performance
       information and any other information as required by ICRC and the contracting
       authority will be provided by the private party to the contract from time to time.


7. Validation of Information Prior to Disclosure

ICRC shall, in consultation with the parties, verify the accuracy of the information to be
disclosed before such disclosures are made.
    1. All information shall be validated by the Director of Contract Compliance and/or
       the Head of Policy and Regulation of ICRC and/or any officer of ICRC who has
       been delegated this responsibility before publication on the website.
    2. All contracts shall be checked to ensure exclusion of confidential information prior
       to disclosure.


8. Sample Contractual Provisions

    5.1 A section or chapter entitled “Transparency and Information Disclosure” shall be
        included in all draft contractual documentation included in the RFP and in all PPP
        contracts to be signed by the contracting authorities, including county
        governments.
        a. The section or chapter mentioned in 8(1) will contain clauses pertaining to the
           proactive disclosures to be carried out by the public entity, including disclosure
           of summary project and contract information, contract documents,
           procurement information including procurement documents, and ongoing
           performance information disclosure.


                                                                                          71
     b. The section or chapter mentioned in 8(1) will also contain the obligation of the
        private entity to provide documents and information as and when required and
        in the format required by the public entity, as part of its service obligations
        triggering payment deductions, should there be a failure to provide information
        on the part of the private party.
     c. The section or chapter mentioned in 8(1) will include a subsection dealing with
        confidential information, and will list the items of confidential information in
        a schedule along with the date up to which the information will be considered
        confidential.
     d. The section or chapter mentioned in 8(1) will include a subsection dealing with
        confidential information, and will list the items of confidential information in
        a schedule along with the date up to which the information will be considered
        confidential.
     e. The contract will be structured in a way such that confidential information can
        be easily removed before publication of the contract.
     f.   Sample disclosure clauses for use in all draft contract documentation included
          in the RFP and in all contracts are provided in annex B.2 and its schedules.
     .




72
Annex B.1: Draft Template for Proactive
Disclosure of Projects
in Nigeria
Disclosure During Project Identification, Development and Procurement
Stages
I.    BASIC PROJECT INFORMATION (Disclosed within 30 days of of issuance of the OBC
      compliance certificate and updated after contract signing)
•     Project name
•     Location
•     Sector
•     Sponsoring agency/department
•     Estimated project value
•     Project need
•     Description of asset
•     Description of services
•     Estimated demand to be served
•     Rationale for selection of PPP mode (link to value-for-money report within 30 days of the
      signature of the contract)




II.   PROJECT MILESTONES (ESTIMATED AND ACTUAL) (Disclosed within 15 days from the
      achievement of the milestones)
•     Project proposal received
•     Project proposal screened
•     Project proposal enters list of projects
•     Project feasibility study under development
•     Project feasibility study approved
•     EOI
•     RFP
•     Award
•     FBC approved
•     Contract signing
•     Financial close
•     Commencement of construction or development
•     Completion of construction or development
•     Commissioning
•     Contract expiry


III. PROJECT PREPARATION AND PROCUREMENT DOCUMENTS
•     OBC report (disclosed within 30 days of OBC approval by FEC)




                                                                                            73
•      Expression of Interest (disclosed within 15 days after approval)
•      List of short-listed bidders (disclosed within 15 days after approval)
•      Request for proposal (disclosed within 15 days after approval)
•      Award (disclosed within 15 days after issuance of FBC Certificate of Compliance)




Disclosure Following Signature of Contract
IV. CONTRACT INFORMATION (Disclosed within 30 days of the signature of the contract and
    updated in case of any change)
•      Contracting authority: name of authority, name of representative, address, telephone, fax, e-mail
•      Private party: name of company or consortium, name of representative, address, telephone, fax,
       e-mail
•      Financial structure: (figure showing debt/equity/proportion/providers, shareholders with
       proportion held and voting rights, Caps on equity transfer (if any), Debt and equity providers,
       Category of debt, amount and tenor of each, fixed and floating rate, security and step-in
       arrangements, forecast IRR) (provide link to company registry) (Disclosed within 30 days of
       financial close)
•      PPP Contract



V.     RISK

                                                             DESCRIPTION                  ALLOCATION




VI. GOVERNMENT SUPPORT

    Guarantees

    Grants

    Availability/annuity payment schedule

    Land leases, asset transfers

    Other support

    Revenue share, if any


VII. TARIFFS

    Tariffs and pricing




74
 VIII. TERMINATION PROVISIONS

                 PARTY                      BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF EVENT OF DEFAULT

     Concessionaire

     Authority

 Handback terms and conditions



IX. RENEGOTIATIONS
     RENEGOTIATION 1      RENEGOTIATION 2           RENEGOTIATION 3         RENEGOTIATION 4




X.    PERFORMANCE INFORMATION (to be updated annually)

       KEY                                Year 1                          Year n
       PERFORMANCE
       INDICATORS                Target       Achievement       Target        Achievement




                             Year

                             Category of failure

                             Number of events
Performance failures
                             Penalty or abatement provided in contract

                             Penalty or abatement imposed

                             Penalty paid or abatement effected: Yes/No



                           Links to audit reports (if any), SPV reports, Independent Engineer
Performance assessments
                           reports




                                                                                                75
Annex B.2: Sample Contractual
Provisions (ICRC)
Section [insert number]: Disclosure Requirements
Obligations Regarding Specific Disclosures


1. Freedom of Information
1.1 The [Contracting Authority] and the [Private Party] acknowledge that they
     (1) are both subject to the requirements of the Freedom of Information Act 2011 and
         other legislative instruments implementing the Freedom of Information Act
         [together Freedom of Information Legislation] and
     (2) shall co-operate to enable each other to comply with the obligations under the
         Freedom of Information Legislation, and
     (3) may be obligated to disclose information in accordance to the requirements of the
         Freedom of Information Legislation and the Technical Guidelines on Project and
         Contract Disclosure for Infrastructure Concessions under the Infrastructure
         Concession Regulatory Commission (ICRC) Act 2005 without obtaining consent
         of the other party.


2. Public Relations and Publicity
2.1 The [Private Party] may not represent the views of the [Contracting Authority] on any
    matter, or use the name of the [Contracting Authority] in any written material provided
    to third parties, without the prior written consent of the [Contracting Authority].


3. Publication of Information Relating to PPP Contracts
3.1 The parties agree that the [Contracting Authority], subject to Section 4
    (Confidentiality) below, is entitled to disclose as detailed out in Schedule [ ] the
    following information:
     a. Procurement documents and information;
     b. All project documents including this [PPP Agreement]; and other project
        preparation documents (Environment and Social Impact Assessment/Scoping
        Report, OBC Report, and so forth);
     c. Summary project information as set out in Schedule [      ] of this [PPP Contract];
     d. SPV structure and financial information;
     e. Performance information related to this [PPP Agreement].
3.1 The [Private Party] acknowledges that the [Contracting Authority] intends to publish
    the information mentioned in Subsection 3.1, subject to Section 4 (Confidentiality), on




76
        a web-based platform owned by ICRC and in any other form of communication and
        dissemination.

4. Confidentiality
Confidential Information
4.1 For the purpose of this [PPP Contract], Confidential Information means:
        (a) The subset of Confidential Information included in column 1 of Schedule [ ] of
            this [PPP Contract]; in each case for the period specified in column 2 of Schedule
            [ ].
    (b) Any other information (however it is conveyed or on whatever media it is stored),
        the disclosure of which would, or would be likely to, prejudice the commercial
        interests of any person, trade secrets, commercially sensitive intellectual property
        rights and know-how of either Party, including all personal information;
4.2 Without prejudice to Sections 1 and 3, the parties shall keep confidential all
    Confidential Information received by one party from the other party relating to this
    [PPP Contract] and any other Project Agreements41 or the Public-Private Partnership
    (PPP) project and shall use all reasonable endeavors to prevent their employees and
    agents from making any disclosure to any person of any such Confidential Information.

Permitted Disclosure

4.3 Confidential Information may be disclosed if:
        a. disclosure of such Confidential Information is reasonably required by any person
           engaged in the performance of its obligations under the [PPP Contract] for the
           performance of those obligations;
        b. a party can demonstrate that such Confidential Information is already, or becomes,
           generally available in the public domain otherwise than as a result of a breach of
           this clause;
        c. such disclosure is necessary to enable a determination to be made under clause
           [insert reference to Dispute Resolution clause] or in connection with a dispute
           between the [Private Party] and any of its subcontractors;
        d. such disclosure is required pursuant to (i) any statutory or legal obligation; (ii) any
           order of a court of competent jurisdiction; (iii) a Parliamentary obligation placed
           upon the party making the disclosure; (iv) any order from a governmental or
           regulatory authority;
        e. the Confidential Information is already lawfully in the possession of the receiving
           party, prior to its disclosure by the disclosing party;
        f.   the Confidential Information is provided to:


39 To be defined on a project-by-project basis to refer to the material contracts entered into by the private
party in connection with and relevant for the respective PPP project.




                                                                                                                77
             i.   each party's own professional advisers or insurance advisers; and/or
            ii.  the lenders or the lenders' professional advisers or insurance advisers or,
                 where it is proposed that a person should or may provide funds (whether
                 directly or indirectly and whether by loan, equity participation, or
                 otherwise) to the [Private Party] to enable it to carry out its obligations
                 under the [PPP Contract], or may wish to acquire shares in the [Private
                 Party] in accordance with the provisions of this [PPP Contract] to that
                 person or their respective professional advisers but only to the extent
                 reasonably necessary to enable a decision to be taken on the proposal;
                 and/or
          iii.   international or bilateral financial institutions involved in the project as
                 lenders, political risk insurers, or guarantors.
     g. the disclosure of such Confidential Information by the [Contracting Authority]
        relates to the design, construction, operation and maintenance of any PPP project
        and any disclosure of other Confidential Information as may be reasonably
        required for the purpose of conducting a due diligence exercise, to any proposed
        new private partner, its advisers and lenders, should the [Contracting Authority]
        decide to retender a [PPP Contract] or undertake any market testing;
     h. such disclosure is required for any registration, filing, or recording of the required
        permits and property registration in connection with the PPP project;
     i. the disclosure of Confidential Information by the [Contracting Authority] to any
        other relevant authority or their respective advisers or to any person engaged in
        providing services to the [Contracting Authority] is necessary for any purpose
        related to or ancillary to the [PPP Contract]; or
     j.   such disclosure is necessary for the purpose of:
             i.   the examination and certification of the [Contracting Authorit y’s] or the
                  [Private Party’s] accounts;
            ii.   any examination pursuant to [insert reference to any auditing obligations
                  for public contracts] of the economy, efficiency, and effectiveness with
                  which the [Contracting Authority] has used its resources;
           iii.  complying with a proper request from either party's insurance adviser, or
                 insurer on placing or renewing any insurance policies; or
          iv.    [without prejudice to the generality of Clause 4.3 (d) compliance with
                 [insert reference to any laws requiring disclosure (e.g. environmental
                 laws)]].
4.4 When disclosure is permitted under Clauses 4.3 (a), (c), (f), (g), and (i), the party
    providing the information shall ensure that the recipient of the information shall be
    subject to the same obligation of confidentiality as that contained in this [PPP
    Contract]. The [Private Party] shall expressly inform any person to whom it discloses
    any information under this clause of the confidentiality restrictions set out in this clause
    and shall procure its compliance with the terms of this clause as if it were party to this
    [PPP Contract] and the [Private Party] shall be responsible for any breach by any such
    person of the provisions of this clause.
4.5 The provisions of Section 4.3 are not applicable to [insert relevant exceptions for
    specific project, e.g., national security].




78
Confidential Information Related to End Users
4.6 Where the [Private Party], in carrying out its obligations under the [PPP Contract], is
    provided with personal information relating to [end users (e.g., road users, patients,
    and so forth)], the [Private Party] shall not disclose or make use of any such
    information otherwise than for the purpose for which it was provided, unless the
    [Private Party] has obtained the prior written consent of that [end user] and has
    obtained the prior written consent of the [Contracting Authority].
4.7 On or before the expiry date, the [Private Party] shall ensure that all documents or
    computer records in its possession, custody, or control, which contain personal
    information relating to [end users] including any documents in the possession, custody,
    or control of a subcontractor, are delivered up to the [Contracting Authority].

5. Reporting Obligations, Provision of Information and Documents
Obligation to Disclose Information, Documents, and Records upon Request
5.1 (a) The [Private Party] shall provide to the [Contracting Authority] all information,
    documents, records, and the like in the possession of, or available to, the [Private Party]
    as may reasonably be requested by the [Contracting Authority] for the purpose of
    complying with any of its statutory reporting obligations including but not limited to
    its reporting obligations under the Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission
    Act 2005, the Nigeria Fiscal Responsibility Act 2007, and [insert other legislation as
    applicable, e.g., sector-specific legislation].
    (b) To this end, the [Private Party] shall ensure that all such information in the
    possession of any subcontractor or other counterparty to any Project Agreement shall
    be available to the [Contracting Authority] and the [Private Party] has included, or shall
    include, appropriate provisions to this effect in all Project Agreements.

Project Information
5.2 (a) The [Private Party] shall provide to the [Contracting Authority] a project summary
    as set out in Schedule [       ] of this [PPP Contract] within [ ] business days after
    signature of this [PPP Contract] and an updated version within 15 business days after
    financial close [insert definition for financial close].
    (b) In the event of any relevant change of the project summary information, the [Private
    Party] shall provide to the [Contracting Authority] the updated information and the
    updated documents [ ] business days after the relevant change has occurred.

Performance Information
5.3 (a) The parties agree that the [Private Party] shall provide to the [Contracting
    Authority] information on performance on Key Performance Indicator against agreed
    target levels and performance failure as set out in Schedule [ ] of this [PPP Contract]
    and SPV reports within one year after [Commercial Operation Date] of this [PPP
    Project] as well as each year hereafter during the term of this [PPP Contract] on […].
    (b) The [Private Party] shall upload the performance information mentioned in
    Subsection 1 on a web-based platform owned by the ICRC and in any other form of
    communication and dissemination.



                                                                                            79
Calculation of Equity Internal Rate of Return
5.4 Where the contract is a result of an unsolicited proposal and/or where substantial
    government support is provided to the project, the [Private Party] shall provide to the
    [Contracting Authority] each year during the term of this [PPP Contract] on
    [ ] and on [         ] a calculation of the actual equity internal rate of return and any
    other financial information submitted to any other authority including any regulators.


Audited Financial Statements
5.5 The [Private Party] shall provide to the [Contracting Authority] audited financial
    statements annually and no later than [180] days after the end of the fiscal year of the
    [Private Party].


Enforcement of Reporting and Information Obligations
5.6 Without prejudice to other legal remedies available to the parties in this [PPP Contract],
    the parties agree that the scope of services under this [PPP Contract] includes
    obligations of the [Private Party] to provide information as set out in
    [Section/Subsection [          ]] to the [Contracting Authority] and that any breach of
    this obligation shall be a failure in performance of the service triggering deductions in
    accordance with the payment mechanism as set out in Schedule [            ] of this [PPP
    Contract].




                                       Schedule [    ]
                                  Confidential Information

                                                         Period for which information will
              Clauses/schedules
                                                               remain confidential




80
Annex C: Suggested Amendments to the
NSIA Act 2011
SECTION 52 pertaining to Documentation
   52 (1) All investments shall be documented (…).
   (2) The Authority shall publish on a designated website [or in any other form specified
   in the [regulations OR guidelines] issued under Subsection (3)] contract and project
   information related to its investments in infrastructure projects, in particular but not
   limited to (a) basic project information, (b) information related to project progress, (c)
   procurement information, (d) project preparation documents, (e) contract summaries,
   (f) guarantee information, (g) financial information, (h) information regarding
   renegotiations, (i) information related to project progress as well as performance
   information.
   (3) No confidential information as specified in the [regulations OR guidelines] issued
   under Subsection (4) shall be disclosed.
   (4) The Authority shall develop [regulations or guidelines] regarding project and
   contract disclosure for its investments in infrastructure projects [that specify the
   elements of disclosure, responsibilities, timelines, method for disclosure, confidential
   information, and [include standard language for respective contractual provisions]];
   (5) The Authority shall collaborate with the Infrastructure Concession Regulatory
   Commission (ICRC) when developing and implementing [regulations or guidelines]
   for project and contract disclosure related to Concessions as defined in the ICRC
   (Establishment) Act, 2005.




                                                                                          81
Annex D: Suggested Text for Disclosure
Framework (NSIA)
1. Introduction

The Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority (Establishment) Act 2011 provides that the
Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority (“NSIA”) shall implement best practices with
respect to management independence and accountability, corporate governance,
transparency and reporting on performance as provided in the Act.42 The Act enjoins NSIA
to adopt appropriate Santiago Principles in addition to other similar principles or
conventions to attain best practices. It further stipulates that NSIA shall develop policies
and procedures for communicating its investment objectives in a manner generally
consistent with the guiding objectives of the Santiago Principles.43 Specifically, Section
51(2)1(a) of the Act imbues NSIA with the power to develop appropriate internal
guidelines to conduct its business operations in a manner that fosters transparency,
accountability, and good corporate governance. It also requires that NSIA operations be
consistent with the highest ethical standards and reflect best practices. In furtherance of
this mandate, NSIA subscribed to the International Working Group of Sovereign Wealth
Funds and adopted the Santiago Principles for Sovereign Wealth Funds. The Principles
urge member states to make disclosure a goal of their transparency and accountability
strategy.
The Nigerian legal framework for transparency and accountability of public resources
provides specific legislation governing the management of public finances, and prescribes
full and timely disclosure of transactions and decisions involving public revenues and
expenditures.44 The 2011 Freedom of Information Act provides for public access to
information by all public authorities, and defines public authorities to include all companies
in which government has controlling interest, and private companies utilizing public funds.
As an organization owned by the government of Nigeria, NSIA is accountable for the use
and management of its resources in a manner consistent with its mandate and has the
obligation to be responsive to questions relating to its investments.
The NSIA Infrastructure Fund (“The Fund”) aspires to attain bes t practices in its
governance standards for its PPP and private investments. Upon this premise, The Fund
seeks to enhance its investment disclosure framework through the establishment of systems
of transparency and accountability, including processes conducive to disclosure and to
embed disclosure in its routine investment practice. This overarching Framework is
intended to make NSIA’s investment disclosures more structured and to enable syst ematic
and organized disclosure of information at different stages of The Fund’s investment

42 See Section 4(2) (d) Nigeria Sovereign Investment Agency (Establishment) Act.
43 See Section 49(1) Nigeria Sovereign Investment Agency (Establishment) Act.
44 Section 48 of the Fiscal Responsibility Act 2007.




82
process. The Framework and associated standardized template presented here hold out the
promise of raising the standard of transparency and accountability around investment.
Since disclosure is an evolving area, the Framework remains a work in progress. It will be
revisited and revised every two years, if and as required.


2. Application

This Framework will be used in various circumstances and at different levels. NSIA will
apply this Framework as a project sponsor, developer, and investor. Where applicable, the
Framework will be applied to disclosure of PPP projects, private investment projects,
NSIA-to-public deals, NSIA-to-private deals, and other forms of infrastructure projects
NSIA participates in. The Framework demonstrates the application of each template from
the early disclosure of basic project information to performance information. Annex D.1
will apply to all NSIA-to-public investment types/modes. Annex D.2 will be applicable to
all NSIA-to-private investment types/modes. NSIA in the discharge of its mandate receives
from other parties’ information that is not publicly available for the purpose of enabling
NSIA to assess business opportunities, or to monitor and evaluate existing investments.
NSIA respects the confidentiality of any such information, hence, NSIA-to-private
investment disclosure will depend upon the level of disclosure permitted by NSIA’s
counterparties and the nature of the project. Annex D.3 will be applicable to all PPP
projects. The annexes offer stand-alone templates that have been developed to facilitate the
application at the various stages of the Framework. A summary of disclosure by type of
investment is provided in table D.1.


3. Specific Disclosures for NSIA-to-Public Projects

    a. Specific disclosures will consist of the elements included in the following
       Subsections b to i, and will follow the template provided in annex D.1.
       Confidential information as provided under Section 6 will be redacted before
       publication.
    b. Basic project information (pre-contract). Basic project information will be
       provided within the nearest quarter after the Executive Board’s (“Board”) budget
       approval for conducting due diligence of the proposed investment. Basic project
       information will include project name, location, industry/sector, sponsoring
       agency, estimated project value, market drivers, and project need. The basic project
       information page will include a disclaimer on the early information disclosed,
       stating that early project information is indicative and not final. The template for
       the disclaimer is provided in annex D.1.
    c. Project progress tracking. Actual dates of achievement of key milestones will be
       provided as the project progresses, in the form of a project progress tracker.




                                                                                         83
     d. Procurement information. When appropriate, key procurement documents will be
        provided within the nearest quarter after the procurement process. The list of
        project consultants, advisors, and contractors advising on the project will be
        published within the nearest quarter after engagement of advisors/consultants.
        Other project preparation documents such as the scoping report and feasibility
        study report will be disclosed within the nearest quarter after Board review.
     e. Contract summary. Names of parties, total project cost, investment type and mode,
        size and share of NSIA’s financing, technical description of infrastructure to be
        developed, description of proposed services, project objectives, estimated demand
        to be served and tariffs, high level risk summary, allocation and mitigation will be
        disclosed within the nearest quarter of contract signing.
     f.   Guarantee information. Basic information related to guarantees, details of the
          memoranda of understanding with other levels of government and foreign
          governments, and any asset transfers and grants received, and availability / annuity
          payments will be disclosed within the nearest quarter of financial close.
     g. Financial information. Summary of financial information will be disclosed within
        the nearest quarter of financial close.
     h. Renegotiations. Summary information relating to each renegotiation will be
        published within the nearest quarter of signature of the renegotiated project
        agreement.
     i.   Performance information. High-level summary of performance against agreed
          target levels will be published within one year of commissioning of the project,
          with annual updates published within the nearest quarter of anniversary of first
          publication date. Performance information will include high-level details relating
          to performance failures and will be updated annually.


4. Specific Disclosures for NSIA-to-Private Projects

     a. Specific disclosures will consist of the elements included in the following
        Subsections b to f, and will follow the template provided in annex D.2. Where
        disclosure under this section is deemed to be appropriate, all information will be
        disclosed within the nearest quarter following signature of the contract.
        Confidential information as provided under Section 6 will be redacted before
        publication.
     b. Basic project information (post-contract). Basic project information will include
        project name, location, industry/sector, project sponsor, estimated project value,
        brief description of the project, project need and market drivers, identity of the
        project company, and amount and nature of NSIA’s investment in the project.




84
  c. Project progress tracking. Actual dates of achievement of key milestones will be
     provided as the project progresses in the form of a project progress tracker within
     the nearest quarter after contract signing.
  d. Contract summary. Names of parties, total project cost, investment type and mode,
     technical description of infrastructure to be developed, description of proposed
     services, size and share of NSIA’s financing, nature of NSIA’s investment, project
     objectives, estimated demand to be served, tariffs and project additionality.
  e. Financial information. Summary of financial information will be disclosed within
     the nearest quarter of financial close.
  f.   Renegotiations. Summary information relating to each renegotiation will be
       published within the nearest quarter of signature of the renegotiated project
       agreement.


5. Specific Disclosures for PPP Projects

  a. Specific disclosures will consist of the elements included in the following
     Subsections b to k and will follow the template provided in annex D.3. Confidential
     information as provided under Section 6 will be redacted before publication.
  b. Basic project information (pre-contract). Basic project information will be
     provided within the nearest quarter after the Management Board’s (“Board”)
     budget approval for conducting due diligence of the proposed project. Basic
     project information will include project name, location, industry/sector,
     sponsoring agency/department, estimated project value, project need, technical
     description of asset, description of the services, estimated demand to be served
     annually, summary scoping report, environmental impact assessment report,
     summary outline business case report, and value-for-money analysis report. The
     basic project information page will include a disclaimer on the early information
     disclosed, stating that early project information is indicative and not final. The
     template for the disclaimer is provided in annex D.1.
  c. Project progress tracking. Actual dates of achievement of key milestones will be
     provided as the project progresses in the form of a project progress tracker.
  d. Procurement information. When appropriate, key procurement documents will be
     provided within the next quarter after the procurement process. The list of project
     consultants, advisors, and contractors advising on the project will be published
     within the nearest quarter after engagement of advisors/consultants.
  e. Outline Business Case (OBC). The non-confidential aspects of the OBC and Full
     Business Case, will be published within the nearest quarter after Infrastructure
     Concession Regulatory Commission recommendation for approval by FEC or
     other delegated authority.




                                                                                     85
     f.   Contract summary. Names of parties, high-level risk summary, total project cost,
          investment type and mode, technical description of infrastructure to be developed,
          estimated demand to be served, and tariffs will be disclosed within the nearest
          quarter of contract signing.
     g. Guarantee information. Basic information related to guarantees, details of the
        memoranda of understanding with other levels of government and foreign
        governments, and any asset transfers and grants received will be disclosed within
        the nearest quarter of financial close.
     h. Financial information. Summary of financial information will be disclosed within
        the nearest quarter of financial close.
     i.   Renegotiations. Summary information relating to each renegotiation will be
          published within the nearest quarter of signature of the renegotiated project
          agreement.
     j.   Termination provisions. Brief description of event of default and handback term
          and conditions following default will be disclosed as provided in annex D.3.
     k. Performance information. High-level summary of performance against agreed
        target levels will be published within one year of commissioning of the project,
        with annual updates published within the nearest quarter of anniversary of first
        publication date. Performance information will include high-level details relating
        to performance failures and will be updated annually.


6. Confidential Information

For the purposes of this Framework, the following elements will be considered as
confidential. However, these elements will be reviewed every two years for any
modifications:
     1. Technology/inventions
     2. Intellectual property
     3. Pricing methodology
     4. Bid evaluations
     5. Trade secrets
     6. Financial model
     7. Bill of quantity
     8. Internal rate of return




86
7. Method of Disclosure

All information and documents will be published on a web-based platform owned by
NSIA.


8. Responsibilities for Disclosure

   1. All information will be uploaded by NSIA on the NSIA website as provided in
      Section 3, 4, and 5, after redacting confidential information.
   2. NSIA will give 21 days’ timeline within which the NSIA Chief Executive Officer
      (“CEO”) or any officer designated by the CEO will validate and approve the
      information prior to public disclosure.
   3. Performance information and any other information as required by NSIA will be
      provided by the Private Party and from time to time.


9. Validation of Information Prior to Disclosure

All information shall be validated by the NSIA CEO or any officer designated by the CEO
before publication on the website.


10. Standard Contractual Provisions

   a. A section or chapter entitled “Transparency and Information Disclosure” shall be
      included in all draft contractual documentation included in the request for proposal
      and in all investment contracts to be signed by the contracting parties.
   b. The section or chapter mentioned in 10.a will contain clauses pertaining to the
      proactive disclosures to be carried out by NSIA, including disclosure of summary
      project contract information, procurement information including procurement
      documents, and yearly performance information disclosure.
   c. The section or chapter mentioned in 10.a will also contain the obligation of the
      private partners to provide documents and information as and when required and
      in the format required by NSIA as part of its contractual obligations.
   d. The section or chapter mentioned in 10.a will include a subsection dealing with
      confidential information and will list the items of confidential information in a
      schedule along with the date up to which the information will be considered
      confidential.




                                                                                       87
      e. Sample disclosure clauses for use in all draft project documentation to be included
          in all project agreement are provided in annex D.4 and its schedules.




TABLE D.1: SUMMARY OF NSIA INFORMATION DISCLOSURE, BY
TYPE OF INVESTMENT
 #          INFORMATION              NSIA-PUBLIC            NSIA-PRIVATE         REGULAR PPP
                                                                                Within the nearest
                                  Within the nearest
                                                                                quarter after the
                                  quarter after the
                                                                                Management
                                  Executive Board’s        Within the nearest
                                                                                Board’s budget
 1      Project name              budget approval for      quarter after
                                                                                approval for
                                  conducting due           contract signing
                                                                                conducting due
                                  diligence of the
                                                                                diligence of the
                                  proposed investment
                                                                                proposed project
                                                           Within the nearest
        Brief description of
 2                                Same as above            quarter after        Not applicable
        project
                                                           contract signing
                                                                                Within the nearest
                                  Within the nearest
                                                                                quarter after the
                                  quarter after the
                                                                                Management
                                  Executive Board’s        Within the nearest
                                                                                Board’s budget
 3      Location                  budget approval for      quarter after
                                                                                approval for
                                  conducting due           contract signing
                                                                                conducting due
                                  diligence of the
                                                                                diligence of the
                                  proposed investment
                                                                                proposed project
                                                           Within the nearest
 4      Industry/Sector           Same as above            quarter after        Same as above
                                                           contract signing
 5      Sponsoring agency         Same as above            Not applicable       Same as above
                                                           Within the nearest
        Estimated project
 6                                Same as above            quarter after        Same as above
        value
                                                           contract signing
                                                           Within the nearest
 7      Project need              Same as above            quarter after        Same as above
                                                           contract signing
                                                           Within the nearest
 8      Market drivers            Same as above            quarter after        Not applicable
                                                           contract signing
                                  Within the nearest       Within the nearest
        Identity of the project
 9                                quarter after contract   quarter after        Not applicable
        company
                                  signing                  contract signing
        Amount and nature of      Within the nearest       Within the nearest
 10     NSIA’s investment in      quarter after contract   quarter after        Not applicable
        the project               signing                  contract signing
                                                                                Within the nearest
                                                                                quarter after the
                                                                                Management
                                  Within the nearest       Within the nearest
        Technical description                                                   Board’s budget
 11                               quarter after contract   quarter after
        of asset                                                                approval for
                                  signing                  contract signing
                                                                                conducting due
                                                                                diligence of the
                                                                                proposed project



88
#       INFORMATION                NSIA-PUBLIC           NSIA-PRIVATE          REGULAR PPP
     Description of the
12                              Same as above           Not applicable       Same as above
     services
                                                        Within the nearest
     Estimated demand to
13                              Same as above           quarter after        Same as above
     be served annually
                                                        contract signing
                                Within the nearest
14   Scoping report             quarter after Board     Not applicable       Same as above
                                review
     Environment and
15   social impact              Same as above           Not applicable       Same as above
     assessment report
     Outline Business
16   Case report or             Same as above           Not applicable       Same as above
     feasibility study report
     Value-for-money
17                              Not applicable          Not applicable       Same as above
     analysis report
                                                        Disclosed within
     Project progress           As milestones are       the nearest          As milestones are
18
     tracking                   achieved                quarter of           achieved
                                                        contract signing
                                Disclosed within the
     Key procurement
19                              nearest quarter after   Not applicable       Not applicable
     documents
                                procurement
     List of project            Within the nearest                           Within the nearest
     consultants, advisors,     quarter after                                quarter after
20   and contractors            engagement of           Not applicable       engagement of
     advising on the            advisors/                                    advisors/
     project                    consultants                                  consultants
     Names of
                                Within the nearest      Within the nearest   Within the nearest
     parties/private co-
21                              quarter of contract     quarter of           quarter of contract
     investors/investment
                                signing                 contract signing     signing
     vehicle
     High-level risk
22                              Same as above           Not applicable       Same as above
     summary
                                                        Within the nearest
23   Total project cost         Not applicable          quarter of           Not applicable
                                                        contract signing
     Investment type and
24                              Not applicable          Same as above        Same as above
     mode
                                                                             Within the nearest
25   Tariffs                    Not applicable          Not applicable       quarter of financial
                                                                             close
                                Within the nearest
26   Project objectives         quarter of contract     Not applicable       Not applicable
                                signing
                                Within the nearest                           Within the nearest
27   Government support         quarter of financial    Not applicable       quarter of financial
                                close                                        close
                                Within the nearest                           Within the nearest
     Termination
28                              quarter of signature    Same as above        quarter of contract
     provisions
                                of the contract                              signing
                                                        Within the nearest
                                Within the nearest
                                                        quarter of
29   Project additionality      quarter of signature                         Not applicable
                                                        signature of the
                                of the contract
                                                        contract




                                                                                                   89
  #         INFORMATION                   NSIA-PUBLIC         NSIA-PRIVATE          REGULAR PPP
                                                             Within the nearest
                                      Within the nearest                          Within the nearest
                                                             quarter of
                                      quarter of signature                        quarter of signature
  30     Renegotiations                                      signature of the
                                      of the renegotiated                         of the renegotiated
                                                             renegotiated
                                      contract                                    contract
                                                             contract
                                      Within the nearest     Within the nearest   Within the nearest
  31     Financial information        quarter of financial   quarter of           quarter of financial
                                      close                  financial close      close
                                      Within one year of                          Within one year of
         Performance                  commissioning of                            commissioning of
  32                                                         Not applicable
         information                  project with annual                         project with annual
                                      updates                                     updates

Note: NSIA = Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority.




90
Annex D.1: Template for Proactive
Disclosure of NSIA-to-Public Projects
Disclosure Following Project Identification. Early Review and Appraisal
Stages
I.    BASIC PROJECT INFORMATION (Disclosed within the nearest quarter after Board Budget
      Approval)
•     Project name, location
•     Project description
•     Industry/sector
•     Estimated project value
•     Sponsoring agency
•     Project need: benefits provided, economic and social (including specific information on the public interest
      aspect)
•     Market drivers


II.   PROJECT MILESTONES (ACTUAL) (Disclosed as they become available)
•     Project Board approval
•     Commencement of due diligence study
•     Procurement start date
•     Date of award
•     Commencement of construction or development
•     Completion of construction or development
•     Commissioning
•     Contract expiry


III. PROCUREMENT DOCUMENTS (Disclosed within the nearest quarter following procurement)
•     Short-listed bidders
•     Request for proposal
•     Award
•     List of project development consultants engaged in the project (Disclosed within the nearest
      quarter after engagement)


IV. DISCLOSURE OF OTHER DOCUMENTS (Disclosed within the nearest quarter after Board
    review)
•     Scoping report
•     Feasibility study report




                                                                                                             91
Disclosure Following Signature of Project Contract
V.     CONTRACT SUMMARY (Disclosed within the nearest quarter of contract signing and updated
       in case of any change)
•      Public authority party: name of authority, name of representative, address, telephone, fax,
       e-mail
•      Private party co-developer: name of company or consortium, name of representative, address,
       telephone, fax, e-mail, total project cost, nature of NSIA’s investment (equity, loan, guarantee)
•      Size and share of NSIA’s financing
•      Project objectives
•      Technical description of the infrastructure to be developed
•      Status/dates of various approvals
•      High-level description of the proposed services
•      Estimated demand to be served annually
•      Project additionality


VI. RISK (High-level summary of risks including risk allocation and mitigation)

                                                          DESCRIPTION                   ALLOCATION




VII. GOVERNMENT SUPPORT

    Guarantees

    Grants

    Availability/annuity payment schedule

    Land leases, asset transfers

    Other support

    Revenue share, if any


VIII. RENEGOTIATIONS
     RENEGOTIATION 1           RENEGOTIATION 2           RENEGOTIATION 3          RENEGOTIATION 4




92
IX. FINANCIAL INFORMATION (Disclosed within the nearest quarter of financial close)
•    Commercial lenders, bilateral or multilateral lenders, public issue of bonds, supplier credit, other
•    Equity-debt ratio
•    Shareholders of project vehicle
•    Share capital of project vehicle
•    Shareholders categories senior debt, mezzanine debt, other
•    Amount and tenor of each, fixed or floating rate
•    Governance rights



X.   PERFORMANCE INFORMATION (to be updated annually)

     KEY                                    Year 1                               Year n
     PERFORMANCE
     INDICATORS                    Target         Achievement           Target        Achievement




XI. DISCLAIMERS
Unless stated otherwise, it is hereby acknowledged that information disclosed on this page is to
provide early access to basic project information. Before final approval by the NSIA Executive
Management Board and before contract signature, projects are under appraisal and negotiation, and
should not be construed as NSIA’s final investm ent decision. The data provided on this page are
merely indicative and should not be construed to represent official NSIA policy.
NSIA makes no warranties or representations, express or implied as to whether information provided
on or through this website is accurate, complete, or up-to-date. NSIA is not responsible nor liable for
the content of pages made available via hyperlinks.
NSIA will not be liable for any lost profits or consequential, special, punitive, indirect, or incidental
damages relating to, arising out of, or in any way in connection to the user’s reliance on early project
information.




                                                                                                      93
Annex D.2: Template for Proactive
Disclosure of NSIA-to-Private Projects
Disclosure Following Contract Signing
I.     BASIC PROJECT INFORMATION
•      Project name, location
•      Project description
•      Industry/sector
•      Project sponsor
•      Estimated project value
•      Project need: objectives and benefits provided, economic and social (including specific
       information on the public interest aspect)
•      Market drivers
•      Amount and nature of NSIA’s investment in the project
•      Description of project company



II.    PROJECT MILESTONES (Disclosed within the nearest quarter following contract signing)
•      Project approval date
•      Commitment date
•      Disbursement date


III. CONTRACT SUMMARY (Disclosed within the nearest quarter following contract signing and
     updated in case of any change)
•      Private co-investors: name of company or investment vehicle, name of representative, address,
       telephone, fax, e-mail, total project cost, nature of NSIA’s investment (equity, loan, guarantee),
       size and share of NSIA’s financing, project objectives, technical description of the infrastructure
       to be developed, high-level description of the proposed services, estimated demand to be served
       annually, and project additionality.


IV. FINANCIAL INFORMATION (Disclosed within the nearest quarter of financial close)
•      Percentage of share capital in the project vehicle
•      Category of debt provided: senior debt, mezzanine debt, other
•      Amount and tenor of each, fixed or floating rate
•      Governance rights.


V.     RENEGOTIATIONS

      RENEGOTIATION 1           RENEGOTIATION 2             RENEGOTIATION 3         RENEGOTIATION 4




94
Annex D.3: Template for Proactive
Disclosure of NSIA PPP Projects
Disclosure Following Project Identification, Early Review and Appraisal
Stages
I.    BASIC PROJECT INFORMATION (Disclosed within the nearest quarter after Board budget
      approval for conducting due diligence)
•     Project name
•     Location
•     Industry / Sector
•     Sponsoring agency/department
•     Estimated project value
•     Project need
•     Technical description of asset
•     High-level description of the services
•     Estimated demand to be served annually
•     Summary scoping/Environmental Impact Assessment/stakeholder consultation report
•     Value-for-money analysis or cost-benefit analysis
•     Outline Business Case assessment report (disclosed within the nearest quarter after ICRC
      approval)


II.   PROCUREMENT INFORMATION
•     List of NSIA consultants and advisors throughout project life cycle: legal, financial, engineering,
      and so forth (disclosed within the nearest quarter after engagement of advisors/consultants)


III. PROJECT MILESTONES (Disclosed as they become available)
•     Date of Board approval
•     Commercial close
•     Financial close
•     Commencement of construction or development
•     Completion of construction or development
•     Commissioning
•     Commencement of operations
•     Contract expiry




                                                                                                      95
Disclosure Following Signature of Contract
IV. CONTRACT INFORMATION (Disclosed within the nearest quarter of contract signing)
•      Private party: name of company or consortium
•      Public authority: name of authority (Disclosed within the nearest quarter of signature of the
       contract and updated in case of any change)


V.     RISK (High-level summary of risks including risk allocation)

                                                           DESCRIPTION                   ALLOCATION




Disclosure Following Financial Close
VI. FINANCIAL INFORMATION (Disclosed within the nearest quarter of financial close)
•      Commercial lenders, institutional investors, bilateral or multilateral lenders, public issue of
       bonds, supplier credit, other
•      Equity-debt ratio
•      Share capital
•      Shareholders categories senior debt, mezzanine debt, other
•      Amount and tenor of each, fixed or floating rate


VII. GUARANTEES/COMMITMENTS RECEIVED (Disclosed within nearest quarter of financial close)

                                              Basic information related to guarantees
    Guarantees                                Details of the memoranda of understanding with other
                                              levels of government and foreign governments

                                              Subsidy as a proportion of project value
                                              Capital subsidies received during construction with
    Grants
                                              periodicity or milestones
                                              Operating subsidies and their periodicity or milestones

                                              These are payments received from the public authority
    Service payments                          or purchaser for infrastructure services
                                              Total payments and periodicity

                                              Land transferred on lease or other basis by
                                              government.
    Land leases, physical or other asset
                                              Equipment transfers: details of equipment with
    transfers
                                              conditions of transfer
                                              Rights or licenses transferred

                                              Non-compete clauses
    Other support
                                              Provision for revenue shortfall loan

                                              Revenue share on base case
                                              Revenue share on upside
    Revenue share, if any
                                              Graphs: annual concessionaire payments to
                                              government




96
VIII. TARIFFS (Disclosed within the nearest quarter of financial close)

                             This information will be required only where the infrastructure is
                             financed partly or fully through the levy of user charges
 Tariffs and pricing
                             Scope for reviews of tariff, pricing, regulatory mechanisms
                             Graphs: tariff increases over time, consumer price index movement


 IX. TERMINATION PROVISIONS (Disclosed within the nearest quarter after contract signing)

                 PARTY                      BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF EVENT OF DEFAULT

     Concessionaire

     Authority

 Handback terms and conditions

X.    RENEGOTIATIONS (After contract signing)

     RENEGOTIATION 1        RENEGOTIATION 2           RENEGOTIATION 3          RENEGOTIATION 4




XI. PERFORMANCE INFORMATION (to be updated annually)

       KEY                                Year 1                             Year n
       PERFORMANCE
       INDICATORS                Target         Achievement         Target       Achievement




                                Year


                                Category of failure


                                Number of events
Performance failures
                                Penalty or abatement provided in contract


                                Penalty or abatement imposed


                                Penalty paid or abatement effected: Yes/No



Performance assessments        Annual reports




                                                                                                  97
Annex D.4: Suggested Standard
Contractual Clauses (NSIA)
Section [insert number]: Disclosure Requirements
Obligations Regarding Specific Disclosures


1. Freedom of Information

     1.2 The [Private Party] acknowledges that [NSIA] is subject to the requirements of the
         Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority Establishment Act 2011, Freedom of
         Information Act 2011, and the Santiago Principles for Sovereign Wealth Funds
         and may be entitled to disclose information in accordance to the requirements
         under Section 52 of the NSIA Establishment Act, Sections 2(4) and (7) of the
         Freedom of Information Act 2011.
     1.3 The [Private Party] agrees to facilitate [NSIA’s] compliance with its disclosure
         requirements under the NSIA Establishment Act 2011 and the Freedom of
         Information Act 2011.
     1.4 Where the [NSIA] receives a request for information under the Freedom of
         Information Act 2011 in relation to information that the [Private Party] is holding
         and which the [NSIA] does not hold itself the [NSIA] shall refer to the [Private
         Party] such request for information that it receives as soon as practicable and in
         any event within [five] business days of receiving the request and the [Private
         Party] shall
         a. provide the [NSIA] with a copy of all such information in the form the [NSIA]
            requires as soon as practicable and in any event within [five] business days (or
            such other period as the [NSIA] acting reasonably may specify); and
         b. provide all necessary assistance as reasonably requested by the [NSIA] in
            connection with any such information to enable the [NSIA] to respond to a
            request for information within the time for compliance set out in the Freedom
            of Information Act 2011.
     1.5 The [Private Party] shall ensure that all project information generated is retained
         and maintained in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act 2011 during
         the term of this [ ] Agreement and for at least [ ] years after the [ ] Agreement
         has been terminated and shall permit the [NSIA] to inspect such information as
         requested from time to time.
     1.6 Where the [NSIA] receives a request for information under the Freedom
         Information Act 2011 the [NSIA] shall be responsible for determining at its
         absolute discretion whether information is exempt from disclosure under the
         Freedom of Information Act 2011 and for determining what information will be
         disclosed in response to any information request in accordance with the Freedom
         of Information Act 2011.



98
2. Public Relations and Publicity

   2.2 The [Private Party] shall not by itself, its employees or agents, communicate with
       representatives of the press, television, radio, or other communications media on
       any matter concerning this [ ] Agreement without the prior written approval of
       the [NSIA]
   2.3 The [Private Party] shall procure that its subcontractors shall not communicate
       with representatives of the press, television, radio, or other communications media
       on any matter concerning this [ ] Agreement without the prior written approval
       of the [NSIA]
   2.4 The [Private Party] may not represent the views of the [NSIA] on any matter, or
       use the name of the [NSIA] in any written material provided to third parties,
       without the prior written consent of the [NSIA].


3. Publication of Information Related to NSIA-
Sponsored Projects

   3.1 The parties agree that the [NSIA], subject to Section 4 (Confidentiality), is entitled
       to disclose as detailed out in Schedule [ ] the following information:
       a. Procurement documents and information;
       b. All project documents including this [ ] Agreement and other associated
          documents (such as, the feasibility study report/Outline Business Case or the
          Scoping Report);
       c. Summary project information as set out in Schedule [             ] of this [      ]
          Agreement;
       d. Performance information related to this [ ] Agreement.
   3.2 The [Private Party] acknowledges that the [NSIA] intends to publish the
       information mentioned in Subsection 3.1, subject to Section 4 (Confidentiality),
       on a web-based platform owned by NSIA.


4. Confidentiality

Confidential Information
   4.1 For the purpose of this [ ] Agreement, Confidential Information means:
       a. The subset of Confidential Information included in column 1 of Schedule [ ]
          of this [ ] Agreement in each case for the period specified in column 2 of
          Schedule [ ].
       b. Any other information (however it is conveyed or on whatever media it is
          stored) the disclosure of which would, or would be likely to, prejudice the
          commercial interests of any person, trade secrets, commercially sensitive


                                                                                          99
               intellectual property rights, and know-how of either Party, including all
               personal information;
      4.2 Without prejudice to Sections 1 and 3, the parties shall keep confidential all
          Confidential Information received by one party from the other party relating to this
          [ ] Agreement and any other Project Agreements or the [ ] project and shall use
          all reasonable endeavors to prevent their employees and agents from making any
          disclosure to any person of any such Confidential Information.

Permitted Disclosure
      4.3 Confidential Information may be disclosed if:
          a. disclosure of such Confidential Information is reasonably required by any
             person engaged in the performance of its obligations under the [ ] Agreement
             for the performance of those obligations;
          b. a party can demonstrate that such Confidential Information is already, or
             becomes, generally available in the public domain otherwise than as a result
             of a breach of this clause;
          c. such disclosure is necessary to enable a determination to be made under clause
             [insert reference to Dispute Resolution clause] or in connection with a dispute
             between the [Private Party] and any of its subcontractors;
          d. such disclosure is required pursuant to (i) any statutory or legal obligation; (ii)
             any order of a court of competent jurisdiction; (iii) a Parliamentary obligation
             placed upon the party making the disclosure; (iv) any order from a
             governmental or regulatory authority;
          e. the Confidential Information is already lawfully in the possession of the
             receiving party, prior to its disclosure by the disclosing party;
          f.   the Confidential Information is provided to:
                  i.   each party's own professional advisers or insurance advisers; and/or
                 ii.   the lenders or the lenders' professional advisers or insurance advisers
                       or, where it is proposed that a person should or may provide funds
                       (whether directly or indirectly and whether by loan, equity
                       participation or otherwise) to the [Private Party] to enable it to carry
                       out its obligations under the [ ] Agreement, or may wish to acquire
                       shares in the [Private Party] in accordance with the provisions of this
                       [ ] Agreement to that person or their respective professional advisers
                       but only to the extent reasonably necessary to enable a decision to be
                       taken on the proposal; and/or
                iii.   international or bilateral financial institutions involved in the project
                       as lenders, political risk insurers or guarantors.
          g. the disclosure of such Confidential Information by the [NSIA] relates to the
             design, construction, operation and maintenance of any PPP project and any
             disclosure of other Confidential Information as may be reasonably required for
             the purpose of conducting a due diligence exercise, to any proposed new
             private partner, its advisers and lenders, should the [Private Party] decide to
             retender a PPP Agreement or undertake any market testing;



100
       h. such disclosure is required for any registration, filing or recording of the
          required permits and property registration in connection with the [ ] project;
       i.   the disclosure of Confidential Information by the [NSIA] to any other relevant
            authority or their respective advisers or to any person engaged in providing
            services to the [NSIA] is necessary for any purpose related to or ancillary to
            the [ ] Agreement; or
       j.   such disclosure is necessary for the purpose of:
               i.   the examination and certification of the [NSIA’s] or the [Contracting
                    Party’s] accounts;
              ii.   any examination pursuant to [insert reference to any auditing
                    obligations for public contracts] of the economy, efficiency and
                    effectiveness with which the [NSIA] has used its resources;
             iii.   complying with a proper request from either party's insurance adviser,
                    or insurer on placing or renewing any insurance policies; or
             iv.    [without prejudice to the generality of Clause 4.3 (d) compliance with
                    [insert reference to any laws requiring disclosure (e.g., environmental
                    laws)]].
   4.4 When disclosure is permitted under Clauses 4.3 (a), (c), (f), (g), and (i), the party
       providing the information shall ensure that the recipient of the information shall
       be subject to the same obligation of confidentiality as that contained in this [ ]
       Agreement. The [Private Party] shall expressly inform any person to whom it
       discloses any information under this clause of the confidentiality restrictions set
       out in this clause and shall procure its compliance with the terms of this clause as
       if it were party to this [ ] Agreement and the [Private Party] shall be responsible
       for any breach by any such person of the provisions of this clause.

Confidential Information Related to End Users
   4.5 Where the [Private Party], in carrying out its obligations under the [ ] Agreement,
       is provided with personal information relating to [end users (e.g., road users,
       patients, and so forth)], the [Private Party] shall not disclose or make use of any
       such information otherwise than for the purpose for which it was provided, unless
       the [Private Party] has obtained the prior written consent of that [end user] and has
       obtained the prior written consent of the [NSIA].
   4.6 On or before the expiry date, the [Private Party] shall ensure that all documents or
       computer records in its possession, custody or control, which contain personal
       information relating to [end users] including any documents in the possession,
       custody or control of a subcontractor, are delivered up to the [NSIA].




                                                                                        101
5. Reporting Obligations, Provision of Information and
Documents

Obligation to Disclose Information, Documents and Records upon Request
      5.1 (a) The [Private Party] shall provide to the [NSIA] all information, documents,
          records and the like in the possession of, or available to, the [Private Party] as may
          reasonably be requested by the [NSIA] for the purpose of complying with any of
          its statutory reporting obligations including its reporting obligations under the
          Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority Act, 2011, the Freedom of Information
          Act 2011 and the Santiago Principles for Sovereign Wealth Funds.
          (b) To this end, the [Private Party] shall ensure that all such information in the
          possession of any subcontractor or other counterparty to any Project Agreement
          shall be available to the [NSIA] and the [Private Party] has included, or shall
          include, appropriate provisions to this effect in all Project Agreements.

Project Information
      5.2 (a) The [Private Party] shall provide to the [NSIA] a project summary as set out in
          Schedule [        ] of this [ ] Agreement within [ ] business days after signature of
          this [ ] Agreement and an updated version within fifteen business days after [insert
          definition for financial close].
          (b) In the event of any relevant change of this project information, the [Private
          Party] shall provide to the [NSIA] the updated information and links to the updated
          documents [ ] business days after the relevant change has occurred.
          (c) In the event of renegotiation the [Private Party] shall provide to the [NSIA]
          information on the renegotiation as well as links to the renegotiated [ ] Agreement
          within fifteen business days after signature of the renegotiated [ ] Agreement.

Performance Information
      5.3 The parties agree that the [Private Party] shall provide to the [NSIA] information
          relating to performance as set out in Schedule [ ] of this [ ] Agreement each year
          during the term of the contract.



                                          Schedule [ ]
                                    Confidential Information
                                                      Period for which information will remain
                Clauses/schedules
                                                                    confidential




102
Annex E: Comparison of World Bank
and Agreed Framework with Current
Practice (ICRC)
                                                              CURRENT
                                                                            AGREED
                      WORLD BANK FRAMEWORK                   DISCLOSURE
                                                                          FRAMEWORK
                                                              PRACTICE

1.           BASIC PROJECT INFORMATION

     1.1.    Name                                                Y              Y

     1.2.    Location                                            Y              Y

     1.3.    Sector                                              Y              Y

     1.4.    Sponsoring agency/department                        Y              Y

     1.5.    Estimated project value                             Y              Y

             Project need: benefits provided, economic
     1.6.    and social (including specific information on       N              Y
             the public interest aspect)

     1.7.    Stakeholder consultations                           N              Y

             Reason for selection of PPP mode and type
     1.8.                                                        N              Y
             in brief

             Brief description of other modes analyzed
     1.9.                                                        N              N
             and reasons for rejecting these

             Technical description of the physical
     1.10.                                                       N              Y
             infrastructure

     1.11.   Dates of various approvals                          N              Y

     1.12.   High-level description of the services              Y              Y

     1.13.   Estimated demand to be served annually              N              Y

     1.14.   Project additionality                               N              Y

             CONTRACT MILESTONES AND
2.
             DOCUMENTS

     2.1.    Date of contract signing                            N              Y

     2.2.    Date of financial close                             N              Y

             Date of commencement of construction or
     2.3.                                                        N              Y
             development

             Date of completion of construction or
     2.4.                                                        N              Y
             development

     2.5.    Date of commissioning                               N              Y




                                                                          103
      2.6.            Date of contract expiry                            N     Y

                      All contract documents (with appropriate
      2.7.                                                               N     Y
                      redactions)

                      PARTIES TO THE CONTRACT WITH
3.
                      CONTACT DETAILS

                      Public authority: name of authority, name of
      3.1.            representative, address, telephone, fax, e-        N     Y
                      mail

                      Private party: name of company or
      3.2.            consortium, name of representative,                N     Y
                      address, telephone, fax, e-mail

                      Financiers: name of lead financial institution
      3.3.            (FI), other FIs, name of representative of         N     Y
                      lead FI, address, telephone, fax, e-mail

4.                    PROCUREMENT INFORMATION

      4.1.            Dates and summary details                          Y     Y

                      Final feasibility study (including cost-benefit
      4.2.                                                               N     Y
                      analysis, if any)

                      Land acquisition, rehabilitation, social
                      (including information on human rights
      4.3.                                                               N     Y
                      impact assessment) and environmental
                      assessment related information

                      Reports of independent procurement
      4.4.                                                               N     Y
                      auditors and (if any)

      4.5.            Procurement documents

             4.5.1.   Expression of Interest                             Y     Y

             4.5.2.   Pre-qualification or short list                    Y     Y

             4.5.3.   Request for proposal                               Y/N   Y

                      Evaluation criteria: brief description with
             4.5.4.                                                      N     Y
                      weights

                      Brief information on constitution of the
             4.5.5.                                                      N     Y
                      evaluation committees

                      Negotiation parameters: brief description of
             4.5.6.   the parameters for negotiation with preferred      N     Y
                      proponent

             4.5.7.   Minutes of pre-bid meetings                        N     N

             4.5.8.   Selection of preferred bidder                      Y     Y

5.                    RISK

                      Pre-construction risk: all risks up to financial
      5.1.                                                               N     Y
                      close

      5.2.            Construction/completion                            N     Y




104
     5.3.    Cost risk: capital, operating                    N         Y

     5.4.    Refinancing risk                                 N         Y

             Risk related to change in law, taxes, scope,
     5.5.                                                     N         Y
             technical standards, regulatory framework

     5.6.    Exchange rate risk                               N         Y

     5.7.    Operating risk                                   N         Y

     5.8.    Commercial risk, market risk, demand risk        N         Y

     5.9.    Performance risk                                 N         Y

     5.10.   Financial risk                                   N         Y

     5.11.   Force majeure risk                               N         Y

     5.12.   Environmental risk                               N         Y

     5.13.   Social risk                                      N         Y

             EVALUATION OF PPP OPTION (VALUE-
6.           FOR-MONEY OR OTHER APPROACH
             USED)

     6.1.    Evaluation report (value for money or other)     N         Y

             Rationale for doing the project as a PPP,
             including any qualitative or quantitative
             value-for-money, final feasibility studies
     6.2.    (including cost-benefit analysis, if any) or     N         Y
             other analysis that might have been used,
             including nonfinancial benefits that have
             been quantified or considered

             Discount rates used along with the risk
             premium used, if any, and an explanation for
             the rate of risk premium used, referring to
     6.3.                                                     N         N
             guidance, if any, available in this regard or
             describing project-specific circumstances
             that justify the risk premium rate used

             Risk comparison of other financing
     6.4.                                                     N         N
             mechanisms

7.           FINANCIAL INFORMATION

     7.1.    Equity-debt ratio                                N         Y

     7.2.    Share capital                                    N         Y

             Shareholders with proportion held and voting
     7.3.                                                     N         Y
             rights

             Details of any provisions related to contracts
             providing for caps on equity transfer in
     7.4.    different stages of the contract, especially     N         Y
             during the construction stage and for a few
             years thereafter




                                                                  105
                      Commercial lenders, institutional investors,
      7.5.            bilateral or multilateral lenders, public issue   N   Y
                      of bonds, supplier credit, other

                      Categorize senior debt, mezzanine debt,
      7.6.                                                              N   N
                      other

                      Amount and tenor of each, fixed or floating
      7.7.                                                              N   Y
                      rate

      7.8.            Security and step in arrangements                 N   Y

      7.9.            Forecast internal rate of return                  N   Y

8.                    GOVERNMENT SUPPORT

                      Guarantees (type and details of the
      8.1.            guarantees provided—explicit and contingent       N   Y
                      guarantees)

             8.1.1.   Minimum revenue guarantee                         N   Y

             8.1.2.   Exchange rate guarantee                           N   Y

             8.1.3.   Debt repayment guarantee                          N   Y

             8.1.4.   Other guarantees                                  N   Y

                      Fiscal commitments and contingent liability
             8.1.5.                                                     N   Y
                      disclosure reports

      8.2.            Grants                                            N   Y

             8.2.1.   Subsidy as a proportion of project value          N   Y

                      Capital subsidies paid during construction
             8.2.2.                                                     N   Y
                      with periodicity or milestones

                      Operating subsidies and their periodicity or
             8.2.3.                                                     N   Y
                      milestones

                      Service payments (payments made by the
                      public authority or purchaser to the private
      8.3.            provider for infrastructure services              N   Y
                      (applicable in private finance initiative–type
                      projects))

             8.3.1.   Total payments and periodicity                    N   Y

             8.3.2.   Methodology for calculating payments              N   Y

             8.3.3.   Indexation used                                   N   Y

      8.4.            Land leases, asset transfers                      N   Y

                      Property numbers with the quantum of land
             8.4.1.                                                     N   N/Y
                      transferred

             8.4.2.   Zoning information of land                        N   N

             8.4.3.   Conditions of transfer of land                    N   N

                      Equipment transfers: details of equipment
             8.4.4.                                                     N   N
                      with conditions of transfer



106
                      Human resources / personnel transfers:
             8.4.5.                                                      N         Y
                      details and conditions of transfer

      8.5.            Other support                                      N         Y

             8.5.1.   Non-complete clauses                               N         Y

             8.5.2.   Provision for revenue shortfall loan               N         N

      8.6.            Revenue share, if any                              N         Y

             8.6.1.   Revenue share on base case                         N         Y

             8.6.2.   Revenue share on upside                            N         Y

                      Graphs: annual concessionaire payments to
             8.6.3.                                                      N         Y
                      government

9.                    TARIFFS

                      Tariffs and pricing (where the infrastructure
      9.1.            is financed partly or fully through the levy of    N         Y
                      user charges)

             9.1.1.   Methodology for tariff setting/pricing             N         Y

                      Scope for reviews of tariff, pricing, regulatory
             9.1.2.                                                      N         Y
                      mechanisms

                      Graphs: tariff increases over time, consumer
             9.1.3.                                                      N         Y
                      price index movement

10.                   CONTRACT TERMINATION

                      Concessionaire: events of default,
      10.1.           termination payments made, methodology             N         Y
                      used for total payments

                      Authority: events of default, termination
      10.2.           payments made, methodology used for total          N         Y
                      payments

11.                   RENEGOTIATIONS

      11.1.           Nature of variation                                N         Y

      11.2.           Rationale for variation                            N         Y

                      Change in roles and responsibilities of the
      11.3.                                                              N         Y
                      parties due to the variation, if any

                      Change in original risk allocation due to the
      11.4.                                                              N         Y
                      variation, if any

                      Change in original fiscal commitments or
      11.5.           contingent liabilities of government due to        N         Y
                      the variation, if any

                      Change in capital or operational costs due to
      11.6.                                                              N         Y
                      the variation, if any

                      Change in tariffs or service levels due to the
      11.7.                                                              N         Y
                      variation, if any




                                                                             107
      11.8.         Date of variation                                N   Y

12.                 PERFORMANCE INFORMATION

      12.1.         Annual demand levels                             N   N

                    Annual revenues (where revenue share
                    clauses or other related clauses, such as
      12.2.                                                          N   N
                    minimum revenue guarantees, are present in
                    the contract)

                    Actual internal rate of return (where there is
      12.3.         government equity investment or other form       N   N
                    of government support that is substantial)

                    Performance (actual year-wise performance
      12.4.         against 10 to 12 identified key performance      N   Y
                    indicators)

      12.5.         Performance failures                             N   Y

          12.5.1. Year                                               N   Y

          12.5.2. Category of failure                                N   Y

          12.5.3. Number of events                                   N   Y

          12.5.4. Penalty or abatement provided in contract          N   Y

          12.5.5. Penalty or abatement imposed                       N   Y

          12.5.6. Penalty paid or abatement effected                 N   Y

      12.6.         Performance assessments                          N   Y

          12.6.1. Audit reports                                      N   Y

                    Independent performance assessments of
          12.6.2.                                                    N   Y
                    the independent engineer

                    Any other performance reports available for
          12.6.3.                                                    N   Y
                    the project




108
Annex F: Comparison of World Bank
and Agreed Framework with Current
Practice (NSIA)
                                                               CURRENT
                                                                             AGREED
                       WORLD BANK FRAMEWORK                   DISCLOSURE
                                                                           FRAMEWORK
                                                               PRACTICE

1.            BASIC PROJECT INFORMATION

     1.1.     Name                                                Y              Y

     1.2.     Location                                            Y              Y

     1.3.     Sector                                              Y              Y

     1.4.     Sponsoring agency/department                        Y              Y

     1.5.     Estimated project value                             Y              Y

              Project need: benefits provided, economic
     1.6.     and social (including specific information on      Y/N             Y
              the public interest aspect)

     1.7.     Stakeholder consultations                           N              Y

              Reason for selection of PPP mode and type
     1.8.                                                         N              Y
              in brief

              Brief description of other modes analyzed
     1.9. s                                                       N              Y
              and reasons for rejecting these

              Technical description of the physical
     1.10.                                                        N              Y
              infrastructure

     1.11.    Dates of various approvals                          N              Y

     1.12.    High-level description of the services              Y              Y

     1.13.    Estimated demand to be served annually              N              Y

     1.14.    Project additionality                               N              Y

              CONTRACT MILESTONES AND
2.
              DOCUMENTS

     2.1.     Date of commercial close                            N              Y

     2.2.     Date of financial close                             N              Y

              Date of commencement of construction or
     2.3.                                                         N              Y
              development

              Date of completion of construction or
     2.4.                                                         N              Y
              development

     2.5.     Date of commissioning                               N              Y




                                                                           109
      2.6.            Date of contract expiry                           N     Y

                      All contract documents (with appropriate
      2.7.                                                              N     Y
                      redactions)

                      PARTIES TO THE CONTRACT WITH
3.
                      CONTACT DETAILS

                      Public authority: name of authority, name of
      3.1.            representative, address, telephone, fax, e-       N     Y
                      mail

                      Private party: name of company or
      3.2.            consortium, name of representative,               N     Y
                      address, telephone, fax, e-mail

                      Financiers: name of lead financial institution
      3.3.            (FI), other FIs, name of representative of        N     Y
                      lead FI, address, telephone, fax, e-mail

4.                    PROCUREMENT INFORMATION

      4.1.            Dates and summary details                         Y     Y

                      Final feasibility study (including cost-benefit
      4.2.                                                              N     Y
                      analysis, if any)

                      Land acquisition, rehabilitation, social
                      (including information on human rights
      4.3.                                                              N     Y
                      impact assessment) and environmental
                      assessment related information

                      Reports of independent procurement
      4.4.                                                              N     Y
                      auditors and (if any)

      4.5.            Procurement documents

             4.5.1.   Expression of Interest                            Y     N

             4.5.2.   Pre-qualification or short list                   Y     Y

             4.5.3.   Request for proposal                              Y/N   Y

                      Evaluation criteria: brief description with
             4.5.4.                                                     N     Y
                      weightage

                      Brief information on constitution of the
             4.5.5.                                                     N     N
                      evaluation committees

                      Negotiation parameters: brief description of
             4.5.6.   the parameters for negotiation with preferred     N     N
                      proponent

             4.5.7.   Minutes of pre-bid meetings                       N     N

             4.5.8.   Selection of preferred bidder                     Y     Y




110
5.           RISK

             Pre-construction risk: all risks up to financial
     5.1.                                                       N         Y
             close

     5.2.    Construction/completion                            N         Y

     5.3.    Cost risk: capital, operating                      N         Y

     5.4.    Refinancing risk                                   N         Y

             Risk related to change in law, taxes, scope,
     5.5.                                                       N         Y
             technical standards, regulatory framework

     5.6.    Exchange rate risk                                 N         Y

     5.7.    Operating risk                                     N         Y

     5.8.    Commercial risk, market risk, demand risk          N         Y

     5.9.    Performance risk                                   N         Y

     5.10.   Financial risk                                     N         Y

     5.11.   Force majeure risk                                 N         Y

     5.12.   Environmental risk                                 N         Y

     5.13.   Social risk                                        N         Y

             EVALUATION OF PPP OPTION (VALUE-
6.           FOR-MONEY OR OTHER APPROACH
             USED)

     6.1.    Evaluation report (value for money or other)       N         Y

             Rationale for doing the project as a PPP,
             including any qualitative or quantitative
             value-for-money, final feasibility studies
     6.2.    (including cost-benefit analysis, if any) or       N         Y
             other analysis that might have been used,
             including nonfinancial benefits that have
             been quantified or considered

             Discount rates used along with the risk
             premium used, if any, and an explanation for
             the rate of risk premium used, referring to
     6.3.                                                       N         Y
             guidance, if any, available in this regard or
             describing project-specific circumstances
             that justify the risk premium rate used

             Risk comparison of other financing
     6.4.                                                       N         Y
             mechanisms

7.           FINANCIAL INFORMATION

     7.1.    Equity-debt ratio                                  N         Y

     7.2.    Share capital                                      N         Y

             Shareholders with proportion held and voting
     7.3.                                                       N         Y
             rights




                                                                    111
                      Details of any provisions related to contracts
                      providing for caps on equity transfer in
      7.4.            different stages of the contract, especially      N   Y
                      during the construction stage and for a few
                      years thereafter

                      Commercial lenders, institutional investors,
      7.5.            bilateral or multilateral lenders, public issue   N   Y
                      of bonds, supplier credit, other

                      Categorize senior debt, mezzanine debt,
      7.6.                                                              N   Y
                      other

                      Amount and tenor of each, fixed or floating
      7.7.                                                              N   Y
                      rate

      7.8.            Security and step in arrangements                 N   Y

      7.9.            Forecast internal rate of return                  N   Y

8.                    GOVERNMENT SUPPORT

                      Guarantees (type and details of the
      8.1.            guarantees provided—explicit and contingent       N   Y
                      guarantees)

             8.1.1.   Minimum revenue guarantee                         N   Y

             8.1.2.   Exchange rate guarantee                           N   Y

             8.1.3.   Debt repayment guarantee                          N   Y

             8.1.4.   Other guarantees                                  N   Y

                      Fiscal commitments and contingent liability
             8.1.5.                                                     N   Y
                      disclosure reports

      8.2.            Grants                                            N   Y

             8.2.1.   Subsidy as a proportion of project value          N   Y

                      Capital subsidies paid during construction
             8.2.2.                                                     N   Y
                      with periodicity or milestones

                      Operating subsidies and their periodicity or
             8.2.3.                                                     N   Y
                      milestones

                      Service payments (payments made by the
                      public authority or purchaser to the private
      8.3.            provider for infrastructure services              N   Y
                      (applicable in private finance initiative–type
                      projects))

             8.3.1.   Total payments and periodicity                    N   Y

             8.3.2.   Methodology for calculating payments              N   Y

             8.3.3.   Indexation used                                   N   Y

      8.4.            Land leases, asset transfers                      N   Y

                      Property numbers with the quantum of land
             8.4.1.                                                     N   N/Y
                      transferred




112
             8.4.2.   Zoning information of land                         N         N

             8.4.3.   Conditions of transfer of land                     N         Y

                      Equipment transfers: details of equipment
             8.4.4.                                                      N         Y
                      with conditions of transfer

                      Human resources / personnel transfers:
             8.4.5.                                                      N         Y
                      details and conditions of transfer

      8.5.            Other support                                      N         Y

             8.5.1.   Non-complete clauses                               N         Y

             8.5.2.   Provision for revenue shortfall loan               N         Y

      8.6.            Revenue share, if any                              N         Y

             8.6.1.   Revenue share on base case                         N         Y

             8.6.2.   Revenue share on upside                            N         Y

                      Graphs: annual concessionaire payments to
             8.6.3.                                                      N         Y
                      government

9.                    TARIFFS

                      Tariffs and pricing (where the infrastructure
      9.1.            is financed partly or fully through the levy of    N         Y
                      user charges)

             9.1.1.   Methodology for tariff setting/pricing             N         Y

                      Scope for reviews of tariff, pricing, regulatory
             9.1.2.                                                      N         Y
                      mechanisms

                      Graphs: tariff increases over time, consumer
             9.1.3.                                                      N         Y
                      price index movement

10.                   CONTRACT TERMINATION

                      Concessionaire: Events of default,
      10.1.           termination payments made, methodology             N         Y
                      used for total payments

                      Authority: events of default, termination
      10.2.           payments made, methodology used for total          N         Y
                      payments

11.                   RENEGOTIATIONS

      11.1.           Nature of variation                                N         Y

      11.2.           Rationale for variation                            N         Y

                      Change in roles and responsibilities of the
      11.3.                                                              N         Y
                      parties due to the variation, if any

                      Change in original risk allocation due to the
      11.4.                                                              N         Y
                      variation, if any

                      Change in original fiscal commitments or
      11.5.           contingent liabilities of government due to        N         Y
                      the variation, if any



                                                                             113
                    Change in capital or operational costs due to
      11.6.                                                          N   Y
                    the variation, if any

                    Change in tariffs or service levels due to the
      11.7.                                                          N   Y
                    variation, if any

      11.8.         Date of variation                                N   Y

12.                 PERFORMANCE INFORMATION

      12.1.         Annual demand levels                             N   Y

                    Annual revenues (where revenue share
                    clauses or other related clauses, such as
      12.2.                                                          N   Y
                    minimum revenue guarantees, are present in
                    the contract)

                    Actual internal rate of return (where there is
      12.3.         government equity investment or other form       N   Y
                    of government support that is substantial)

                    Performance (actual year-wise performance
      12.4.         against 10 to 12 identified key performance      N   Y
                    indicators)

      12.5.         Performance failures                             N   Y

          12.5.1. Year                                               N   Y

          12.5.2. Category of failure                                N   Y

          12.5.3. Number of events                                   N   Y

          12.5.4. Penalty or abatement provided in contract          N   Y

          12.5.5. Penalty or abatement imposed                       N   Y

          12.5.6. Penalty paid or abatement effected                 N   Y

      12.6.         Performance assessments                          N   Y

          12.6.1. Audit reports                                      N   Y

                    Independent performance assessments of
          12.6.2.                                                    N   Y
                    the independent engineer

                    Any other performance reports available for
          12.6.3.                                                    N   Y
                    the project




114
116
