Reaching for the SDGs
The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply,
Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector
Executive Summary



TANZANIA
About the Water Global Practice
Launched in 2014, the Word Bank Group's Water Global Practice brings
together financing, knowledge, and implementation in one platform.
By combining the Bank's global knowledge with country investments,
this model generates more firepower for transformational solutions to
help countries grow sustainably.

Please visit us at www.worldbank.org/water or follow us on Twitter
@WorldBankWater.
Reaching for the SDGs
The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply,
Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector
Executive Summary
 This publication is the executive summary from the forthcoming Water Supply, Sanitation,
 and Hygiene (WASH) Poverty Diagnostic, Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of
 Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector. Please use the full report for citation,
 reproduction, and adaptation purposes.

© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board
of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment
on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of
its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as
full attribution to this work is given.

Please cite the work as follows: World Bank. 2017. Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential
of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector . WASH Poverty Diagnostic. World Bank,
Washington, DC.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-
2625; e-mail: pubrights​@­worldbank.org.

Cover design: Bill Pragluski, Critical Stages LLC.
  Acknowledgments
  This work was made possible by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency.

  The authors of this report are George Joseph (Senior Economist), Sabrina Haque, (Consultant
  Public Health Specialist), and Sophie Ayling (Consultant Analyst). Work on the Tanzania WASH
  Poverty Diagnostic began in December 2015. The study team is led by George Joseph and
  C. Ajith Kumar (Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist). Team members include Sabrina Haque,
  Sophie Ayling, Jonathan Grabinsky (Consultant), and Nazia Moqueet (Consultant).

  The following expert consultants provided substantive contributions to this study: Isabel
  Larenas Gonzalez, John Newman, Pete Gething, and Ruth Denali Carlitz.

  The team thanks Alexander Danilenko (Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist) and Aroha
  Bahugana (Operations Analyst) for their contributions through analysis of IBNET data.

  The team also thanks the WASH Poverty Diagnostic global team members: Luis Andres
  (Lead Economist), Craig Kullmann (Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist), Vivek Srivastava
  (Lead Public Sector Development Specialist), and Emmanuel Skoufias (Lead Economist) for
  their guidance concerning different elements of this work. Also, the report would not have been
  possible without the inputs of global team members Shiqing Li (Consultant), Diana Cubas
  (Consultant), Elizabeth Loughnan (Consultant), and Katja Vinha (Consultant). We would also
  like to thank Martin Craig Hall (Communications Officer) for presentation support.

  The team is grateful for the insights, interest, and feedback of Tanzania Country Management
  Unit members Yitbarek Tessema (Lead Water and Sanitation Specialist), Gayle Martin (Program
  Leader), Andre Bald (Program Leader), Gabriel Lwakabare (Consultant), Matilda James Kivelege
  (Consultant), and Carlos Batarda (Consultant) for the support and encouragement of Bella Bird
  (Country Director).

  The team also thanks Jyoti Shukla (Director), Maria Angelica Sotomayor (Practice Manager),
  and Jonathan Kamkawalala (Practice Manager) for making this work possible.

  The team is very appreciative of the thoughtful comments and feedback from peer reviewers
  Kristoffer Welsien (Water and Sanitation Specialist), Maximilian Hirn (Economist), and Gayle
  Martin (Program Leader).




Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector	   iii
  Abbreviations
  BCC	           Behavioral change communications
  B40	           Bottom 40 percent of the wealth distribution
  CBO	           Community-based organization
  COWSO	         Community-owned water supply organization
  DAWASCO	       Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Corporation
  DHS	           Demographic and Health Survey
  EAC	           East African community
  JMP	           Joint Monitoring Program
  MDG	           Millennium Development Goal
  MKUKUTA	       Tanzania’s National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty
  NGO	           Non-governmental organization
  SDG	           Sustainable Development Goal
  TASF	          Tanzania Social Fund
  T60	           Top 60 percent of the wealth distribution
  TWPD	          Tanzania WASH Poverty Diagnostic
  WASH	          Water supply, sanitation, and hygiene
  WSDP	          Water Sector Development Program
  WSS	           Water supply and sanitation




Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector	   v
         Tanzanian Wash Sector
         At A Glance
         Access to safe, functional, and improved water points remains too low.
                                              Only 60% of Tanzanians get their drinking water from an
                                                                                    improved source.
                                         In 2016, 40% of water points were reportedly non-functional,
                                                  with many failing in the first year after construction.
                                     About two-thirds of all piped water users in urban areas reported
                                     that they were unable to access water for at least one day in the
                                                                                   previous two weeks.
         The sanitation sector achieved gains in coverage in recent years, but still has a long
         road ahead.
                                         Though almost all Tanzanians practice fixed-point defecation,
                                        over 80% of rural Tanzanians rely on rudimentary, unimproved
                                                                                  sanitation facilities.
                                             In urban areas, despite a 13% increase in total improved
                                       sanitation, overall coverage of sewerage networks remains low
                                                                  with less than 2% coverage in 2016.
         Hygiene promotion and WASH in schools and hospitals remain neglected goals.
                                      About 22% of households and 75% of schools lack a functional
                                                 hand-washing facility with available soap and water.
                                          Over half of health facilities report routine water shortages,
                                                                which can interfere with hygienic care.


         Rurality and wealth have a notable impact on access to WASH services.
                                     Rurality contributes 45% of the explanation for lack of access to
                                       improved water, while poorer wealth status contributes 50% of
                                               the explanation for lack of improved sanitation access.
                                     Only 13% of the population practices open defecation. However,
                                             of those, 75% are in the B40 of the wealth distribution.

         Poor WASH undermines public health and human development.
                                     Waterborne diseases stemming from poor WASH are an issue of
                                      concern. In 2016, 24,108 cholera cases, including 378 deaths,
                                                                         were reported in Tanzania.
                                        Lack of WASH can interrupt healthy childhood development by
                                       increasing risk of enteric infections and reducing retention and
                                        absorption of essential nutrients. In Tanzania, 35% of children
                                                                             under age five are stunted.




vi	   Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector
  Executive Summary
  Tanzania is the fourth most populous country in Sub-Saharan Africa, home to more than
  55.6 million people.1 The country’s macroeconomic outlook is positive, with GDP growth of
  6.5 percent per annum over the past fifteen years and significant reductions in poverty since
  2007.

  Despite this progress, 40 percent of its population, some 21 million people, lack access to
  improved drinking water and more than double that figure, almost 43 million people, lack
  access to improved sanitation. The country recently fell a long way short of reaching its
  Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets for water and sanitation, which was “to halve the
  proportion of people without improved drinking water and sanitation in 1990 by 2015.” Now,
  the new Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) aim to reach universal access to safe water
  and sanitation by 2030, an aspiration that appears even more daunting.

  “Too Low and Too Slow: The Unfulfilled Potential of Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene in Tanzania”
  is a summary report of the findings of the Tanzania WASH Poverty Diagnostic (TWPD) study led
  by the World Bank’s Water and Poverty Global Practices team. TWPD identifies the nature of
  challenges of water supply, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) access in Tanzania and proposes
  ways to prioritize those challenges in moving forward to meet the new SDGs. It concludes that
  WASH must improve not only for the sake of the sector itself, but also because of the broader
  knock-on effects that it has on crucial dimensions of human development and poverty
  reduction.

  TWPD discusses the country’s current development and poverty context before moving on
  to the ways in which poverty and WASH overlap. It then examines the different dimensions
  of WASH deficiencies in the country, and how these differ along economic and geographic
  lines. Next, it delves into specific linkages between WASH and human development, with a
  focus on stunting—a nutrition issue of immense importance in the Tanzanian context. It
  then provides an overview of the bottlenecks in the institutional and policy context that thus
  far have been constraining greater progress in the sector. Finally, the report offers
  recommendations on how to speed progress toward national and global objectives with a
  focus on the bottom 40% poor (B40).

  This Executive Summary provides an overview of the key messages and recommendations of
  the work conducted.


  Key Messages

  Message 1: Tanzania Faces Ambitious SDG Targets for Water
  and Sanitation against a Backdrop of Low Coverage and
  Slow Progress during the MDG Era
  The SDGs call for universal access to safely managed water and sanitation by 2030. Beyond
  providing technologically improved water and sanitation facilities, the country will also need to
  meet rigorous standards on service quality. For instance, to have safely managed water, a
  household must have access to a technologically improved water source that is on premise
  and delivers uninterrupted and clean water, free of chemical and bacterial contaminants. To
  meet the sanitation target, a household will need an unshared, improved sanitation facility that
  has regular fecal sludge management and is equipped with a handwashing station with
  available soap and water (JMP 2017).


Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector	   1
       However, Tanzania’s performance during the MDG period sets a difficult task for meeting the
       ambitious SDGs. Globally, Tanzania is among the 17 countries that could not meet the water
       target and among the 69 that missed the sanitation target. Compared to its East African
       neighbors and the Sub-Saharan region, Tanzania had the smallest gains in improved water
       coverage during the MDG period and despite making progress in sanitation had the second-
       worst improved sanitation coverage (figures ES.1 and ES.2). Tanzania is the second-largest
       economy in the East African Community (EAC) and has comparative advantages that could
       support strong economic growth: it is a resource-rich coastal hub and has good demographic
       dividends and political stability. Its shortcomings in the water and sanitation sector are
       somewhat surprising. Slow progress during the MDG era may make the SDG targets seem out
       of reach, but now the country has the opportunity to revise and revitalize efforts to ensure that
       all Tanzanians live in a safe WASH environment that bolsters their quality of life.


       Message 2: Improved Water Services Are Largely Underdeveloped
       for Rural Dwellers and Unreliable for Too Many Urban Inhabitants
       National improved water coverage is only 60 percent, meaning that some 21 million people lack
       access to a water source that is built with technology that prevents contaminants from entering
       the system. (See figure ES.3.) Rural areas have the worst improved water coverage—48 percent
       compared to 87 percent in urban areas. Many rural Tanzanians instead rely on traditional open-
       dug wells (24 percent) or surface water (18 percent). In urban areas, people who cannot access
       tap or borehole water may turn instead to costly, informal tanker trunks or water vendors.

       Furthermore, just 47 percent of the population has access to an improved water source that
       has a collection time of 30 minutes or less, and only about 25 percent have access to a water
       source on their household premise. Without proximal access to an improved source, many
       Tanzanians, particularly rural women, must travel long distances to retrieve water for drinking
       and other domestic needs, taking away valuable time from productive activities. On average,
       Tanzanians spend 36 minutes per trip to collect water. Assuming that water collection is a daily
       activity, with at least two trips per day, a household on average devotes more than eight hours
       per week to collecting water.

       Though urban dwellers tend to have better access to improved water services close to their
       homes,  they too face challenges of unreliable service, high dependence on informal providers,

           Figure ES.1: Access to Improved Water across the East African Community and
           Sub-Saharan Africa Region: Changes 1990–2015


                     100

                                                           79            76             76
                     80
                                                                    69                                               68
                                 56          63
                                                                                   59                 59
                     60     54
           Percent




                                                                                                                48
                                       43             40
                     40

                     20

                      0
                           Tanzania     Kenya         Uganda        Burundi        Rwanda      South Sudan Sub-Saharan
                                                                                                              Africa
                                                                  1990      2015


       Source: World Development Indicators (database). 2017. World Bank, Washington, DC. http://databank.worldbank.org/data​
       /­home.aspx.




2	   Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector
        Figure ES.2: Access to Improved Sanitation across the East African Community and
        Sub-Saharan Africa Region: Changes 1990–2015


                  80

                                                                                                   62
                  60
                                                                                 48
        Percent




                                                                         42
                  40                                                                          33
                                               30                                                                                     30
                                        25                                                                                       24
                                                               19
                  20       16                             13
                       7                                                                                           7
                   0
                       Tanzania             Kenya         Uganda             Burundi            Rwanda     South Sudan        Sub-Saharan
                                                                                                                                 Africa

                                                                       1990            2015


        Figure ES.3: National, Urban, and Rural Water Access, by Tiers of Service


            100
                                                                      86.8
                                                                             79.0
                  80

                              59.7                                                  58.7
                  60
      Percent




                                                                                                         51.6
                                     47.9                                                                       48.4
                       40.3
                  40                                                                                                   34.9
                                            24.5                                         26.3
                  20
                                                   10.4        13.3                                                       10.3
                                                                                                                                  3.9
                   0
                                  Total                                  Urban                                     Rural
                           Unimproved water (T0)                       Improved water (T1)                       Basic water (T2)
                           On-premise improved water (T3)              On-premise piped water (T4)


  Source: DHS 2016.
  Note: Box ES.1 provides a full explanation of JMP definitions on tiers of service for water and sanitation.


  and low water quality. For instance, two-thirds of piped water users report an interruption in service
  at least once every two weeks. These problems stem from financial and service delivery problems
  at the urban utilities. For example, DAWASCO, Dar es Salaam’s utility, suffers from high rates of
  non-revenue water, consistently exceeding 50 percent over the past three years. Figures like these
  may reduce the utilities’ ability to invest in expanding and improving services for the sprawling
  urban population. In Dar es Salaam, 18 percent of the Bottom 40 relies on informal tanker trucks.

  Message 3: The Longstanding Neglect of Sanitation
  Leaves 80 Percent of the Population Relying on
  Rudimentary and Unsafe Facilities
  Improved sanitation reaches a mere 20 percent of the population nationwide (figure ES.4), meaning
  that the vast majority of Tanzanians, some 43 million people, are relying on rudimentary, unimproved
  facilities. At the same time, there are pockets of open defecation highly concentrated in the


Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector	                                   3
             Box ES.1: The Importance of Data

             The Tanzania WASH Poverty Diagnostic has drawn on data from several sources to
             document as far as possible the country’s history and current conditions in terms
             of water supply, sanitation, poverty and health. Data sources include household
             surveys (primarily Demographic and Household Surveys (DHS) from 1996 to 2016);
             Joint Monitoring Program (JMP) data on the MDG targets since 1990; the Rural
             Water and Sanitation Survey (RWS) collected under the supervision of the World
             Bank and the Water and Sanitation Program until 2014; poverty data calculations
             from the National Bureau of Statistics in collaboration with the Poverty Global
             Practice World Bank; and the Tanzanian Ministry of Water and Irrigation’s Water
             Point Mapping data from 2014.

             Gaining an understanding of the overall picture through analyses of different data
             sources has sometimes been a challenge in and of itself because they provide
             different lenses on common problems. Lack of consistent and reliable data is a
             particular limitation in Tanzania in establishing trends over time and fixing attainable
             targets across sectors. There is also a need for representative household data at
             the district level to better undertake inferences at the level of local government
             authorities, the lowest administrative units) with more statistical precision. As for
             the WASH sector, SDG monitoring requires reliable water quality estimates at the
             district level. Water Point Mapping data from the Ministry of Water and Irrigation has
             also been undergoing iterations of cleaning in order to ensure the information is
             accurate.

             Reliable data collection, verification, harmonized indicators in line with national
             targets, and data entry are key to providing concrete insights to stakeholders in a
             technical and politically neutral manner. In Tanzania, the collection and use of Water
             Point Mapping data in particular are on their way to being institutionalized. The data
             have been undergoing iterations of cleaning in order to ensure accuracy. Regular
             updating using improved technologies should be integrated into the mapping
             process.




       northeast of the country, with a total of 14 percent of the rural population (5.1 million people)
       lacking a toilet. In urban areas, less than 2 percent of the population has a sewer connection.
       Without a national policy on sanitation and clear designation of an agency to guide the rural
       sanitation sector, there is limited political will and coordination to effectively scale up sanitation
       interventions. Rural sanitation has benefited from some successful campaigns to reduce open
       defecation, but there is little progress in transitioning households to using technologically
       improved sanitation facilities. With sanitation champions such as the late President Julius
       Nyerere, open defecation was successfully reduced through such initiatives as the 1973 Mtu Ni
       Afya (“Health Man”) campaign. New campaigns such as Choo Bora (“A Good Toilet is Possible!”)
       are now using behavioural change communication (BCC) and sanitation marketing approaches to
       encourage the uptake of improved latrines and have achieved some success in pilot districts
       (World Bank 2017). But large scale-up of improved sanitation remains unachieved.

       In contrast, provision of urban sanitation services is delegated to too many organizations, with
       low accountability, and responsibilities and functions often misaligned. Responsibility for the


4	   Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector
       Figure ES.4: National, Urban, Rural Sanitation Access by Tiers of Service


                100                                                                                         89.3
                              79.8                                        74.9
                 80
                                                                     57
      Percent




                 60
                                                                                  43
                 40                  31.7
                                            20.2
                 20    10.5                                                                          13.8          13.8
                                                               2.5                                                        10.7
                                                   0.4                                 1.3                                       0.1
                  0
                                National                                  Urban                                 Rural
                                                         Open defecation
                                                         Unimproved sanitation (T0)
                                                         Improved sanitation (incl shared) (T1)
                                                         Improved sanitation (unshared) (T2)
                                                         Private sewer connection (T3)


  Source: DHS 2016.
  Note: Box ES.1 provides a full explanation of JMP definitions on tiers of service for water and sanitation.




  operation of sanitation and hygiene facilities (cess pit emptying, cleaning of public latrines,
  solid waste collection, etc.) is divided among a plethora of organizations at all levels.
  Concerning oversight, five ministries— water, environment, health, education, and local
  government—have some responsibility for sanitation. Implementation is delegated to
  parastatal organizations, the private sector, NGOs, and CBOs. However, these organizations
  typically face limited capacity to implement at a large scale. This leaves the majority of
  Tanzanian cities with minimal treatment of sewerage. Dar es Salaam discharges it directly
  into the Indian Ocean and the Msimbazi River. While wastewater stabilization ponds do exist
  in the city, recent reports found that five out of seven of these were malfunctioning. Tanga
  port has a similar problem: 2,164 cubic meters of raw sewage are discharged directly into
  the Indian Ocean each day.


  Message 4: Rurality and Poverty Are the Primary Drivers of Low
  WASH Coverage. The Sustained Deprivation of WASH Signals
  that Business-as-Usual Investments Are Not Showing Sufficient
  Return for the Country’s Rural Majority Population
  Spatial analysis shows substantial overlaps between rurality, high poverty rates, and low
  WASH coverage. Red patches on map ES.1 show overlap in high poverty and low improved
  water coverage in the dry season in Ruvuma in the South, Katavi and Mbeya in the West,
  and parts of Tabora and Kigoma in the North. Such patterns could be due to the fact that
  more than 90 percent of the poor live in rural regions. Business-as-usual investments are not
  overcoming service delivery barriers associated with rurality and poverty. The urban-rural
  disparity in WASH services is stark, with minimal progress in closing this gap during the MDG
  period. In Tanzania and in many countries throughout the world, urban households are better
  off than their rural counterparts because they have superior endowments in such measures
  as education, assets, and institutions (World Bank 2015). Implementing services for urban
  dwellers is typically easier than for rural residents, but with 70 percent of the national
  population making their lives in rural areas and the vast majority of them being poor, the
  country needs to give special attention to designing interventions that can reach the poor as
  well as be sustainable in rural settings.


Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector	                              5
           Map ES.1: Cross Mapping of Poverty Versus Access to Improved Water in Dry Season
           of 2014



                                                                              Cross-mapping of poverty versus
                                                                                  WASH: population using
                                                                                    improved water (%)
                                                                                       (dry season)




             Poverty     WASH
              rate     indicator
               Low        Low
               Low        High
              High        Low
              High        High

             Admin boundaries
                                      0 20 40   80 Miles
                  Districts



       Source: DHS 2016 and World Bank 2017.



       Despite large-scale investments in expansion of rural water services, coverage rates have not
       shown corresponding increases (figure ES.5). Of the 83,000 rural water points recorded in the
       national water point census as of 2014, 40 percent were found to be non-functioning, with the
       likelihood of failure highest in their first year of operation with a staggering 20 percent failure
       rate. A more in-depth analysis of this water point data has shown that technology choice,
       hydrology, management, and location-based factors are to varying degrees responsible for the
       failures. Going forward, the country would do well to learn from these experiences to ensure
       that future investment provides more sustainable results.


       Message 5: WASH Investments Can Lead to Broad Knock-On
       Effects on Productivity and Human Development in Tanzania
       Adequate WASH conditions are a cornerstone for improved human development and
       accelearated poverty reduction in Tanzania. In view of the multifaceted harmful effects of


6	   Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector
        Figure ES.5: Spending on Water versus Access


                               $4.50                                                                               75%

                               $4.00                                                                               70%

                               $3.50                                                                               65%
      Expenditure per capita




                                                                                                                         % of pop. with access
                               $3.00                                                                               60%

                               $2.50                                                                               55%

                               $2.00                                                                               50%

                               $1.50                                                                               45%

                               $1.00                                                                               40%

                               $0.50                                                                               35%

                               $0.00                                                                               30%
                                       99

                                            00

                                                 01

                                                      02

                                                            03

                                                                  04

                                                                        05

                                                                              06

                                                                                     07

                                                                                           08

                                                                                                    09

                                                                                                         10

                                                                                                              11
                                       19

                                            20

                                                 20

                                                      20

                                                           20

                                                                 20

                                                                       20

                                                                             20

                                                                                   20

                                                                                          20

                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                              20
                                                           Expenditure per capita (real 2010 US$)
                                                           % of pop. with access to clean water


  Source: Carlitz 2016.


  inadequate WASH, ensuring WASH access is critical for meeting multiple objectives across
  sectors. SDG 6 and its six targets are inextricably linked with a number of the other SDGs and
  targets including ending extreme poverty (1.1); ending forms of malnutrition (2.2); reducing
  infant mortality (3.2); and improving educational attainment (4.1).

  Improving WASH can go a long way toward reducing stunting and enhancing life in a child’s early
  years. It is not just a matter of preventing the onset of water-borne illness and diarrheal
  disease. One of the most unexpected impacts of inadequate WASH is its contribution to
  chronic intestinal infection, which can lead to higher rates of stunting, a marker of undernutrition
  for children under five (figure ES.6). Stunting is not just about physical stature. It also hinders
  healthy early childhood development. Getting insufficient nutrients can limit a child’s cognitive
  capabilities, leading to lower schooling, earnings, and overall productivity later in life.

  WASH beyond the household—in public spaces such as schools and health centers—
  holds particular importance for human development outcomes. One in three health centers
  in Tanzania does not have improved WASH facilities, which means that patients could
  pick up another infection during visits. In schools, substandard WASH can lower learning.
  Poor sanitation discourages girls from attending school during menstruation, and a lack
  of  on-premise water takes time away from learning as teachers and pupils carry water
  back to school. It also reduces the likelihood of hand washing in an environment where
  children face high risk of picking up germs from one another and their surroundings during
  play and other interaction.


  Message 6: There Are Shortcomings in the Institutional Dynamic
  and Policy Framework that Limit Progress in the WASH Sector
  A history of centralized delivery and the politicization of water have been the backdrop for
  different types of failings in rural and urban contexts. An incomplete decentralization process
  has led to a misalignment of roles and responsibilities as well as functions and functionaries


Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector	                                        7
           Figure ES.6: Proportion of Children under Age Five Stunted in Tanzania, by Wealth
           Quintiles


           Richest
                                                                          29%


            Fourth                                                        29%        35% of children
                                                                                       under five are
                                                                                         stunted in
            Middle                                                        39%       tanzania. 32% are
                                                                                      stunted by their
                                                                                        2nd birthday
           Second                                                         39%


            Poorest                                                       40%


                     0%       20%        40%       60%       80%   100%
                                         Stunted   Healthy


       Sources: DHS 2016; World Bank 2017.




       affecting accountability relationships which in turn has adversely affected service delivery.
       Decentralization efforts in rural areas have created the institutions at local and community
       level in a de jure sense. However, the de facto centralized tendencies have often led to confusion
       of the respective roles and responsibilities in practice. For instance, LGAs are not being held
       accountable for providing technical assistance and financial support to community water
       committees (COWSOs) when needed due a lack of clarity in determining when such support is
       warranted. This is one of the factors that has led to the prevalence of non- functional water
       points across the rural landscape.

       Donor interventions tend to focus less on institutional shortcomings and thus perpetuate
       existing dynamics. Misplaced focus in the water sector on new infrastructure construction
       rather than on maintenance also stems from the fact the donor contributions are structurally
       biased towards capital investments. The political capital gained from building new water
       points, rather than ensuring the maintenance or sustainability of existing ones, has traditionally
       been both the more popular and the easier approach. Tanzania as a historic “donor darling”
       has long been a recipient of aid and thus only more recently have sustainability considerations
       been more fully taken into account. Donors are now increasingly recognizing the importance
       of ensuring that the existing institutional structures also need strengthening, to ensure
       accountability and deliver improved services. They are also encouraged to “celebrate
       maintenance” to shift norms in the sector that have led to unsustainable infrastructure.

       Political and electoral considerations often tend to dominate new construction decisions, leading
       to suboptimal public works. For instance, though the construction of new water points should
       be allocated according to an established formula agreed upon within the Ministry’s official
       documentation, quantitative analytical studies which have contributed to this diagnostic have
       confirmed commonly discussed politicization of water, finding a significant correlation between
       allocation of funds and election cycles driven in part by favoritism and clientilistic practices
       (Carlitz 2007).

       Sanitation meanwhile has seen the opposite problem, with an absence of national policy and
       few actors willing to champion the cause in the political space. Sanitation received prominence
       during the years of the Julius Nyerere government which helped Tanzania to make a significant
       dent in open defecation prevalence. However in the present day, institutional arrangements for
       sanitation in both the urban and rural contexts are characterized by a lack of “champions” to


8	   Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector
  bring the issues front and center of the political agenda. A lack of appreciation of the potential
  for return on investment and the division of responsibilities for oversight between so many
  different actors has led to a disordered institutional set up. The result of this is manifest in the
  absence of a clear national sanitation policy which needs to be addressed.

  Finally, in spite of the availability of financial resources, considerable capacity limitations to plan,
  implement and monitor water supply programs plague the sector, thus affecting the expansion
  of safe access. For instance, the rural water supply and water resources sub-sectors sector
  were able to utilize only 52 percent and 46 percent respectively of all the allocations they
  received in FY 15-16 while sanitation sector was unable to use almost any of its financial
  allocations. Any new initiatives need to focus on improving the capacity of the institutions and
  policy framework in the sector so as to translate available finances into improved and cost-
  effective service delivery. If Tanzania brings these lessons into new initiatives, it has the
  potential to become an example which other countries can emulate.


  Recommendations for Moving the WASH Sector
  Forward in Tanzania
  Challenge #1: Creating a Roadmap toward Meeting Tanzania’s
  SDGs for Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene as well as
  other WASH-Relevant Goals
  Recommendation 1: Integrate the SDG framework into poverty-reduction strategies and WSS
  programmatic approaches such as Water Sector Development Program (WSDP) II. Tanzania’s
  National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty (MKUKUTA), first adopted in 2005,
  provides for embedding the MDG targets in poverty reduction efforts. The plan, which gave
  high priority to eradicating extreme poverty and promoting broad-based growth, has had
  significant effect, with national basic needs poverty declining from 34.4 to 28.2 percent
  between 2007 and 2011/12. The integration of the SDG targets into the WSDP II framework
  would be the first step to getting Tanzania on track toward the SDGs for WASH. We can
  consider the SDGs as providing Tanzania with a clean slate, promising a new beginning as the
  global community transitions from infrastructure to service oriented goals. Despite a lack of
  progress in the MDGs, the SDGs provide a new, more accurate set of definitions and standards
  to aim at. These new standards acknowledge water quality, safe waste disposal, and the
  importance of WASH in public spaces, particularly schools and health centers. Putting
  Tanzania’s national statistics into the SDG framework can provide a helpful stepping stone
  toward this integration.


  Challenge #2: Enhancing the Sustainability of Rural
  Water Services
  Recommendation 2: In making further investment in rural water and sanitation, take stock of
  lessons learned on what brought past water point failure, and how to enhance sustainability in
  the future. Part of the reason why so many rural water points failed has been the excessive
  focus on new construction, which led to the installation of water systems that the local
  communities do not have the capacity to manage. Data analysis of 83,000 water points as
  part of this WPD shows that 60 percent of failures in the first two to four years resulted from
  the wrong choice of pump type, suggesting that the choice of an appropriate technology is a
  key reason for water point failure. The limited management capacity of small and often poor
  communities in the B40 and lack of proper backstopping arrangements also contributed to the
  frequent water system breakdowns. All this has translated into large quantities of money being
  invested with lower than anticipated returns.


Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector	    9
        For these reasons, programs to enhance sustainability of rural water schemes should
        consider the following three steps. First, programs should ensure that technology choice
        takes into account the capacity of the community or their technical service provider to
        operate and maintain the system. Second, donors and governments should shift their focus
        from construction to the “celebration of maintenance,” focusing on the effective oversight
        of water scheme choice, construction and maintenance by central and local government and
        communities. Third, donors and the client should work together to further institutionalize
        the collection, verification, and use of data in analysis for policy planning and investments.
        Together, these steps will bring a welcome result for all parties involved, a higher return on
        funds invested in future.


        Challenge #3: Improving Reliable and Affordable Access
        to Safe Water in Urban Areas
        Recommendation 3: Address utility inefficiencies, the growth in dependence on informal
        private providers, and the need for expanded regulation. In urban areas, in particular in the
        major city of Dar es Salaam, a history of “hydraulic exclusion” that begun back in the
        colonial period shapes the dynamic of expansion of the water network to this day. Tanzanian
        cities typically have a small core area with a long-standing piped water network while large
        areas of the periphery are forced to rely on non-networked solutions, particularly in low
        income areas. Those most reliant on informal service providers (ISPs) are the poor, who
        often face the highest costs, despite their lower ability to pay. The ISPs are not subject to
        regulation. Therefore the quality of water they provide is unknown. Unregulated wells may
        also be depleting groundwater sources in disregard of broader water resource management
        concerns. Finally, ISPs often take their water supply from the utilities, thereby further
        reducing the utilities’ revenue at the same time as taking their customers.

        The first priority for Tanzania’s urban utilities in expanding reliable water networks to the
        urban periphery is to reduce their rates of non-revenue water and enhance their fiscal
        management. Their service expansion can then be both poor-inclusive and financially
        sustainable. Despite ranking quite highly in terms of their capacity to serve the poor compared
        to other urban utilities in Sub-Saharan Africa (van den Berg and Danilenko 2017), Dar es
        Salaam’s DAWASCO has only recently begun recovering from consecutive years of 50 percent-
        plus levels of non-revenue water (Triche, Kariuki, and Makino 2012). DAWASCO has tried to
        employ pragmatic solutions in expanding improved coverage, using tanker trucks and
        standpipes for areas further out of the original network remit. But in order to ensure that
        network expansion does not mean unreliable supply, it first needs to ensure it has the
        revenues to pay for network maintenance.

        In the medium to long term, both the utility and the population will benefit greatly from
        reduced reliance on informal providers. Though at present, 58 percent of the Tanzanian
        population pay nothing for water according to available data, 10 percent were devoting
        more than 5 percent of their total household expenditures to it in 2012. This was the
        highest in a recent JMP study (WHO 2017) of 11 countries worldwide. (The international
        standard is a maximum of 2 percent.) In Dar es Salaam, the B40 recently overtook the T60
        in portion reliant on tanker trucks for their supply. Because water from informal vendors
        can cost as much as five times more than utility water, the integration of their customers
        into utility networks will ultimately mean greater revenue for the utility as well as lower cost
        basic services for the poor. In the short term, placing informal providers under the umbrella
        of regulatory institutions would begin to meet concerns of water quality and safety
        concerns. A longer-term approach would have the urban utilities strategizing to increase
        their recovery of costs and expand their network services to areas that are now informally
        served.




10	   Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector
  Challenge #4: Transitioning 89 Percent of Tanzania’s Rural
  Population from Unimproved to Improved Sanitation Facilities
  Recommendation 4: More clearly define and assign responsibilities for sanitation, identify
  sanitation champions, and formulate a more coherent policy. This report highlights that a key
  constraint on the success of previous sanitation interventions in rural areas has been the lack
  of a coherent policy and institutional framework. Responsibilities are currently divided between
  many different ministries. Though the Ministry of Health is meant to take the lead, its other
  responsibilities appear to be crowding out its ability to act on sanitation. As the evidence
  presented in this diagnostic shows, sanitation needs a clearer focus at the heart of health
  policy if coverage is to substantially increase. This should include learning lessons from past
  interventions on successes and failings and recognize the need for larger financing mechanisms,
  whether market-based or public sector. Demand creation needs to go beyond community-led
  total sanitation and toward encouraging the transition from unimproved to improved facilities.
  On the other side of the equation, there is a need to provide affordable and desirable supply
  of sanitation equipment and facilities. This may mean encouraging the involvement of private
  sector actors by making them aware of the potential financial returns and strengthening their
  capacity to meet demand for those who have varying capacities to pay. Meanwhile, a public
  sector approach may involve integration of sanitation interventions into social protection
  programming such as the Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF), which aims to aid the country’s
  poorest citizens.  Tanzania already has case studies of successful sanitation marketing
  (Cardosi, Mwambuli, and Indodi 2010), as well as evaluations of implementation challenges
  (Share Consortium 2016). The challenge of scale-up needs particularly close examination for
  both public and private efforts.

  The setup of a clearer institutional structure, with an identified champion at its helm, would
  greatly aid the transition from unimproved to improved sanitation as part of a national strategy,
  integrated with health. A nodal institutional arrangement would help to clearly define
  responsibilities for sanitation regulation and provision.



  Challenge #5: Making Sanitation Safer in Urban Areas through
  Onsite and Offsite Sanitation Solutions that Include Fecal
  Sludge Management
  Recommendation 5: In urban areas, adopt citywide sanitation approaches that recognize
  that different solutions are suitable in different contexts. Diverse experiences across
  developing country contexts suggests that citywide inclusive sanitation would succeed in
  Tanzanian cities, with their rapidly expanding population mostly in low-income areas of the
  city. Donors and other country governments can share knowledge on the most effective
  designs, mixing onsite and offsite sanitation solutions in urban contexts. In  cities with
  densely populated informal settlements where sewerage pipes are either too expensive to
  lay or disruptive of existing infrastructure, onsite improved sanitation solutions such as
  DEWATS can be employed in order to ensure that waste is safely disposed of and treated.
  Such solutions are poor-inclusive, well suited to cities such as Dar es Salaam that have a
  history of extremely limited networked sanitation. Sewerage network expansion remains
  extremely low at under 2 percent nationally, and as most public funds continue to be
  invested in cities, the result is that the wealthy are being served before the poor. Facilities
  for wastewater treatment also need urgent investment attention. In Dar es Salaam, for
  example, five out of seven wastewater stabilization ponds were found in the study to be
  malfunctioning. Without proper treatment, expansion of networks will create environmental
  and health-related hazards.




Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector	   11
        The unimproved to improved facility transition also needs to occur for at least 25 percent of the
        urban population who lack improved access. During the rainy season, flooding can lead to
        the overflow of unimproved latrines, their contents easily contaminating drinking water. With
        the World Health Organization reporting 24,108 cases of cholera, including 378 deaths, in
        Tanzania in 2016, waterborne diseases are still very much a concern. These illnesses hit Low
        Income Areas the hardest.


        Challenge #6: Enhancing Early Childhood Development through
        WASH Services
        Recommendation 6: Design WASH interventions with a “nutrition-sensitive” lens and seek to
        integrate WASH into multi-sectoral strategies addressing education, health, and nutrition
        outcomes. Better WASH conditions can help children thrive and fulfill their full potential to be
        engaged and productive citizens and leaders of the future. As this diagnostic demonstrates,
        substantial evidence in Tanzania supports the link between unimproved sanitation and stunted
        growth in children under five, particularly in their first 1,000 days. With unimproved sanitation
        so common in both urban and rural areas of Tanzania and the harm to health so clear, this
        diagnostic recommends the integration of WASH into health, education, and nutrition strategies
        for early childhood development. In addition, the country needs strategies to improve sanitation
        at the community and household levels. The diagnosis reveals that WASH interventions are
        most effective in combination with other strategies that include enhancing the mother’s
        wellbeing. There is room for more exploitation of synergies with large countywide social
        protection programs such as the Tanzania Social Fund (TASF) to expand sanitation to distant
        villages and the extreme poor.

        For instance, designing WASH interventions with behaviour-change components that
        address handwashing, household water treatment, food hygiene, open defecation, and
        other behaviours that affect exposure to fecal bacteria could help reduce enteric infections
        that lead to undernutrition. Further gain would come from monitoring indicators beyond
        infrastructural access, such as behaviours and water quality deficiencies that contribute
        directly to the contracting of enteric infections and waterborne diseases. Targeting WASH
        interventions to areas that have high prevalence of stunting or expectant mothers and
        children would be nutrition-sensitive. Through cross-sector interventions like these, the
        country could move more quickly toward other SDGs such as Goal 6 relating to child
        health.


        Challenge #7: Improving the Slow, Inefficient, and Unreliable
        Financial Flows between National and Local Institutions
        Recommendation 7: Facilitate efficient, transparent, and predictable financial flows between
        WSS actors—from donor, to government, to community—to promote sustainable governance.
        Primarily in rural WSS interventions, the diagnostic has uncovered a mismatch between the
        investments made and the level of change achieved. Within the Tanzanian government, a more
        transparent, rapid, and simple flow of funds and data between all levels of government would
        ensure more efficient service provision to the end user. These financial flows would be aided
        by clarity of institutional role on the ground.

        Following a political economy analysis, the WPD recommends a facilitation of financial flows
        between all levels of the “sustainability chain,” that is, from donor to government and from
        national offices down to local and community providers. This could be achieved through three
        basic steps. First, continue to strengthen the relationship between donors and government in
        order to facilitate communication and data flow and raise data quality. Second, work for clearer
        communication of central government to LGAs and communities, which would help to ensure




12	   Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector
  that funding and technical support moves when required from one to another. Third, invest
  more in tracking of financial flows between all levels to garner more accurate measurement of
  impact and a clearer understanding of “what works.”

  Tanzania’s WASH challenges in the SDG era may seem daunting. The WASH Poverty Diagnostic
  seeks to provide relevant analysis that can help create a solid foundation for first steps toward
  the goals.


  Note
  	 1.	 Data are from World Development Indicators (database). 2016. World Bank, Washington,
        DC. http://databank.worldbank.org/data/home.aspx.

  References
  Cardosi, Jason, Kaposo Mwambuli, and Alice Indodi. 2010. “Marketing Rural Sanitation
      Improvements in Tanzania.” IFC Smart Lessons brief. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://
      documents​ .­w orldbank.org/curated/en/586011468132896776/Marketing-rural​
      -sanitation​-improvements-in-Tanzania.

  Carlitz, R. 2016. “Money Flows, Water Trickles: Understanding Patterns of Decentralized Water
      Provision in Tanzania.” World Development 93: 16–30.

  JMP (Joint Monitoring Programme). 2017. “WASH in the 2030 Agenda.” Online brochure.
     Available at: http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/monitoring/coverage/jmp-2017​
     -wash​-in-the-2030-agenda.pdf?ua=1. Accessed August 29, 2017.

  Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children (MoHCDGEC)
      [Tanzania Mainland], Ministry of Health (MoH) [Zanzibar], National Bureau of Statistics
      (NBS), Office of the Chief Government Statistician (OCGS), and ICF. 2016. Tanzania
      Demographic and Health Survey and Malaria Indicator Survey (TDHS-MIS) 2015-16. Dar es
      Salaam, Tanzania, and Rockville, MD, USA: MoHCDGEC, MoH, NBS, OCGS, and ICF.

  Triche, T., M. Kariuki, and M. Makino. 2012. “A Case Study of Public-Private and Public-Public
       Partnerships in Water Supply and Sewerage Services in Dar es Salaam.” Region.
       World Bank, Washington, DC.

  Share Consortium. 2016. “Process Evaluation of the National Sanitation Campaign of
     Tanzania.” London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London. http://www​
     .­communityledtotalsanitation.org/sites/communityledtotalsanitation.org/files/SHARE​
     _­Tanzania_NSC_PolicyBrief.pdf.

  van den Berg, Caroline, and Alexander Danilenko. 2017. Performance of Water Utilities in Africa.
      World Bank, Washington, DC.

  World Bank. 2015. “Developing a High Resolution Poverty Map for Tanzania: Final Report.”
      World Bank, Washington, DC.

  ———. 2017. “Technical Assistance P155940 Poor-Inclusive Sustainable Water and
    Sanitation Services in Tanzania. Annual Review for FY17.” Unpublished report. World Bank,
    Washington, DC.

  World Health Organization. 2017. “Safely Managed Drinking Water—Thematic Report on
      Drinking Water 2017.” Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.




Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector	   13
W17082
