Financing Sustainable Development

    IDEAS
     for
        ACTION
                           2017

                                  Edited by
                       Mahmoud Mohieldin
                         Djordjija Petkoski
Financing Sustainable Development


       IDEAS
        for
           ACTION
                                2017
                                        Edited by
                            Mahmoud Mohieldin
                              Djordjija Petkoski
Contents
  Overview	vii
  Acknowledgments	xi

Winning Proposals for 2017

1	 Creating Kitovu: A Web/Mobile-Based Decentralized Fertilizer
   and Seedling Warehousing System That Increases Crop Yields
   in Nigeria by Matching the Right Inputs to the Right Soils	     1
  Abstract	1
  Problems and Context: Raising the Incomes of Smallholder
     Farmers through Increased Productivity	                    2
  Solution: Web- and Mobile-Based Decentralized Fertilizer and
     Seedling Warehousing System	                               4
  Piloting the Solution	                                        7
  Expected Impact	                                             11
  Where We Are Now and Where We Go Next	                       12
  Comparable Solutions	                                        12
  Challenges	14
  References	15
  Additional Reading	                                          15

2	 Reducing Breast Cancer Death Rates among Women
   in Uganda and Increasing the Employability
   of Visually Impaired Women	                                    17
  Abstract	17
  Problem and Context	                    18
  Solution	18
  Expected Impact	                        19
  Comparable Product Offerings	           20
  Potential Challenges	                   20
  References and for Further Information	 21

3	 Converting Unproductive, Waterlogged Land into
   Productive Fish Farming Units to Generate Sustainable
   Livelihoods, Provide Food Security, and Develop Critical
   Avenues for Economic Growth for Local Rural Communities	       23
  Abstract	23
  Problem and Context	 24



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                iii
     Current Operations	                                                  30
     Comparable Projects	                                                 33
     Challenges	33
     The Road Ahead	                                                      33
     References	35
     Additional Reading	                                                  35
     Annex 1. Agratam India’s Activities	                                36
     Annex 2. Fish Farm Versus Agricultural Economics in Bihar per Acre	 37
     Annex 3. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) of Impact	               38
     Annex 4.  Agratam’s Team Credentials	                                39

2017 Runners-up

4	 Encouraging Volunteerism Using a Proprietary
   Digital-Currency Incentive	                                               41
     Abstract	41
     Problem and Context	 42
     References	51

5	 Portable Toilet Solution: Sustainable Sanitation
   for the Base of the Pyramid	                                             53
     Abstract	53
     Problem and Context: The Importance of Improving Access
        to Adequate Sanitation	                                      54
     Solution: Portable Toilet Solution That Uses a Utility Business
        Model Supported by a Public-Private Partnership and
        Community Involvement	                                       55
     The PTS Pilot	                                                  56
     Business Model Implementation	                                  56
     Expected Impact	                                                59
     Comparable Product Offerings	                                   60
     Potential Challenges	                                           60
     References	62
     Additional Reading	                                             62

6	 A Socio-productive Model for Entrepreneurial Education
   and the Promotion of Business Activity for Women
   Who Are Victims of Armed Conflict	                                       63
     Abstract	63
     Problem and Context	        64
     Solution: Implement She-Is	 65



iv                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
  Recent Developments with the She-Is Project	 72
  Impact Assessment	                           73
  Philosophy	74
  References	75

Appendix: Honorable Mention
  Commodity Bonds: A Practical Solution to Crisis Vulnerability in
    Commodity-Dependent Developing Countries	                        77
    Abstract		                                                       77
  Filling the Credit Gap: Improving SME Accounting Standards
     and Data Collection in India	                                   78
     Abstract		                                                      78
  Innovative Solutions to a Sustainable Blood Supply Chain
    Management System: A Technology-Driven Donor
    Management System in Nigeria	                                    79
    Abstract		                                                       79
  Wicked Problems, Simple Solutions, and a New Generation of
    Changemakers	80
    Abstract 		                                              80




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                   v
Overview
We are pleased to present the results of the 2017 Ideas for Action (I4A)
initiative, a youth competition on financing for development that is jointly
organized by the World Bank Group and the Zicklin Center for Business
Ethics Research at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.
This is the third year of the competition, and the 2017 winners were selected
from among 743 proposals from 118 countries.
   We focus on youth for this competition because 3 billion people—43
percent of the world’s population—are under the age of 25. Today’s youth
have the most at stake in achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and its associated Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
The world’s youth will implement this global agenda, contributing their
unique solutions and shaping their future and ours.
   The SDGs are a set of 17 global goals that seek to end poverty, promote
peace, and preserve the planet for future generations, all by 2030. More
ambitious than their predecessor, the Millennium Development Goals, the
SDGs cover a broad range of interconnected issues, from ending hunger,
promoting health, addressing inequality, creating jobs and sustainable eco-
nomic growth to improving governance and addressing global challenges
such as climate change.
   The I4A competition encourages young people from around the world to
develop and share their ideas for innovative approaches, through the smart
use of technology, as well as financing solutions, to solve development chal-
lenges. It attracts engagement from young people across the globe, with
about 38 percent of submissions from Sub-Saharan Africa, 15 percent from
Latin American and the Caribbean, 13 percent from South Asia, 12 percent
from East Asia and the Pacific, 12 percent from North America, 8 percent
from Europe, and 2 percent from the Middle East and North Africa.
   The winners were selected through a vigorous three-stage selection pro-
cess evaluating the creativity, significance, feasibility, and clarity of the pro-
posals. Reviewers included young World Bank Group staff and Wharton
students, along with technical experts and senior executives from the
World Bank Group, Wharton School, MasterCard, PepsiCo, Firmenich,
and the G-24 Secretariat. Other competition partners included the World
Bank Group Youth to Youth Community, the Young Americas Business
Trust, and the Organization of American States.
   The 2017 winners will present their proposals at the World Bank Group–
International Monetary Fund Annual Meetings in October 2017 in
Washington, D.C., and at other high-level international events. The


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                            vii
Wharton School will offer the winners training and opportunities to
exchange knowledge.


2017’s Winning Proposals
The 2017 winning proposal, Kitovu, from Nigeria, is an innovative plat-
form and system that matches fertilizer type and quantity, improved qual-
ity seeds, and other inputs to the right soil. It envisions a web- and
mobile-based decentralized fertilizer and seedling warehousing system
that matches the right inputs to different farm locations owned by small-
holder farmers in distant locations so as to lower the cost of cultivation
while ensuring increased yields. The platform also seeks to create market
access for smallholder farmers in distant locations by using a mix of web,
mobile, and SMS platforms to link farmers to processors, produce buyers,
transporters, and other ecosystem stakeholders to tackle postharvest losses
and enable produce traceability while increasing farmer income.
   The second-place proposal, Gifted Hands, from Uganda, is a network
that seeks to reduce breast cancer deaths and provide an employment
opportunity for women who are visually impaired. The network is designed
to facilitate training for women who are visually impaired to become certi-
fied medical tactile examiners to carry out early breast cancer detection
and prevention using their heightened and well-trained sense of touch. The
certified examiners will use their blindness as an opportunity to create
employment as well as to save the lives of women who might otherwise die
from breast cancer without the early examinations.
   The third-place proposal, Agratam, from India, works to convert
low-lying, waterlogged wastelands into productive fish farming units in the
state of Bihar. This program is aimed primarily at providing sustainable
employment opportunities for the extremely poor fisher communities that
do not have access to a consistent and stable source of income. By aggregat-
ing this unproductive land, Agratam also provides rental income to mar-
ginal and smallholder farmers who own small parcels of land from which
they cannot extract value or generate economic returns.
   Project Forward, one of the three runners-up, proposed a social
currency–backed ecosystem that allows nonprofits to indirectly incentivize
volunteers. It facilitates the monetization of volunteer hours through a pro-
prietary digital currency.
   SAVE, another runner-up, focused on the provision of sanitation to the
poorest segments of society in the Province of Laguna in the Philippines
through a portable toilet solution, anchored on a utility business model
and supported by a public-private partnership and the community. Eligible

viii                        Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
households will be given a portable toilet bundled with their water service
connection. These toilets will have a collection system to ensure proper
disposal and treatment in a wastewater treatment facility.
   The final runner-up, She-Is, is a socio-productive model for entrepre-
neurial education and the promotion of business activity for women who
are victims of armed conflict. In the case of Colombia, the campaign seeks
to champion women in postconflict situations as successful entrepreneurs
by harnessing their knowledge and generating a positive impact on the
peace process.
   The I4A competition offers the winners a platform to share and discuss
their ideas and encourages young people to take ownership over imple-
mentation of the SDGs. It also provides the winners access to some of the
leading professionals in the global development field and in the private
sector.


Cultivating the Next Generation of Leaders
Our hope is that I4A will bring together the creative insights and thought-
ful innovations of the next generation of business and public sector leaders
with the implementation potential of development organizations. We fur-
ther hope that it will foster a sense of ownership while incubating some
exciting ideas that can shape our shared future for the better. The submis-
sions included in this book, as well as the rest of the 733 submissions, have
clearly demonstrated the innovative and creative potential of youth.
   I4A is not exclusively an essay competition. I4A has also convened sev-
eral workshops, called IdeasLabs, as opportunities for interested young
people to get information and share knowledge and ideas. Equally import-
ant was the creation of several I4A clubs, and among the most active of
these are at Wharton School, and in Belgrade, Hong Kong SAR, and China.
These targeted activities have engaged the young professionals who took
part in the competition, as well as those simply interested in global
development.
   The 2015 and 2016 versions of this book were used as teaching tools at
undergraduate and graduate classes at Wharton as well as at several other
schools throughout the world. Students had the opportunity to comment
on the winning proposals and shared their ideas with the winning teams.
To facilitate the use of the book, teaching notes will be made available to
interested academics.
   One of the main goals of I4A continues to be engaging leading schools
of finance and development and connecting them with practitioners
around the world. This endeavor helps redefine the global development


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        ix
conversation and assists the World Bank Group and other development
organizations in leveraging their resources and convening power more
effectively.
   It is our hope that I4A will help the World Bank Group and other
development partners recognize young people with bright ideas so they
can participate more fully in solving the world’s greatest challenges. Thus,
by encouraging the next generation of global leaders to think beyond the
existing approaches to development issues, we can help innovative solutions
germinate and take root.

                                                 Mahmoud Mohieldin
                                                   Senior Vice President
     2030 Development Agenda, United Nations Relations and Partnerships
                                                     World Bank Group

                                                       Djordjija Petkoski
                                                                  Lecturer
                             Legal Studies and Business Ethics Department
                           The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania




x                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Acknowledgments
The Ideas for Action (I4A) initiative was launched jointly by the World
Bank Group (WBG) and Wharton Business School of the University of
Pennsylvania, and in partnership with the WBG’s Youth to Youth
Community (Y2Y) and the Young Americas Business Trust (YABT) at the
Organization of American States. Over the past three years, this initiative
has benefited from the enthusiasm, commitment, and insightful feedback
of the staff of these organizations, as well as the dedicated champions of the
initiative.
   At the WBG, this initiative is coordinated by Arunima Dhar and Farida
Aboulmagd from the Office of the Senior Vice President for the 2030
Development Agenda, UN Relations and Partnerships (SVPMM). The
Wharton team led by Marie-Louise Wiegert is composed of Joseph
Kupferberg, Maryam Alausa, Michaela Asamoah, Walid Beramdane, Sisan
Dorsu, Farirai Baya, James Goh, Halle Aberhm, Faithe Hill, Michelle Jaffe,
Melissa Jassir, Jeffery Chen, Jiaying Li, Kevin Yang, Tyler Knox, Polina
Naumenko, Olivia Ryan, Cynthia Song, Kamelia Stavreva, Ekunda Wonodi,
and Kevin Lee. Partners in Latin America included Mariana Urban,
Victória Laurentiz, Sofia Martinelli, Gustavo de Carvalho Marin, José
Roberto Macri, and Amanda Bessoni. The I4A student initiative represen-
tatives included Ned Shell (Harvard University) and Sue Mohieldin
(Dartmouth College). Julian Friederich, German Chamber of Commerce
São Paulo/Wharton Team, supported the publications process.
   The WBG Y2Y partner colleagues included Georgie Chisholm, Manuela
Dimuccio Gonzalez, Angela Elzir Assy, Djeanane Monfort, Bruna Moraes,
Pooja Thapar, Angela Ting, Coralie Vannoye, and Ermal Vila.
   The YABT team included Luis Viguria and Isabella Troconis.
   This year, the Ideas for Action initiative would especially like to acknowl-
edge the World Bank Africa Region External Communications team led by
Haleh Bridi for its outreach efforts in the region. With Erick Rabemananoro,
the team comprised Elita Banda, Zeria Banda, Daby Diack, Carlyn
Hambuba, Kafu Kofi Tsikata, Olufunke Modupe Olufon, Keziah
Muthembwa, Taleb Ould Sid’ahmed, and Diana Styvanley. We would also
like to acknowledge Harisoa Rasolonjatovo from the Education Global
Practice.
   The selection process was conducted in three phases. The first round of
reviews was completed by Kay Atanda, Farida Aboulmagd, Demet Cabbar,
Devy Damayanti, Arunima Dhar, Julius Gwyer, Lobna Hadji, Veronica
Piatkov, and Ferran Perez Ribo from the World Bank Group; Marie-Louise


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                          xi
Wiegert, Joseph Kupferberg, Maryam Alausa, Michaela Asamoah, Walid
Beramdane, Sisan Dorsu, Farirai Baya, James Goh, Halle Aberhm,
Faithe  Hill, Michelle Jaffe, Melissa Jassir, Jeffery Chen, Jiaying Li, Kevin
Yang, Tyler Knox, Polina Naumenko, Olivia Ryan, Cynthia Song, Kamelia
Stavreva, Ekunda Wonodi, Kevin Lee, Mariana Urban, Victória Laurentiz,
Sofia Martinelli, Gustavo de Carvalho Marin, José Roberto Macri, and
Amanda Bessoni from Wharton Business School; Ned Shell from Harvard
University; and Sue Mohieldin from Dartmouth College.
  The 60 English language proposals that qualified for the second round
were reviewed in three working groups that considered 20 proposals each.
The groups were chaired by Marco Scuriatti, Adviser, SVPMM, WBG;
Mike Kelleher, Adviser, SVPMM, WBG; and Djordjija Petkoski, Lecturer
and Senior Fellow, Wharton Business School. Group A comprised Jos
Verbeek, Special Representative to the WTO and UN in Geneva, SVPMM,
WBG; Christopher Juan Costain, Lead Financial Sector Specialist,
Finance & Markets Global Practice, WBG; Filip Fidanoski, Researcher,
Luxembourg School of Finance, University of Luxembourg; Felipe
Gonzalez, University Diego Portales (UDP), Santiago, Chile; Victor
Gabriel de Oliveira Rodriguez, University of São Paulo (USP), Brazil; and
Dragan Radic, Senior Specialist, Employers’ Activities, International
Labour Office.
  Group B comprised Steve Dimitriev, Lead Private Sector Specialist,
Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice, WBG; Gabriela de la Garza,
Sustainability Director,  PepsiCo, Inc.  Latin America Beverages; Chris
Thomas, Lead Strategy Officer, Strategy and Organizational Performance,
WBG; Gustavo Díaz, UDP; Carolina Busco, UDP; Juliana Domingues,
USP (Ribeirão Preto Law School); and Maria Alejandra Gonzalez Perez,
Departamento de Organización y Gerencia, Universidad EAFIT.
  Group C included Bjorn Gillsater, Special Representative to the United
Nations, New York, SVPMM, WBG; Eduardo Saad-Diniz (USP): Thomas
Tim, Vice-Presidência, Hauptgeschäftsführung; Dragan Loncar, University
of Belgrade, Faculty of Economics; and Berangere Magarinos-Ruchat, Vice
President, Sustainability, at Firmanich.
  In addition, the qualifying Spanish proposals were reviewed by
Christopher Juan Costain, Lead Financial Sector Specialist, Finance &
Markets Global Practice, WBG; and Gabriela de la Garza, Sustainability
Director, PepsiCo, Inc. Latin America Beverages.
  The final 10 proposals were reviewed by an expert panel, chaired by
Mahmoud Mohieldin, Senior Vice President for the 2030 Development
Agenda, UN Relations and Partnerships, WBG. The panel comprised
Luis Montoya, President, PepsiCo, Inc. Latin America Beverages;



xii                         Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Snezana Stoiljkovic, Vice President, Blended Finance and Partnerships
(CBFVP), WBG; Marilou Uy, Director, G24 Secretariat; Stephane
Wyper, Senior Vice President, New Commerce Partnerships and
Commercialization, MasterCard; Kasturi Rangan, Harvard Business
School; David Shipman, Group Vice President, Global Corporate
Compliance & President, Firmenich North America; Haleh Bridi,
Director, External Communication, Africa Region, WBG, and Djordjija
Petkoski, Lecturer and Senior Fellow, Wharton Business School.
  Finally, a very special thanks go to the young people who contributed to
the 743 submissions and the 1,965 teams that registered representing 5,254
youth from 118 countries.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                    xiii
2017 Ideas for Action Winning Proposals


Ideas on Financing for Development
to Help Achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals
Chapter 1
Creating Kitovu: A Web/Mobile-
Based Decentralized Fertilizer
and Seedling Warehousing
System That Increases Crop
Yields in Nigeria by Matching the
Right Inputs to the Right Soils
Team Kitovu
Nwachinemere Emeka
Nduka Miracle
Adegbola Adedotun



Abstract
Most of the world’s poorest people are smallholder farmers. At least 570
million farms worldwide are smallholdings, with more than 475 million of
those farms owned by families who cultivate less than two hectares of land.
In Nigeria, 70 percent of the working population, or about 121 million
people, are farmers. In Sub-Saharan Africa as a whole, agriculture accounts
for 64 percent of the labor force and 75 percent of the people who survive
on less than $1 per day work in the agricultural sector. This level of poverty
results primarily from very low yields, compared with global yield aver-
ages, as well as from very high postharvest losses. Annual postharvest
losses range between 40 percent and 60 percent, depending on the value
chain being considered. After years of trying to find solutions to low crop
yields, we formed the Kitovu Technology Company and developed the
Kitovu platform. The Kitovu team consists of a passionate group of young
people who have experience in agriculture, processing, and consultancy
services within the African agricultural value chain.
   The Kitovu team firmly believes that improving the use of inputs by
farmers has the potential to lift millions of smallholder farmers out of pov-
erty. But for that to be feasible, a system must be in place that matches the
right composition and quantity of fertilizers, good quality or improved



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                          1
seeds, and other inputs to farms’ actual soils and sites. These practices
would improve yields and consequently increase farmers’ incomes.
  This report describes how the Kitovu platform solves the problem of low
yields and explains the platform’s estimated effects on poverty and social
well-being.


Problems and Context: Raising the
Incomes of Smallholder Farmers through
Increased Productivity
Most of the world’s poorest people are smallholder farmers. Of the more
than 570 million farms worldwide, at least 475 million of these are family
farms of less than two hectares. In Sub-Saharan Africa, agriculture accounts
for 64 percent of the labor force. In rural areas, 75 percent of the people
who are living on less than $1 a day work in agriculture. In Nigeria, 70
percent of the working population, or about 121 million people, are farm-
ers. These statistics represent the least of our challenges.
   The Nigerian agricultural sector is a maze, a patchwork of fragmented
smallholdings in which the disconnected stakeholders coexist. This dis-
connection ensures that farmers are not up-to-date on agricultural best
practices, improved varieties, and available cultivars. Nor do they have
access to markets for buying and selling. As a result, farms do not have the
right inputs—whether fertilizers, agrochemicals, or seedlings—and thus
experience very low yields.
   Many smallholder farmers find the use of fertilizers undesirable for a
variety of reasons, but the top reason is the high cost. In addition, high
transport costs, small markets that lack economies of scale, lack of a rural
dealer network, middlemen who exploit farmers, and lack of a competitive
private sector all reduce the returns on farmers’ investments.
   When farmers do use fertilizers, they seldom use effective quantities, or
they apply fertilizers without considering the state of the soil and its nutri-
ent needs—decisions that lead to suboptimal yields. The outcomes are
glaring: yields are 45–60 percent below the potential. For example, in
Nigeria maize has an average yield of 1.2 tons per hectare, whereas globally
the average yield is about 3.0 tons per hectare. Figure 1 shows the general
decline in productivity of cereals in developing countries.
   Figures 2–4 highlight the relationship between high prices, fertilizer use,
and food production by continent. Sub-Saharan Africa has the highest
prices of fertilizers and the lowest fertilizer use, so unsurprisingly it is one
of the lowest contributors to global food production.

2                            Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
          Declining Productivity Growth in Developing
Figure 1  
           Countries, 1963–2003
6

5

4

3

2

1

0
1963       1967     1971      1975      1979      1983       1987      1991      1995      1999      2003
                                  Maize               Rice              Wheat
Source: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), World Development Report 2008.



          Fertilizer Consumption in Selected Regions
Figure 2  
           (million tons), 1961–2013
     6

     5

     4
Mt




     3

     2

     1

     0
         1961            1970              1980              1990              2000               2010
                  East Asia             South Asia              South America                  Africa
Source: Gro Intelligence, https://www.gro-intelligence.com/insights/fertilizers-in-sub-saharan-africa.



   As figures 5 and 6 show, applying fertilizer increases crop yields. Because
increasing crop yields means increased income for farmers, increasing fer-
tilizer use has the potential to lift millions of smallholder farmers in Nigeria
and Sub-Saharan Africa out of poverty, if done effectively. However, the
only effective way to achieve these yields is to use a system that matches the
right fertilizers with the right soils, provides access to improved seedlings
of proven quality, gives farmers access to agricultural best practices, and
connects their farms to the markets or distribution system, because a
fertilizer-only approach is ineffective. To achieve these outlined objectives,
we founded the Kitovu Technology Company.

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                                         3
           mports of Fertilizer as a Percentage of
Figure 3  I
            Consumption in Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
            America, and South Asia, 2002–2007
100%

    80%

    60%

    40%

    20%

        0
               2002                 2003                  2004               2005               2006                2007
                        Sub-Saharan Africa                          Latin America                     South Asia

Source: Research Gate, citing Hernandez and Torero 2013, http://www.researchgate.net/figure/257922160_
fig2_Figure-3-Imports-of-fertilizer-as-a-percentage-of-consumption-sub-Saharan-Africa.



          Food Production by Continent (million metric tons), Indexed,
Figure 4  
           1970–2010
140
120
100
 80
 60
 40
 20
    0
        1970

               1972

                      1974

                             1976

                                    1978

                                           1980

                                                   1982

                                                            1984

                                                                   1986

                                                                          1988

                                                                                 1990

                                                                                        1992

                                                                                               1994

                                                                                                      1996

                                                                                                             1998

                                                                                                                    2000

                                                                                                                           2002

                                                                                                                                  2004

                                                                                                                                         2006

                                                                                                                                                2008

                                                                                                                                                       2010


                               Africa                     Americas                 Asia                Europe                 Oceania

Source: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, FAOSTAT database, http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#home.




Solution: Web- and Mobile-Based
Decentralized Fertilizer and Seedling
Warehousing System
To achieve the objectives outlined in the Problems section, we formed the
Kitovu Technology Company and developed the Kitovu platform. The

4                                                 Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
          Impact of Balanced Fertilization on Grain Yield
Figure 5  
           of Rice
5.8

5.6

5.4

5.2

5.0

4.8
              111-18-17                           120-18-28                            120-22-66
             kg/ha N-P-K                         kg/ha N-P-K                          kg/ha N-P-K
                                                Grain yield (t/ha)

Source: Haifa Group website, http://www.haifa-group.com/.
Note: kg = kilograms; ha = hectare; N = nitrogen; P = phosphorus; K = potassium; t = ton.




          Reported Increase in System of Crop
Figure 6  
           Intensification Crop Yields
 Crop                                                                    Yield Increase
 Finger Millet                                                             200–300%
 Legumes                                                                    50–200%
 Maize                                                                          75%
 Mustard                                                                   200–300%
 Sugarcane                                                                  20–100%
 Tea                                                                       200–400%
 Turmeric                                                                      25%
 Vegetables                                                                 100–270%
 Wheat                                                                       10–140%
Source: New Internationalist 2013.



Kitovu team consists of a group of young people who are passionate about
agriculture and food sustainability. They have experience in agriculture,
processing, and consultancy services within the African agricultural value
chain.
   The Kitovu platform uses a web portal, mobile application, and USSD
platforms (an interactive SMS service) to create a decentralized warehous-
ing system that matches the right inputs needed by smallholder farms—
fertilizers, agrochemicals, and seedlings—to their farms’ actual soils and
sites (figure 7). According to the model, Kitopreneurs—independent
entrepreneurs who work with the Kitovu team—collect and synchronize

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                                 5
Figure 7  How Kitovu Works


                Farmer: releases                    Kitopreneur: assists
             information on farm                      in capturing soil
              location, crop, size,                 data and distributes
              soil data to Kitovu                          inputs
              directly or through
                  Kitopreneur




    Information on                                                     Kitovu platform:
 buyer requirements                                                   analyzes soils and
  is sent to farmers                                                  matches right soils
 through the Kitovu                                                    with inputs, and
     platform and                                                     matches buyers to
through Kitopreneur                                                   crops they require


                                      Potential buyers
                                      of produce and
                                          inputs




Figure 8  Kitovu Farmer User Profile




the farmers’ data to the web portal, as in figure 8. By matching the right
inputs to the soils, the platform can lower costs of cultivation and increase
yields, and therefore increase returns on investment. Having this network
of Kitopreneurs ensures that even farmers in isolated locations, with no
Internet or mobile connectivity, can benefit from our system.


6                                Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
  The Kitovu platform also will enable smallholder farmers to connect
with the entire agricultural sector using their phone. The platform can cre-
ate market access by linking farms to input suppliers, crop processors, pro-
duce buyers, and other stakeholders to reduce postharvest losses and allow
them to trace their produce. By linking farmers to all the aspects of their
markets, the platform can increase their incomes. (See figure 8.)
  In a “One Locality, One Kitopreneur” approach, Kitopreneurs will work
in different localities by signing up farmers and teaching them agricultural
best practices. The system involves setting up and maintaining a small mud
storage warehouse, out of which fertilizers and other inputs are sold to
farmers during the growing season. The warehouse would also serve as
temporary storage for harvested produce. Working with Kitopreneurs who
assist in capturing farmers’ data, selling inputs to them, and buying pro-
duce for resale, the Kitovu team will be able to reduce the cost of inputs by
cutting out middlemen who often hoard inputs to drive up costs.


Piloting the Solution
Starting in September 2017, we are planning to locate our pilot at
Kangangalo in Wushishi Local Government of Niger State, Nigeria, where
about 200 smallholder farmers grow maize and other grains with a matu-
rity window that falls within three months. These smallholder farmers are
in isolated “pocket” locations. As a result, they typically have to make long
journeys to the city to buy fertilizers; however, they are not educated and
have no access to information on improved seedlings and agricultural best
practices. They plant any seeds available to them, and they rely mostly on
fate to determine crop yield. They depend on family labor to grow their
crops. In many cases, with cheaper inputs, they would be able to increase
the size of their farms.
   The first phase of the pilot was set for three months, which is the maxi-
mum time it takes for maize to be ready for harvest. During the pilot, we
plan to record videos in the local languages to demonstrate agricultural
best practices being implemented. The video then can be used to teach
farmers in other locations as the project expands.
   Three months into the pilot, we will distribute 3,000 bags of fertilizer
(generic and soil-specific variants), 15 bags of improved seedlings and cul-
tivars, and 1,200 liters of chemicals to 600 smallholder farmers in distant
pocket locations. To carry out the distribution, we will contract with 15
Kitopreneurs, which will give them an additional source of income. Ninety
smallholder farmers who don’t have funds to purchase inputs also will ben-
efit from our input-produce swap package, which will be available after the


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        7
third month. During the first two months the team will carry out due dili-
gence on both farmers and Kitopreneurs.
   Table 1 highlights the milestones we expect to achieve from the first
month of the pilot to year two. Figure 9 summarizes our projections and
figure 10 illustrates the operating model.


Figure 9  Summaries of Kitovu Projections
20,000
18,000
16,000
14,000
12,000
10,000
 8,000
 6,000
 4,000
 2,000
     0
         Month one        Month two       Month three       Month four         Month five
                      Farmers Reached                    Inputs Distributed
                      Kitopreneurs Empowered             Input Produce Swap


Figure 10  Kitovu Operating Model

                  Suppliers and Partners
                AFEX commodity exchange,                   Location:
                      Nigerian Fertilizer         Kangangalo, Wushishi LGA,            Value propositions:
                          Company,                      Niger State                    Aﬀordable fertilizers,
                  All Farmers Association                                               quality seedlings
                      of Nigeria (AFAN)                                                   within reach
                                                                                       and matched to the
                                                                                           actual soils

           Value Delivery Chains: Kitovu team, Kitopreneur (mobile phone), farmers

               Processes:
                                                                                            Customer and
                                                        Information and                       beneficiary:
                     Organizational model:               other Support:                Smallholder farmers in
                                                                                            distant pocket
                       Work with a “One              Mobile app, web portal,
                                                                                        locations of Nigeria,
                         Locality, One              and USSD all integrated
                                                                                          like Kangangalo,
                     Kitopreneur” approach         together and managed by
                                                                                               Wushishi
                                                     the technical support
                                                             oﬀicer
                      Management system: Quarterly review meetings on
                       performance of Kitovupreneurs, Key Performance
                     Indicators (KPI), number of farmers brought on board
                     quarterly, amount of fertilizers and other inputs sold,
                             number of peers referred by farmers




8                                Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Table 1  Expected Milestones
Month 1
                                                                                             Number of Direct
Productivity Solution          Quantity of Productivity Solution to Be Distributed            Beneficiaries
Fertilizers                    1,000 bags of generic and soil-specific variants                     200
Improved seedlings             5 bags of improved seedlings                                         200
Agrochemicals                  400 liters of chemicals                                              200
Input-produce swap             Not available in first month of the pilot                              0
Employment (Kitopreneurs)      5 Kitopreneurs                                                       200
Month 2
                                                                                             Number of Direct
Productivity Solution          Quantity of Poductivity Solution to Be Distributed             Beneficiaries
Fertilizers                    2,000 bags generic and soil-specific variants                        400
Improved seedlings             10 bags of improved seedlings                                        400
Agrochemicals                  800 liters of chemicals                                              400
Input-produce swap             (Not available in second month of pilot)                               0
Employment (Kitopreneurs)      10 Kitopreneurs                                                      400
Month 3
                                                                                             Number of Direct
Productivity Solution          Quantity of Productivity Solution to Be Distributed            Beneficiaries
Fertilizers                    3,000 bags of generic and soil-specific variants                     600
Improved seedlings             15 bags of improved seedlings                                        600
Agrochemicals                  1,200 liters of chemicals                                            600
Input-produce swap             300 bags of fertilizer, 200 liters of chemicals, and                  90
                               5 bags of improved seedlings
Employment (Kitopreneurs)      15 Kitopreneurs                                                      600
Year 1
                                                                                             Number of Direct
Productivity Solution          Quantity of Productivity Solution to Be Distributed            Beneficiaries
Fertilizers                    9,375 bags of generic and soil-specific variants                    1,875
Improved seedlings             45 bags of improved seedlings                                       1,875
Agrochemicals                  3,600 liters of chemicals                                           1,875
Input-produce swap             4,600 bags of fertilizer, 3,600 liters of chemicals, and 45          180
                               bags of improved seedlings
Employment (Kitopreneurs)      35 Kitopreneurs                                                     1,875
Year 2
                                                                                             Number of Direct
Productivity Solution          Amount of Productivity Solution to Be Distributed              Beneficiaries
Fertilizers                    18,750 bags of generic and soil-specific variants                  3,750
Improved seedlings             90 bags of improved seedlings                                      3,750
Agrochemicals                  7,200 liters of chemicals                                          3,750
Input-produce swap             4,600 bags of fertilizer, 3,600 liters of chemicals, and 45          930
                               bags of improved seedlings
Employment (Kitopreneurs)      75 Kitopreneurs                                                    3,750


                     Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                        9
   The first step in our Kitovu team operations has to do with the devel-
opment of the Kitovu platform. The platforms include a web end, a
mobile app, and a USSD framework that are all integrated seamlessly.
Once development is completed, it will be debugged and beta tested with
a handful of farmers. Then the final version will be made available for
public use.
   Next, the Kitovu team plans to partner with Notore and other fertilizer
suppliers to guarantee a supply of fertilizers at affordable prices. Concurrently,
we will extend a hand of fellowship to AFEX commodity exchange and All
Farmers Association of Nigeria (AFAN). AFEX would guarantee that they
would buy all produce sourced through the Kitovu platform as well as sup-
ply quality seedlings from research institutes. Representatives of AFAN
would provide direct links to smallholder farmers in Kangangalo, through
their leadership at the local government levels.
   The team also would identify a willing Kitopreneur in the Kangangalo
locality and train him or her on the use of the platform and the mobile app
to capture relevant data. We would work together to build a dual-purpose
miniwarehouse made of mud. We also would organize a Kitovu farmers
meeting to sign up farmers. Other meet-up activities include teaching
farmers agricultural best practices, such as the microdosing technique of
fertilizer application, optimal spacing of seeds, and crop rotation. All these
methods ensure optimal yield from reduced use of fertilizers and so guar-
antee lower costs of cultivation for farmers.
   Once we get farmers to sign up for the platform, the Kitopreneur work-
ing with Kangangalo (or another locality) will use the mobile app to cap-
ture relevant farm data, including vegetation types and GPS location. With
the GPS data, we will extract soil and meteorological data of the location,
then analyze and index all the data on our online database. The data then
enable the Kitopreneur and Kitovu team to match each farm with the right
inputs—fertilizers, seedlings, and other agrochemicals—at the right time.
   We then will purchase fertilizers, seedlings, and agrochemicals directly
from partnering manufacturers and distributors and stock them in the
dual-purpose mud warehouse managed by the Kitopreneur. When a
farmer makes a search for inputs, our online database will be able to
remotely match his farm with the right fertilizer, along with the quantity to
be applied for optimal yield. Simultaneously, the details of the farmer’s
request will be sent to the Kitopreneur, who will then supply the farmer
with the inputs, thereby cutting out middlemen who often raise prices by
hoarding supplies to create artificial scarcity.
   For farmers who may not have funds to cover the cost of inputs, the
Kitovu team will set up input-produce swap deals with them. Farmers will
be able to sign an agreement to pay a percentage of their total yields,

10                            Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Figure 11  Contributions to Final Cost of Inputs

                                                                 Transport Cost
                                                                 by Farmer
                Transport Cost
                    incurred by
                    Middleman
                                        Middleman’s
                                         Mark Up


            Distributor’s                                Manufacturer
                Mark Up


                Transport Cost
                    incurred by
                     Distributor



Source: Compiled by Kitovu team using data from Sheahan and Barrett 2014, http://siteresources
.worldbank.org/INTAFRICA/Resources/257994-1351111689757/Africa-Can-Feed-Africa-Part02.pdf and
personal research.




calculated using a template that factors the ratio of input costs to total cost
of crop cultivation and a little margin.
  Because all inputs are stored in environmentally friendly mud silos in
every location with Kitovu coverage and are sold directly to farmers, the
farmers save the cost and stress of shuttling long distances to make pur-
chases. Figure 11 shows the typical factors that contribute to the cost of
inputs, and their percentage share. The chart illustrates the potential sav-
ings the farmers will enjoy by participating in the Kitovu system and elim-
inating markups and transportation costs.
  At harvest, the Kitopreneur will buy the farmers’ produce on behalf of the
Kitovu team and store it temporarily in the mud silo. We will then supply
the produce to AFEX and other commodity buyers in bulk, after aggregat-
ing produce from different locations. The Kitopreneur will earn 20 percent
of the profits from selling inputs to the farmers and produce to buyers.


Expected Impact
After completion of the pilot, the Kitovu team plans to expand first across
Nigeria, one locality at a time, and ultimately across Sub-Saharan Africa. In
Nigeria, of the about 121 million farmers, 22.9 million have mobile phones.
This figure is set to increase with increasing mobile service penetration. In
Nigeria alone, we expect to distribute the platform to about 23 million farm-
ers in the next five years, and we hope to cover the entire African continent

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                              11
in 10 years. To drive rapid expansion, adoption, and engagement on the
Kitovu platform, we plan to sign up farmers for free. We expect that farmers
will also come onboard willingly when we present testimonials of farmers
whose yields were increased by their use of the platform. We would offer
incentives to processors and produce buyers to join the platform by making
it very easy for them to source high-quality produce that is easily traceable
through our proprietary produce rank algorithm. With our platform in
place, we would work to halve postharvest losses while doubling yield rates.


Where We Are Now and Where We Go Next
We have developed our mobile app platform, carrying out a limited pilot
program in three locations—Okaka, in Oyo state; Toro, in Bauchi state; and
Wushishi, in Niger state. During the pilots we introduced our concept to
farmers and carried out beta testing of our mobile app. In Okaka, we worked
with the International Fertilizer Demonstration Center to set up a maize
demonstration farm where we taught farmers. For our efforts so far, we
were awarded the Nigerian Innovation Award for best agricultural mobile
app. However, the USSD framework and portal are still under development.
Our efforts are all geared to carrying out a successful full pilot phase.
   To get the platform operating in the market, we are working on partner-
ships with commodity buyers such as AFEX, fertilizer companies such as
Notore, and farmers associations such as AFAN, as well as the federal and
state ministries of agriculture. We also plan to approach private equity
investors once we have completed the pilot phase of our work and are able
to show some encouraging results.
   In two years, we expect to be serving about 4 million farmers in six states of
Nigeria. We would fund our expansion and growing operations through
retained earnings from revenues from digital advertising, commissions on sales
of inputs (fertilizers, agrochemicals, and seedlings), and subscriptions by pro-
cessors and produce buyers. As we grow, we plan to use our knowledge, experi-
ence, and data on agricultural producers and end users to provide agricultural
logistics services. We intend to capture 10 percent of the new media advertise-
ments in the first five years. As market entry leaders for this innovative approach,
we also intend to gain 60 percent of the market for farm logistics.


Comparable Solutions
Although some similar platforms do parts of what we project to do, none
currently offers them as a bundle. Our farmers-first approach to execution

12                             Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
is also not the focus of these other solutions. Moreover, none of these solu-
tions would work effectively with smallholder farmers in isolated locations
in Sub-Saharan Africa for two main reasons.
   First, these other solutions are all mobile applications, and smallholder
farmers are generally located in areas that lack Internet connectivity (which
mobile apps need to function). We are different in that we incorporate a
USSD framework; therefore, our mobile apps can capture data offline and
then upload the data once the device is in a location with Internet. In
Nigeria particularly, while there are about 22.9 million farmers with mobile
phones, only about 3,000 have smart phones that can support mobile apps;
the rest are feature phones that can support only a USSD platform
   Second, most smallholder farmers that our project targets fall within the
very low income groups and thus are people living on below $1 per day. As
such, they would be very unlikely to be able to afford the other solutions.
This revelation from our research informed our decision to adopt a “free-
mium” model—giving farmers access to our platforms for free, while mak-
ing money from other means.
   Finally, none of these other solutions are localized or take into consider-
ation the complexities of the Sub-Saharan African agricultural landscape.
Nor do they address the critical issues affecting the population—that is,
low yields and postharvest losses. Not only do we take these problems into
account, but we also have incorporated a productivity distribution mecha-
nism into our solution—an input-produce swap for smallholder farmers
who may not have the initial capital to buy inputs for their farms and so
rely solely on natural processes and fate for their farms’ outcomes.
   The following are some of the comparable solutions we looked at:
   SoilWeb. The USDA–National Resources Conservation Service app pro-
vides soil survey information at the touch of a button. The app works with
a smart phone’s GPS receiver to identify soil properties anywhere in the
lower 48 U.S. states where there is cell phone coverage.
   AgIndex. The app from Monsanto Company presents all the markets,
weather, news, and agronomic advice a farmer might want, in one quick-
to-read dashboard. Farmers can receive push notifications customized to
their location and crop portfolio to keep up with changes in commodity
pricing and insect alerts. As advertised, “AgIndex turns your smart phone
or tablet into a complete agronomic information source, so you can stay
fully informed while in the field or on the road.”
   Soil Test Pro. This is a GPS-enabled app developed by TapLogic that
makes soil sampling for the farm easier. The app’s features include
unlimited access to Farm Logic’s precision ag specialists, aerial imagery
of all maps, and test results in 5–7 days It works on Android, iPhone,
and iPad.

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        13
Challenges
As we consider scaling up the Kitovu platform across Sub-Saharan Africa,
we know we will encounter countries with more stringent requirements for
doing business and with protectionist political interventions. The coun-
tries in West Africa have somewhat similar business regulations, but each
country is unique, and we plan to treat them differently. We know that for
our expansion across West Africa to be smooth, we will have to work with
and gain the trust of each country’s ministry of agriculture and regulatory
bodies for information technology (IT). (Nigeria IT is governed by the
Nigerian Information Technology Development Agency; in Ghana, the
agency is the National Information Technology Agency; and for Gambia, it
is Information Technology Association of the Gambia.) The same holds
true for every Western African country we have our sights set on. To ensure
that our relationships with key regulators and officials are sound, we have
decided to adopt a company structure that gives us the flexibility to work
with each country differently. We will have country managers for different
countries, with a local advisory team that is well versed in the legal, busi-
ness, and regulatory frameworks in those countries.
   Another challenge we recognize as typical is the fact that for our pro-
gram to be successful, a lot of users—both farmers and produce buyers and
distributors—must change their approach to doing their work. And we
know that long-held practices, whether sustainable or not, are not easy to
unlearn.
   As with every multifaceted model, we are experiencing the famous
chicken-or-egg paradox: Who comes first? The farmers or other users,
such as produce distributors? Logically, inputs suppliers, farmers, and pro-
duce buyers and distributors all need to be onboard for the platform to be
successful. But the cost of signing up and verifying all stakeholders would
be costly. So far, profiling farms and farmers by their locations and sizes
and capturing soil data are proving to be a huge constraint, considering our
present financial limitations.
   We also realize that having the support and partnership of some stake-
holders, such as the federal and state ministries of agriculture, would give
us voice and legitimacy. Having credit with major companies that sell fer-
tilizer and inputs would also reduce our financial constraints, allowing us
to pay later for delivery of inputs stock. However, for now, we have yet to
secure any such partnerships.




14                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
References
IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2008. World Development
   Report. Washington, DC: IFPRI.
New Internationalist. 2013. “World Development Book Case Study: Does SRI
  Cultivation Really Work?” Citing Jonathan Latham, Independent Science News,
  December 3, 2012. https://newint.org/books/reference/world-development/
  case-studies/does-sri-cultivation-really-work/.
Sheahan, Megan, and Christopher B. Barrett. 2014. “Understanding the
   Agricultural Input Landscape in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Policy Research Working
   Paper 7014, World Bank, Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.org/
   curated/en/165341468002108906/pdf/WPS7014.pdf.



Additional Reading
Chauvin, Nicolas Depetris, Francis Mulangu, and Guido Porto. 2012. “Food
  Production and Consumption Trends in Sub-Saharan Africa: Prospects for the
  Transformation of the Agricultural Sector.” Working Paper, United Nations
  Development Programme, New York.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson. 2011. “Nudging Farmers
  to Use Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American
  Economic Review 101: 2350–90.
Kelly, V. A., and A. Naseem, 2014. “Fertilizer Use in Sub-Saharan Africa; Types
  and Amounts.” UNESCO Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (online). http://
  www.eoiss.net.
Jack, B. Kelsey. 2013. “Market Inefficiencies and the Adoption of Agricultural
   Technologies in Developing Countries.” Agricultural Technology Adoption
   Initiative, J-PAL (MIT) and CEGA (Berkeley).
Lowder, Sarah, Teri Raney, and Jacob Skoet. 2014. “The Global Distribution of
  Smallholder and Family Farms,” CGAP Blog, Consultative Group to Assist the
  Poor, Washington, DC. http://www.cgap.org/blog/global-distribution-small
  holder-and-family-farms.
Lowder, Sarah K., Jakob Skoet, and Saumya Singh. 2014. “What Do We Really
   Know about the Number and Distribution of Farms and Family Farms in the
   World?” Background paper for the State of Food and Agriculture 2014, ESA
   Working Paper 14-02, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
   Nations, Rome. http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/wsfs/docs/Issues_
   papers/HLEF2050_Africa.pdf.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         15
Morris, Michael L., Valerie A. Kelly, Ron J. Kopicki, and Derek Byerlee. 2007
  Fertilizer Use in African Agriculture: Lessons Learned and Good Practice
  Guidelines. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2012. “Regulatory Barriers to Trade Undermine Africa’s Potential in
  Regional Food Trade.” World Bank, Washington, DC. http://siteresources.
  worldbank.org/INTAFRICA/Resources/257994-1351111689757/Africa-Can-
  Feed-Africa-Part02.pdf.




16                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Chapter 2
Reducing Breast
Cancer Death Rates
among Women
in Uganda and
Increasing the Employability of
Visually Impaired Women
Team Gifted Hands Network
Mukose Andrew, special needs rehabilitator and founder, Gifted Hands Networks
Dr. Moses Galukande, medical doctor
Etienne Salborn, mentor, strategist, and founder, Social Innovation Academy
Janice Joyce Ndagire, partnership specialist and business marketier



Abstract
The Gifted Hands Network turns problems into opportunities by training
women who are visually impaired to conduct breast cancer examinations.
As a result, women with breast cancer are more likely to receive treatment
in time for full recovery, and women who are blind gain employment and
social standing.
  Uganda is a developing country with a population of approximately 42
million people. More than 56 percent of the population is female, and more
than 85 percent live without access to good health facilities. This situation
has led to significant loss of life. Good health care is needed in Uganda, but
health services are very expensive and few people can afford them.
  Uganda is among the African countries most affected by breast cancer.
Breast cancer has increased drastically over the past 10 years. The Breast
Cancer Working Group report from Makerere Medical School states that
more than 30,000 women have breast cancer and more than 2,500 women
die from the disease annually in the country. Dr. Fred Okuku, a medical
oncologist at Mulago Hospital in Uganda, said in his medical report of
2014 that there is an additional unknown number of women dying from
undiagnosed breast cancer.



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                             17
   Uganda has more than 1.6 million people who are blind. Socially, people
who are blind are looked on as misfits, nonproductive people, and depen-
dents. They are discriminated against and marginalized in society. More
than 99.5 percent of them are not employed even though many have
received rehabilitation and some are university graduates. These individu-
als have a genius sense of touch that would enable them to detect breast
cancer early once they have received medical training.


Problem and Context
Uganda has more than 1.6 million people who are blind, 99.5 percent of
whom are unemployed even though some are university graduates and
many have received rehabilitation. These individuals who are sight-impaired
are qualified, but society looks at them as nonproductive people.
   In addition, Uganda has more than 30,000 women with breast cancer.
More than 2,500 die each year because few health centers are available.
For example, only two mammography units are located in the urban
center Kampala, and one of those machines is damaged and not work-
ing. Few medical experts are trained in early breast cancer detection. As
a result, women go to hospitals for detection and find they are already in
advanced stages of breast cancer. Many of these women are referred
overseas for treatment, but 99 percent of them cannot afford the treat-
ment and transportation costs. Even if more mammography units were
available, some women are not comfortable with using machines for
breast cancer detection because they fear exposing their bodies to harm-
ful radiation and X-rays.


Solution
The Gifted Hands Network reduces breast cancer deaths by training women
who are visually impaired to become certified medical tactile examiners.
The examiners carry out early breast cancer detection and prevention using
their genius and their heightened and well-trained sense of touch. This
project turns their blindness into an opportunity to create employment for
themselves and to save the lives of other women. When breast cancer is
detected early through examinations, it can easily be cured by treatment
methods available in Uganda, including chemotherapy.
   The target customer population is women ages 20 to 50. Women who are
visually impaired ages 18 to 35 receive the medical training. We also target
stakeholders such as investors, donors, and other caregivers to boost the


18                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
social business and to support us in scaling up to many places across
Uganda and Africa at large.
   The African Summit on Entrepreneurship and Innovation recognized
the Gifted Hands Network as one of the best start-ups and awarded the
business US$10,000 because of its social impact on the lives of people and
because of the employment opportunities it provides. The social business
also was one of the finalists for the African Entrepreneurship Award, and
representatives attended a boot camp in Casablanca, Morocco, for start-
ups most likely to be successful and able to be scaled up in Africa. The
project is also a finalist in the Startup Cup Uganda and is heading to South
Africa for the African Startup Cup competition.
   Gifted Hands Network officially started implementation by organizing a
Dinner in the Dark event, in which we raised more than US$5,000 to train
women who are blind to become certified medical tactile examiners to
carry out the early breast cancer detection.
   In April, we sent two women who are blind to Discovering Hands
Germany, where they were trained and certified as trainers of trainers. The
women are scheduled to return to Uganda in July and will train eight other
blind women to become medical tactile examiners to carry out early breast
cancer detections. By October, the 10 women will officially start early
breast cancer detection.
   Each examination will cost US$10 per person to support the sustainabil-
ity of the project and to help in scaling it up. Detections will be carried out
from partner hospitals and clinics that have already sent letters of intent
indicating that they are ready to give us space in their premises for our
well-trained and certified medical tactile examiners.


Expected Impact
We expect to see a reduction in rates of death from breast cancer among
women in Uganda as a result of using certified medical tactile examiners to
carry out early breast detection at a cost-effective price. Health care services
will improve through the systematic application of a well-trained sense of
touch by women who are visually impaired. In addition to accomplishing early
detection and prevention of breast cancer through examinations, we hope to
raise awareness about the causes and risks of breast cancer among women.
   Women who are potential breast cancer patients will benefit from the
superior natural abilities of well-trained female examiners who are visually
impaired and will enjoy a pleasant private human examination that is high
quality, confidential, and affordable and does not expose their bodies to
X-rays and radiation.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                          19
  The well-trained women who are visually impaired will earn employ-
ment to secure a source of income for themselves. These women will gain
self-esteem, confidence, and a positive attitude that promotes indepen-
dence, self-sustenance, and full participation in society. Socially, the ste-
reotyped negative attitude that people have toward women who are blind
will decrease as people recognize the benefits they contribute to society.


Comparable Product Offerings
A similar program is offered in Germany by Discovering Hands, a social
enterprise we are franchising with. However, we are the first group to pro-
vide this service in Africa. Our partner, Discovering Hands, is a
well-established social enterprise that saves the lives of women from breast
cancer and creates employment opportunities for women who are blind in
European countries and sponsors pilots in some American countries such
as Colombia and Asian countries such as India.


Potential Challenges
We may face a lack of financial support to scale up the social business to
more places in Uganda and in Africa at large. We could address this chal-
lenge by seeking investment or donations from stakeholders such as care-
givers, donors, and social investors in the community and abroad.
  Another challenge is making women aware of our new model of early
breast cancer detection. This challenge can be addressed through organiz-
ing informational programs and raising awareness in communities about
the benefits of our model and also by encouraging women to take advan-
tage of our services for early breast cancer detection.




20                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
References and for Further Information
Discovering Hands website, http://www.discovering-hands.de/en/.
Driskill, Dana. 2015. “Germany’s Blind Breast Cancer Detectors.” Good, February
   23. http://www.good.is/articles/blind-breast-cancer-detectors.
FASE (Finanzierungsagentur für Social Entrepreneurship). 2014. “Case Study
   Social Entrepreneurship: Scaling and Financing of a Social Innovation,
   Discovering Hands.” FASE, Munich. http://social-enterprise-finance.eu/sites
   /default/files/140907_Case_Study_Discovering_Hands_English.pdf.
Dr. Fred Okuku, a medical oncologist at Mulago Hospital, Uganda, in his 2014
   medical report on breast cancer.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         21
Chapter 3
Converting Unproductive,
Waterlogged Land into
Productive Fish Farming Units to
Generate Sustainable Livelihoods,
Provide Food Security, and
Develop Critical Avenues for
Economic Growth for Local Rural
Communities
Team Agratam
Arpita Sinha, Investment Banker, Warwick Business School and University of
Oxford
Akshay Verma, Investment Banker, University of Oxford and Columbia University



Abstract
Bihar, India, has more than 9,000 square kilometers of low-lying, water-
logged wasteland. It has a population of about 130 million, 80 percent of
whom are below the poverty line of US$1 a day. Of those, 15 million people
belong to the fisher community, all of whom live below the poverty line
and are classified by the government as an extremely backward caste. Fish
is the staple diet in the region, with annual consumption of fish at
US$1 billion, but Bihar suffers from a gap between demand and supply of
more than 232 million kilograms of fish per year (US$390 million). To
fulfill that unmet demand, Bihar is importing fish from neighboring states
through unorganized channels.
   Agratam India works in the state of Bihar to convert low-lying and
unproductive wastelands into productive fish farming units. The project
primarily aims to provide sustainable employment opportunities to the
members of the extremely poor fisher community, who do not have access
to a consistent and stable source of income. By aggregating the unproduc-
tive parcels of land held by smallholder farmers, Agratam also provides



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         23
these farmers with rental income on land from which they otherwise
extract negligible value or economic returns.
  Agratam’s aim is to use existing natural resources in an economically
productive and sustainable manner to create income-generating opportu-
nities for the poorest sections of the community.1 The holistic model
focuses on converting unproductive land mass into profit-generating
assets, thereby creating employment, stabilizing incomes, developing skills,
and addressing food security and malnutrition, all of which contribute to
the sustainable development of underserved rural communities.


Problem and Context
Resource Base
With a population of about 130 million, 80 percent of whom are below the
poverty line, Bihar is the third largest of the 28 states in India and has been
classified as one of the four poorest states in the country (Census of India
2011).
   Located at the heart of the Gangetic plain, Bihar has extensive land
and freshwater resources, but it also experiences annual flooding and
drought. Currently Bihar has about 700 square kilometers of embanked
water bodies (ponds and tanks) and 9,000 square kilometers of land that
is waterlogged from seasonal flooding, a third of which is perennially
under water. Despite significant potential for fisheries, naturally occur-
ring in-state resources remain underutilized.

Demographics and Structural Realities
Even though a large majority of the rural community are fishers by profes-
sion, they do not have access to or control of the critical resource: water
bodies. Most of the waterlogged land belongs to smallholder farmers and
is so fragmented that building a 20-acre fish farm could sometimes require
leasing land from at least 40 to 50 smallholder farmers. Moreover, because
the fishers belong to an extremely backward caste and are very poor, they
do not have the security or margin money that banks require to extend
project-based loans. Furthermore, the banks do not have a clear policy or
established mechanisms for lending to fishers, thereby severely limiting

1
   This goal is in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (FAO 2016). The
agenda addresses the contribution and conduct of fisheries and aquaculture to achieve food
security and nutrition, using natural resources in a way that ensures sustainable develop-
ment in economic, social, and environmental terms.


24                               Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
their access to institutional credit. The application process is cumbersome,
and disbursements are extremely hard to execute. Furthermore, despite the
existence of a few subsidy schemes for fisheries development, there is no
focused governmental support for aquaculture, such as training, bank
financing, inputs availability, market linkage, or support price.2

Nutrition and Quality
Fish is the most popular local source of protein in Bihar, and demand far
exceeds production. Fish must be imported from neighboring states, sig-
nificantly reducing the state’s gross domestic product. With 80 percent of
Bihar’s population living below the poverty line, most families, especially
children, suffer from widespread malnutrition. According to a report by
the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO 2012), undernutrition,
including inadequate consumption of foods rich in animal proteins,
remains a huge and persistent problem.3
  In Bihar, the most commonly available fish consumed by residents is an
average of 10 days old, because fish must be transported on ice from the
neighboring state of Andhra Pradesh (2,000 kilometers by road). Despite
the compromised freshness and quality, the fish commands high prices,
between Rs 120 and Rs 150 (US$2.00–2.50) per kilogram.

Demand versus Supply
Bihar produces about 288 million kilograms of fish annually and consumes
almost twice that, on average: about 520 million kilograms. The gap of 232
million kilograms is met through imports from other states in India
(Government of Bihar 2008). The shortfall in production can be attributed
to the poor physical condition of existing community ponds, heavy silt-
ation of those ponds, lack of technical know-how and skilled workers, mul-
tiple ownership of existing water bodies, lack of quality fish seeds from
hatcheries, and the general lack of infrastructure to support a fisheries
value chain.


2
   As compared to the extensive support extended to agriculture in India, systemic support
to aquaculture is severely lacking. Currently, agriculture benefits from established support
frameworks such as availability of high-quality inputs, a subsidized interest rate on bank
credit, subsidized crop insurance, guaranteed procurement at predefined support prices,
and so on.
3
   Fish is usually low in saturated fats, carbohydrates, and cholesterol and provides not only
high-value protein but also a wide range of essential micronutrients, including various vita-
mins, minerals, and polyunsaturated omega-3 fatty acids. Thus, providing fish even in small
quantities can effectively address food and nutritional security among the poor and vulner-
able populations (FAO 2012).


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                       25
Pricing and Distribution
Most of the fish stock produced in Bihar is currently farmed on a small
scale by tenant farmers or small landowners. The fish are harvested twice a
year and then sold through local informal markets. All the locally har-
vested fish are currently sold at the farm gates and rarely reach the whole-
sale market. The consumers in this largely unorganized retail market are
the local, rural population, who pay a higher price for fresh fish than for
the dead fish that is typically imported from neighboring states and sold in
local markets.
   Even in the most rural and economically underdeveloped areas in
Bihar, the lowest cost for imported fish is Rs 100 for 1 kilogram of fish
(about US$1.70 per kilogram). At the local market, this usually
ice-preserved fish stock is sold at a 100 percent margin or higher,
depending on the quality. The money that currently flows out of Bihar
annually to pay for fish imported to meet demand is at least Rs 15 bil-
lion (US$390 million). This estimate excludes transportation costs,
cold-chain storage during the journey from neighboring states, state
import tax, and so on.

Yields
Bihar is blessed with the best natural resources for inland fisheries in the
country. Currently, production yields in Bihar are half the national average,
but they could increase to 16 times the national average if more standard-
ized and innovative farming methods were implemented. Large-scale fish
farming activities across the state are currently very limited, despite the sig-
nificant market opportunity, available government support, and subsidies
aimed at enhancing in-state production. Underdeveloped infrastructure,


Figure 1  Context of the Problem




     Unproductive Asset Base                 Unmet Demand for Fish                       Fishers


      Owned by smallholder                     Of US$39 million for                 15 million fishers
           farmers                             232 million kilograms


Agratam’s model works with existing natural resources to sustainably solve two of Bihar’s inherent
problems. First, the model increases in-state production of fish. Second, it provides long-term sustainable
avenues of income generation and skill development to rural communities.



26                                      Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
gross mismanagement of existing fish farming operations, poor distribu-
tion networks, lack of access to knowledge, and subscale and unscientific
farming methods are key reasons for the largely informal and substandard
approach adopted to date.


Solution
To harness Bihar’s significant resource opportunity, Agratam India began
operations in 2014 using the “composite value generation” model. The
model is based on cross-subsidization, which uses profits from a for-
profit arm to fund activities of a not-for-profit arm to generate long-term
social impacts in the community. Agratam’s first objective is to create
employment and generate income opportunities for local communities
by providing capital and technical support to fishers and entrepreneurs.
Agratam will use its not-for-profit arm, Agratam India Foundation, to
undertake community-level projects, including youth engagement, wom-
en’s self-help groups, sanitation projects, and provision of health care (see
annex 1).


Designing the Initiative
Agratam India is creating a sustainable, profit-generating asset base while
simultaneously addressing the unmet demand for fish and the unmet
needs of very low-income communities in Bihar. Using a sustainable busi-
ness model, Agratam works to convert unproductive waterlogged lands to
productive and profitable assets, improve the volume and quality of fish
production yields, enhance the distribution network and cold storage
facilities, address food security and nourishment issues, and establish
local entrepreneurs. (See figure 1.)
  Fish is highly nutritious and can be an important source of vitamins,
minerals, and protein, even when consumed in small amounts. A World
Bank survey (2013) also showed that small-scale fish farming consistently
pays off by raising workers’ incomes, creating stable work, and increasing
food supplies.
  To demonstrate and quantify the opportunity in Bihar, Agratam began
by developing a model fish farm on 20 acres of aggregated land leased from
smallholders who could not farm their extremely low-lying, waterlogged,
and unproductive land. The objective was to convince the local population
of the viability of the project, through a real-life example, using the most
unproductive pieces of land. Agratam has used its initial pilot farm as both
a demonstration unit and a training facility, and succeeded in reinvesting
returns into building a second 20-acre farm.

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                       27
Increasing the Productivity of Bihar’s Low-Lying
Land Area
The primary way to increase productivity of the region’s low-lying,
flood-affected areas is to convert them into ponds by building embank-
ments around them. Agratam secures the land through long-term (29-
year) leases with smallholder farmers and then invests in the development
of the necessary infrastructure. Agratam makes the initial financial invest-
ments needed to secure the leases, fund the land development, and provide
initial working capital to generate a return on the investment.

Improving Yield Volume and Quality
Although much of Bihar’s land area remains submerged year-round, Bihar is
primarily an agrarian economy with farmers at best producing two crops
from their upland—land that is not affected by waterlogging. However, even
maximum yields from crop cultivation on high quality upland are relatively
poor when compared with fish farming. Local marginal farmers are increas-
ingly acknowledging that aquaculture is the best use of their land. As annex
2 shows, on mainstream agricultural land, even if a farmer is successful in
producing two crops, the annual income generated (maximum Rs 25,000, or
US$385) is lower than conservative aquaculture projections. Currently, the
average yield from fish farming on 1 acre of land in Bihar is nine times the
maximum agricultural yield achievable on high quality upland (see annex 2).
   Fish farming incorporates three core systems: hatcheries, fish feed mills,
and ponds. The first two currently do not exist in Bihar, so part of Agratam’s
long-term strategy is to develop hatcheries and feed mills to build out the
end-to-end fish value chain in the region. Providing fish farmers with
high-quality inputs (fish seed and fish feed) at cost-effective prices is a pre-
requisite for profitable production. As Agratam scales up the program, its
focus will include setting up common resource centers, establishing a net-
work of distribution channels, and providing access to markets.
   India’s average national production from fish farming is more than 3,000
kilograms of fish per hectare (2.47 acres), with Bihar currently producing
about 1,500 kilograms of fish per hectare. Research has shown that Bihar
can produce 15 to 16 times the national average if resources are used effi-
ciently.4 Agratam is currently targeting production of about 5,000 kilo-
grams per hectare.


4
   Research by the government of Bihar (2008) has included relevant literature reviews and
extensive hands-on field research. Most of the research team grew up in the area or have
been working in Bihar for several years and therefore have in-depth knowledge.


28                               Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
   Agratam’s goal of improving volume and quality of fish depends not only
on providing fishers with access to healthy yearlings and high-quality fish
feed. It also requires establishing bulk supply agreements and providing
technical assistance to improve farming methods. The pilot pond and addi-
tional fish farming projects and ponds—each sufficient to supply a few vil-
lages—are expected to generate strong cash inflows for the local
communities through direct and indirect channels, thereby contributing
significantly to improving livelihoods in rural economies.

Enhancing the Distribution Network and Cold
Storage
Within a span of three years, Agratam has established itself as the largest
producer of fresh fish in North Bihar. Given the assured supply Agratam
provides, traders buy directly from the farm gates and supply to neighbor-
ing local markets. The fresh fish Agratam is supplying to local markets
commands a higher price than the imported dead fish and its consistent
availability is having an impact on consumption preferences and patterns
as people inherently prefer fresh fish to dead fish.
  The overall distribution network for farmed fish in Bihar remains signifi-
cantly underdeveloped. Cold-chain storage infrastructure needs to be
developed from the farm to the market. Agratam aims to begin organized
distribution and cold-chain storage by coordinating the harvest, collection,
storage, and transport in refrigerated vans for all local ponds.

Developing Local Fish Entrepreneurs
Agratam has begun work on the following objectives:

••   Entrepreneurship development programs. Programs involve (a) training
     local populations to build viable projects using realistic assumptions
     and (b) equipping people with tools and know-how to execute aqua-
     culture projects. Providing training and information to fishers is essen-
     tial because they have no access to the latest developments in technology
     and management practices.
••   Development capital. By considering investments on a case-by-case
     basis, Agratam may use its capital to cover any shortfall at the fish
     entrepreneur’s end. In each case, it puts in place a suitable partnership
     agreement, depending on the level of capital commitment.
••   Technical support. Agratam has begun hiring technical experts, mar-
     keting professionals, accounting and finance professionals and ana-
     lysts who will be available to visit the fish entrepreneur’s worksite

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        29
     monthly and provide support services. This support will embed a
     structure of accountability, help with monitoring and evaluation, and
     help measure tangible impacts on an ongoing basis.


Current Operations
Agratam currently operates one 20-acre farm, the initial demonstration
unit that it set up in 2014 (see table 1). The farm’s direct beneficiaries
include 34 smallholder farmers (the landowners) and 35 fishers who work
as full-time staff and netters. The ancillary beneficiaries also include hun-
dreds of fish traders who regularly buy the fish from the farm to sell locally.
The availability of fresh fish has provided traders with a high degree of
livelihood assurance.
   Having reinvested profits and infused new capital into the program,
Agratam is now building a second 20-acre farm in a neighboring area. As
demonstrated in figure 2, breakeven is achieved in two years, with a profit
expected in year three for a 20-acre farm.


          Cycle Economics and Working Capital Flows on the
Figure 2  
           20-Acre Farm
                                                   Year 1
 $200,000                           Cycle 1                               Cycle 2                         Cycle 3


 $150,000                       $145,000                        $145,000                        $145,000



 $100,000


   $50,000                                       $32,400                         $32,400                         $32,400


         $0


 –$50,000


                ($77,700)
–$100,000
                                ($112,600)                      ($112,600)                      ($112,600)
–$150,000

                       One time development cost            Operating cost          Revenue       Operating profit

Source: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, FAOSTAT database, http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#home.
Note: USDollars.



30                                    Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
                         Agratam’s aim is to encourage fishers to take entrepreneurial initiative
                      and organize themselves into small groups (potentially under limited part-
                      nership agreements) that will collectively lease the land from the small-
                      holder farmers as well as own their own ponds. The agreements would give
                      fishers sustainable livelihoods, foster self-reliance, break them out of the
                      vicious cycle of day laboring and living hand-to-mouth, and give them an
                      opportunity to benefit from pond profits.
                         Agratam’s involvement would be decided on a case-by-case basis, but
                      feedback suggests that the fisher groups would like Agratam to hold a
                      minority stake in their ponds at all times to ensure adequate operational
                      and oversight support. If sufficient funds are raised to scale up Agratam’s
                      activities, we envision using a combined holding company plus operating
                      company structure.
                         Annex 2 compares aquaculture yields with agricultural yields per acre.



Table 1  Fish Farm Economics on a 20-Acre Farm
 Fixed Cost Details                                                       Amount (Rs)   Amount (US$)
 One-time development cost                                                  5,000,000      77,000
 (earthwork, civil construction, lighting, pump sets, pipes, and so on)
 Total Fixed Costs                                                        5,000,000       77,000
 Operating Cost Details per Cycle – (two cycles per year)                 Amount (Rs)   Amount (US$)
 Purchase of fish seed (yearlings)                                          1,350,000      21,000
 •	 Each acre of water area is stocked with 15,000 yearlings.
 •	 The 20-acre farm will have about 15 acres of water.
 •	 Total stocking requirement is 225,000 yearlings.
 Purchase of fish feed                                                      5,000,000      77,000
 •	 Only supplementary feed is needed because pond ecosystem
    provides nutrition naturally.
 Labor costs                                                                450,000        6,900
 •	 Operation requires 15 fishers at about Rs 5,000 each per month.
 Other costs                                                                500,000        7,700
 •	 Costs include half of annual lease, medicine, and so on.
 Total Operating Costs per Cycle                                          7,300,000       112,600
 Revenue Details per Cycle (two cycles per year)                          Amount (Rs)   Amount (US$)
 Sale of fish                                                               9,450,000     145,500
 •	 Sale weight assumes that 75 percent of yearlings survive and grow
    to 700 grams each in 6 months.
 •	 Total fish sold per acre of water is 7,875 kg.
 •	 Total fish production from 15 acres of water area for one cycle is
    118,125 kg.
 •	 Estimated sale price is Rs 80 per kg.
 Total Revenue per Cycle                                                  9,450,000       145,500
 Total Operating Profit per Cycle                                           2,150,000     32,900
Note: Currency exchange assumes US$1 = Rs 65.



                      Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                           31
Scalability
One of Agratam’s main aims is to lead by example and stimulate the under-
standing of and interest in fish farming. Agratam’s model has motivated
several people to begin aggregating unproductive waterlogged lands for
fish farming.
   Inspired by Agratam’s success, a resident of a neighboring district to
where Agratam currently operates, recently aggregated 100 acres of
low-lying waterlogged land from 534 smallholder farmers. He then
approached Agratam India to ask for financial support to implement the
project. He also sought management and technical assistance, guidance,
and regular inputs from Agratam’s fishery experts to estimate and achieve
desirable production yields.
   Currently, Agratam India has access to over 500 acres of waterlogged
land that can be developed and put into operation within a period of 12 to
18 months. However, lack of funds has prevented Agratam from beginning
these projects.
   The most significant scaling opportunity is expanding operations and
capabilities to cover the entire fishery value chain. Building up this value
chain would require

••   inputs such as fish hatcheries and feed;
••   outputs, such as collection, transportation, and market links; and
••   fish preservation and storage facilities.

  Agratam’s model could be easily replicated, not just across Bihar but also
into neighboring states that have similar geographic features (see map 1).


       Opportunities to Scale Up Fish Farming on
Map 1  
        Low-Lying Lands



                                             1.	 Bihar (current operations)
                                             2.	 Jharkhand
                                             3.	 Odisha
                                             4.	 Chhattisgarh
                                             5.	 Madhya Pradesh
                                             6.	 Uttar Pradesh




32                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Comparable Projects
Bihar currently has no other businesses or organizations working on a fish
farming model. The concept of aggregating and using waterlogged, unpro-
ductive wasteland for aquaculture is an innovative step forward from the
artificial tanks used predominantly by commercial, for-profit aquaculture
operations.
   Andhra Pradesh, where commercial aquaculture is far more established,
has several freshwater aquaculture initiatives, but we do not know of any
that are based on models similar to Agratam’s.
   Internationally, Thailand and Vietnam have traditionally farmed fish in
flooded rice fields, but production has always been more for personal con-
sumption rather than on an industrial or commercial scale.


Challenges
Table 2 explains the challenges facing aquaculture operations in India and
particularly those in Bihar. It also highlights how Agratam India has
demonstrated the benefits of aggregated production to landowners, bene-
ficiary fishers, and other ecosystem players.


The Road Ahead
Agratam’s primary strength is the strong community relationships it has
formed over the past four years through its local presence, community
engagement, and proven skills in executing its initiative. Trust among the
local community is one of Agratam’s strongest attributes. Without it, land
acquisition and operations would prove difficult. The model’s success is
demonstrated by the increasing number of smallholder farmers who have
been approaching Agratam to lease their lands.
   The economic and growth potential that Agratam offers to the local
community is extraordinary. Having successfully demonstrated the viabil-
ity of the model through the pilot project and established a track record,
Agratam now seeks funding support to scale up its operations and generate
greater impacts.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                    33
Table 2  Challenges and Benefits of Aquaculture in Bihar
Challenge      Comments                                        Mitigation
Land           •	 The unproductive land is largely owned       •	 Agratam’s founder is a native of the area who
acquisition       by many smallholder farmers, each of            has strong connections within the local
or rental         whom owns less than an acre of land.            community. He has spent over three years
from           •	 Acquiring this land from farmers and            working with local communities and earned
smallholder       aggregating parcels under one lease can         the respect and trust of the people.
farmers           be challenging.                              •	 Through the pilot, he has demonstrated that
                                                                  he can inspire sufficient trust among farmers
                                                                  to sign up for the lease.
                                                               •	 Farmers are willing to lease the land because
                                                                  it has remained waterlogged and has not
                                                                  produced any economic benefit. By leasing
                                                                  this land, the farmers can earn a healthy,
                                                                  lucrative rental income for 29 years.
                                                               •	 Agratam already has more than 500 acres of
                                                                  land pledged in principle.
Engagement     •	 The model requires fishers to buy into       •	 Besides the significant trust the founder has
with fishers      the investment thesis and sign on to the        built within the local community, the pilot
                  limited partnership agreements.                 project has also been instrumental in
                                                                  demonstrating the benefits of the fish farm,
                                                                  including the potential for sustainable
                                                                  economic benefits to the wider community.
Destruction    •	 Fish farms are exposed to the elements,      •	 Fish stocks can be insured by the Oriental
of ponds or       and fish stocks are exposed to risks of         Insurance Company, a public-sector enterprise
low fish          disease and theft. Small-scale farming          that provides a significant safety net to
yield             techniques may also produce low yields          small- and large-scale fishing activities.
                  and variable quality.                        •	 Advancements in farming techniques can
                                                                  improve both the yield and the quality of the
                                                                  fish harvested.
                                                               •	 Part of the service that Agratam offers is
                                                                  educating fishers on the latest scientific
                                                                  technologies and farming techniques.
Political      •	 Research by the International Finance        •	 This project is a mechanism to ease the
environment       Corporation (IFC) has shown that                government welfare burden in a disadvan-
and support       investments with a strong internal rate         taged area of the country. Therefore govern-
                  of return have been the most successful         ment support assumes little risk of failure.
                  in creating and sustaining jobs.
               •	 With widening income inequality and
                  entrenched poverty, the government of
                  India is focused on achieving significant
                  developmental impacts by supporting
                  economic growth through the broader
                  private sector rather than focusing solely
                  on government handouts and subsidies.
Sustainable    •	 In several parts of the world, aquaculture   •	 Large-scale fish farming can be done without
fish              has acquired some disrepute because of          placing unacceptable demands on the environ-
production        the proliferation of unsustainable and          ment if a region has the existing water resources
and supply        harmful practices to increase productivi-       and pond development does not require the
                  ty and cater to growing commercial              destruction of large tracts of sensitive land or
                  demand.                                         mangroves. Bihar is a good example.
                                                               •	 Agratam’s methods follow guidelines to
                                                                  ensure that its practices are environmentally
                                                                  sustainable and that it avoids resource and
                                                                  manpower exploitation.



34                               Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
References
Census of India. 2011. “Population.” www.censusindia.gov.in.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2012. The State
  of Food Insecurity in the World. Rome: FAO.
———. 2016. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture—Contributing to Food
  Security and Nutrition for All. Rome: FAO.
Government of Bihar, Directorate of Fisheries, Department of Animal and Fish
  Resources. 2008. “Draft Fisheries Policy.”
World Bank. 2013. “Fish to 2030—Prospects for Fisheries and Aquaculture.”
  Discussion Paper 83177, Agriculture and Environmental Services, World
  Bank, Washington, DC.



Additional Reading
BBC. 2011. “Radio 4 Interview: UK International Development Secretary Andrew
  Mitchell.” http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_9396000/9396680.stm.
Indian Council of Agricultural Research. “Fisheries Development in Bihar: An
   Action Plan.” www.ahd.bih.nic.in/Docs/ICAR-Report-Fisheries-Dev-Bihar.pdf.
Kar, D. 2013. Wetlands and Lakes of the World. New Delhi: Springer, 100–25.
Kumar, M., S. N. Ojha, A. Sharma, and R. Kumar. 2014. “A Study on Constraints
  in Adoption of Scientific Aquaculture Practices.” Journal of Applied and Natural
  Science 6 (2): 696–700.
NABARD (National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development). “Information
  Centre,” NABARD website. https://www.nabard.org/default.aspx.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2015. Social
  Impact Investment—Building the Evidence Base. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Prasad, N. K. 1998. Dimensions of Development: Analysis of an Underdeveloped
   State, vol. 1: Agriculture. New Delhi: Concept Pub. Co., 164–66.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                            35
         Agratam India’s Activities
Annex 1. 




For-profit investment   Financial assistance    Management assistance    Technical assistance
arm                     Equity and working      Market links, audit,     Training, monitoring and
                        capital                 strategy                 evaluation, governance




Not-for-profit arm      Women’s and self-help   Rural youth              Sanitation
                        groups                  Skill development,       Personal toilets, clean
                        Employment, income,     entrepreneurship         drinking water
                        savings




36                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
         Fish Farm versus Agricultural Economics in
Annex 2. 
         Bihar per Acre
Fish Farming Economics for 1 Acre of Waterlogged Land
 Fixed Costs                                                                                       Amount (Rs.) Amount (US$)
 One-time development cost                                                                            250,000                3,900
 (earthwork, civil construction, lighting, pump sets, pipes, and so on)
 Total Fixed Costs                                                                                    250,000                3,900
 Operating Cost Details per Cycle (two cycles per year)                                            Amount (Rs)        Amount (US$)
 Purchase of fish seed (yearlings)                                                                     90,000                1,400
 •	 Each acre of water area is stocked with 15,000 yearlings.
 Purchase of fish feed                                                                                250,000                3,900
 •	 Only supplementary feed is needed because pond ecosystem provides
    adequate nutrition naturally.
 Labor costs                                                                                           60,000                925
 •	 Operation requires labor of Rs 10,000 per month.
 Other costs include half of lease costs, medicine, and so on.                                         25,000                400
 Total Operating Costs Per Cycle                                                                      425,000                6,625
 Revenue details per cycle (two cycles per year)                                                   Amount (Rs)        Amount (US$)
 Sale of fish                                                                                         630,000                9,700
 •	 Sale weight conservatively assumes that only 75 percent of yearlings
    survive and only grow to 700 grams each in 6 months.
 •	 Total fish sold per acre of water is 7,875 kg.
 •	 Estimated sale price is Rs 80 per kg.
 Total Revenue Per Cycle                                                                              630,000                9,700
 Total Profit Per Cycle                                                                               205,000                3,075
Note: Currency exchange assumes US$1 = Rs 65.


Agricultural Economics for 1 Acre of Most Fertile Land
 Crop 1—Paddy                                                                     Amount (Rs)                   Amount (US$)
 Maximum production                                                          20 quintals (2,000 kg)         20 quintals (2,000 kg)
 Minimum support price (provided by the government)                             1,400 per quintal                       21


 Maximum total revenue                                                                28,000                           430
 Minimum input cost (seed, fertilizer, land rental, labor, etc.)                      14,000                           215
 Crop 1 Profit                                                                        14,000                           215
 Crop 2—Wheat                                                                     Amount (Rs)                   Amount (US$)
 Maximum production                                                          15 quintals (1,500 kg)         15 quintals (1,500 kg)
 Minimum support price (provided by the government)                             1,400 per quintal                       21
 Maximum total revenue                                                                21,000                           320
 Minimum cost ((seed, fertilizer, land rental, labor, etc                             10,000                           155
 Crop 2 Profit                                                                        11,000                           170
 Total Combined Profit in 1 year                                                     25,000                           385
Note: These are the economics for the most fertile land and assumes that the farmer can produce at the highest level of
productivity and is also able to sell the harvest at the maximum price (which is not the case in reality). It also assumes no
leakages in the supply chain.



                        Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                                          37
         Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) of
Annex 3. 
         Impact
The measurement parameters include regular estimations on improvements compared with
baseline indicators (per capital household income levels, employment, availability of fresh
fish, per week fresh fish consumption, and so on).
   Expected impact: Agratam measures its impact on both a primary and secondary level.
At a primary level, beneficiaries and impact generated include those that are directly
involved in the fish farms.

Primary Beneficiaries                    Impact
Local fishers                            Promotion of employment and income generation

Smallholder farmers                      Assured rental income for landowners
Traders (buying at farm gate)            Assured supply



   At a secondary, ecosystem-wide level, Agratam’s activities have gone a long way in facili-
tating not only the associated value chain participants but also local community
development.

Secondary Beneficiaries                  Impact
Traders (wholesale local markets)        Assured supply allowing for accurate sale projections and for better
                                         managing supply-demand dynamics
Ancillary products (net makers, etc.)    Income consistency
Consumers                                Consumption of healthy, organically grown, nutritious fresh fish




38                                  Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Annex 4.  Agratam’s Team Credentials

Akshay Verma
Relevant Experience:

••   3.5+ years of Leveraged Finance experience at UBS Investment Bank,
     London
••   Extensive experience of working with local communities and entre-
     preneurs in Bihar
••   3.5+ years of startup experience in the Indian ecosystem

Education:
•• B.A. (Hons.) Mathematics, St. Stephen’s College, Delhi University,
   India
•• MSc. Financial Economics, Oxford University, United Kingdom
•• Master of Public Administration, Columbia University, New York

Arpita Sinha
Relevant Experience:
•• 6 years of Leveraged Finance experience at Barclays Corporate and
    Investment Bank, London
•• Experience of working with rural communities and disaster relief
    programs
•• Extensive independent consulting experience

Education:
•• B.A. (Hons.) Literature, LSR College, Delhi University, India
•• MSc. Management, Warwick Business School, United Kingdom
•• Master of Business Administration, Impact Investing, Oxford
   University, United Kingdom




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                 39
2017 Runners-up
Chapter 4
Encouraging Volunteerism Using
a Proprietary Digital-Currency
Incentive
Team Project Forward
Faith Suwilanji Kaoma, co-founder, Copper Rose
Daniel Kashani, financial associate, Willis Towers Watson
Michael Kashani, vice president, Goldman Sachs
Cole Pergament, University of Pennsylvania Class of 2020
Tristan Thoma, Baruch College Class of 2020
Matthew Weiss, University of Pennsylvania Class of 2020



Abstract
Project Forward is an innovative, self-sustaining, and social currency–
backed ecosystem that allows not-for-profit organizations to indirectly
incentivize volunteers. At its core, Project Forward facilitates the moneti-
zation of volunteer hours through a proprietary digital currency.
   Within the United States alone, there is a stark drop-off in the rates of
volunteerism. In the past 12 years volunteer rates fell from 28.8 percent in
2003 to 24.9 percent in 2015 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2003; U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics 2016). While there are several theories as to why
the rate of volunteerism is declining, it is clear that not-for-profit organiza-
tions are having less success encouraging people to engage and become
more active in their communities. To cultivate meaningful and long lasting
engagement, organizations that rely on volunteers must entertain the
thought of creating a more comprehensive incentive.
   The use of digital currencies continues to increase. Technology has cre-
ated the next wave of transactional components that banks and individuals
alike have begun to adopt: a new medium of exchange involving digital
wallets and smart contracts. To expand this usage and create something
that will yield a better value structure, Project Forward has married two
vitally beneficial functions. Millennials especially will now be able to obtain
the skills required to conduct business in this new era of technology while
also giving back. What was once considered an elusive part of the technol-
ogy world will instead aid the future of positive social impact.



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                          41
Problem and Context
According to the 2016 World Giving Index (CAF 2016), 63 percent of the
U.S. population donates to charity. The tax incentives available in the
United States for charitable contributions are widely cited as one of the
main reasons for this extremely high contribution rate. On average, just 22
percent of the population donates in countries that offer no tax incentives
for charitable contributions. Thus, it is critical to provide an incentive that
will drastically augment charitable contributions to society.
   While the percentage of people donating to charity in the United States
is still quite high, the percentage of people who volunteer continues to
decline. A study covering the year ending in September 2015 released by
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016) reported that only 24.9 percent of
the population volunteer, with that rate slightly lower for seniors and then
declining sharply for younger age groups, the unemployed, and individuals
without a college education. Additionally, the percentage of people who
volunteer is materially lower than the percentage of people donating to
charity in the United States and continues to decline at an alarming rate. By
facilitating incentives for volunteering, we believe Project Forward can
increase volunteerism rates, thus helping organizations that want to make
a positive impact on the world.

The Solution
By facilitating incentives for volunteers, we can increase volunteerism rates,
thus magnifying the ability of not-for-profit organizations to achieve their
missions. The social currency that Project Forward creates to incentivize
volunteerism will provide new opportunities for social engagement and par-
ticipation. Local stores and universities will be able to create self-sustaining
systems that use a digital currency based on the blockchain1 to strengthen
the characters of consumers and students. At its core, Project Forward facil-
itates the monetization of volunteer hours through a digital currency.
How It Works
A person sets out to volunteer at a participating not-for-profit. Once the
not-for-profit confirms that the person has volunteered for a specific num-
ber of hours, it communicates the amount of Forward Coins earned by the
volunteer to Project Forward. After the process is confirmed, the volunteer
will receive Forward Coins into his or her digital wallet. This transaction

1
   “A digital ledger in which transactions made in…cryptocurrency are recorded chrono-
logically and publicly” (Oxford University Press 2017).


42                             Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
can take place using a digital smart contract, which automatically facili-
tates, verifies, and enforces the negotiation of a contract. The coins earned
have monetary value and are transferable.
   Upon receiving the Forward Coins, the user has two options:

1.	 The volunteer can accept and use the coins: Volunteers can exchange
    Forward Coins for gift cards or account credits with participating
    retailers. Participating retailers can accept Forward Coins directly on
    their sites. In the long term, Project Forward will facilitate the transfer
    of credit to almost any website for the purchase of items. Forward
    Coins can be used for exclusive promotions in which only Forward
    Coins are accepted (for example, concerts and sporting events). Project
    Forward will also facilitate person-to-person transactions, such as cur-
    rency exchanges and transfers.
2.	 The volunteer can pay it forward: Volunteers who are not comfortable
    with being compensated for their efforts can choose to transfer the
    Forward Coins to a different not-for-profit. In this scenario, the volun-
    teer never takes possession of the coins, thus avoiding potential future
    or regulatory tax implications. Volunteers also have the ability to nom-
    inate nonprofits that are not currently registered with Project Forward,
    thus expanding the Project Forward network. The “pay it forward”
    option dramatically magnifies the societal impact of each volunteer
    hour and eliminates the potential objection some individuals may have
    to being paid to volunteer.

Forward Coin
The Forward Coin is based on blockchain technology, which enables trans-
parency and reliability of information. The use of Blockchain will facilitate
the transfer of Forward Coins without a central bank and will immutably
record the details of every transaction.

••   Forward Coin value. The value of each Forward Coin is backed
     directly by donated funds from sponsoring partners to Project
     Forward, initially on a one-to-one basis. These donated funds serve to
     underwrite the Forward Coins, providing an immediate redeemable
     value and confidence in the currency.
••   Certification and storage. Each Forward Coin has a digital imprint
     certifying its philanthropic origin, minimizing the possibility of fraud-
     ulent activity and providing invaluable information regarding volun-
     teering trends. Unlike point systems, coins that have been redeemed
     do not expire but rather are held at the Project Forward Bank for future
     consideration.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         43
••   Social implication. The Forward Coin currency not only is a digital or
     cryptocurrency, but importantly, also is a social currency that individ-
     uals may use and retailers may redeem with the knowledge that it was
     created through socially impactful means.
Project Governing Structure
•• Project Forward. Project Forward is a 501(c)(3) corporation responsi-
   ble for building and maintaining relationships among volunteers, non-
   profits, and sponsors. The corporation is also responsible for auditing
   nonprofits to confirm the validity of volunteer attestation and serves as
   a conduit between volunteers and the Forward Coins they have earned.
•• Project Forward Bank. The Project Forward Bank is a for-profit finan-
   cial services corporation. The bank is the creator and initial owner of
   all Forward Coins. It is obligated to accept a combination of volunteer
   attestation and sponsor donations in exchange for Forward Coins. It
   facilitates the redemption, trade, and sale of Forward Coins through a
   self-managed exchange or bank.

Although Project Forward envisions that it will be
available for all volunteers globally, the following use
cases are first steps for expansion.
University Engagement Strategy
The situation. Most university students have the time and desire to be
socially engaged but lack the personal incentive or an organized system in
which to participate. With Project Forward, students will be able to accrue
digital currency to redeem on campus or forward to local charities.

The proposition. Universities often consist of young, socially conscious,
and energetic student bodies already involved in dispersed community
engagement efforts with no organized method of growth. Project Forward
would serve to organize and incentivize students, providing a self-sustaining
ecosystem that encourages them to engage in their community. The uni-
versity framework facilitates numerous volunteering opportunities in and
around campus as well as receptiveness to adopt this technology. Many
universities currently allocate funds toward social engagement initiatives.
Such funding could act as sponsorship for Forward Coins that could be
redeemed with the university itself or a closely aligned foundation. In this
scenario, the incentive for students is to use Forward Coins to subsidize
costs of student life, such as campus food, books, apparel, printing, and
other supplies. This approach to campus impact is replicable at universities
around the world.

44                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Winners
••   Universities. With Project Forward, universities can expand their com-
     munity engagement efforts and greatly increase their institutional
     value. A university that implements programs to benefit students and
     other local organizations will be recognized as innovative and socially
     impactful. These added values attached to the university’s name could
     result in greater alumni support and future student enrollment.
••   Student-volunteers. The Project Forward ecosystem will help
     encourage college students to direct their energy to community
     impact. Young adults are statistically the least likely to volunteer, so
     incentivizing them at universities could break this downward trend
     (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2016). By getting involved in volun-
     teering starting in college, the person is more likely to continue vol-
     unteering into adulthood.  The experience and skills gained while
     volunteering also would help the students after graduation when
     they enter the job market.
••   Not-for-profit organizations. Not-for-profits can be introduced to
     Project Forward in a highly controlled process, with the university
     promoting confidence in the system and giving the not-for-profits a
     source of volunteers who are engaged. The incentives provided by
     Project Forward will increase the access to an engaged pool of volun-
     teers. Additionally, the digital nature of the currency will increase the
     visibility of the not-for-profit as volunteers tie the earning of Forward
     Coins to their social media accounts. Finally, because they are respon-
     sible only for the attestation of volunteer hours, not-for-profits can eas-
     ily partner with Project Forward.

  The university strategy offers a unique environment for testing and scal-
ing the Project Forward ecosystem, given the concentration of participat-
ing entities. University student bodies also represent the most socially
active age demographic, which can propel Project Forward’s growth
exponentially.
Corporate Engagement Strategy
The situation. Corporations are increasingly dedicating significant
resources to philanthropy and corporate engagement within their commu-
nities, including organizing volunteering opportunities for their employ-
ees. Some corporate employees may feel that these volunteer initiatives are
limited in their effect on the not-for-profit institutions, because they are
typically one-day experiences and only sometimes provide a pathway to a
continued relationship with the not-for-profit. Additionally, corporate vol-
unteering is becoming more important to employees, forcing companies to

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                          45
come up with more dynamic offerings to attract and retain talent
(CyberGrants 2015).

The proposition. Rather than replacing the tailored approach that each
corporate engagement or human resource department has developed,
Project Forward would serve as an overlay that would seek to enhance the
experience of the volunteer-employee and provide greater engagement
with the not-for-profit institution. In this scenario, the corporate entity
that is providing the volunteer to the not-for-profit would also act as the
sponsor for the underlying value of the Forward Coins. Additionally, the
volunteer in this case would be required to pay it forward and send the
Forward Coins to a different not-for-profit.

Winners
••   Corporations. By overlaying the prospect of earning Forward Coins to
     the existing volunteer opportunities, the corporation increases interest
     in what is commonly a predictable program by introducing a dynamic
     way for employees to double their impact. In addition to the recogni-
     tion from the initial volunteering opportunity, the corporation could
     be associated with the Forward Coins that the employee-volunteers
     pay forward to the not-for-profit of their choice. Finally, the corpora-
     tion could track the Forward Coins they sponsored, thereby providing
     a more expansive way to measure their impact.
••   Employee-volunteers. The introduction of the Forward Coin opens a
     new dynamic, providing employees with a greater sense of ownership
     and an opportunity to multiply their philanthropic efforts to what is
     typically regarded as strongly encouraged volunteering. Also, Project
     Forward is introduced to the exact demographic that is historically
     more likely to volunteer, thereby increasing the possibility of height-
     ened adoption outside the corporate setting.
••   Not-for-profit organizations. Not-for-profits can be introduced to
     Project Forward in a highly organized process, more closely involving
     the corporations and giving the not-for-profits a source of volunteers
     who are more likely to be engaged. This experience will make the not-
     for-profits more likely to participate in Project Forward outside corpo-
     rate engagement settings as well, especially because the process will be
     streamlined and many of the concerns removed.

  In short, the corporate engagement strategy introduces a wide array of
the three most important players to the Project Forward platform: spon-
sors, volunteers, and not-for-profits. If the program were widely adopted,


46                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Forward Coin circulation could increase substantially, not only because of
the initial release of the Forward Coins through corporate volunteering but
also because of a wide audience (which we believe is more likely to pay it
forward) now exposed to the platform.

Emerging Markets Strategy
The situation. There is often a discrepancy between charitable dollars
given and their results, which are often scattered, undefined, or nearly
invisible. If donors could confirm the number of hours of labor for social
good that their dollars were enabling, they would be more satisfied with
and would potentially increase their contribution.
   In addition to the handful of large global charities, there are a multitude
of localized not-for-profit organizations in emerging markets that could
make a significant impact in their communities but that lack adequate
financial and operational support. The true needs of each community are
best known by its local inhabitants, who understand the region’s specific
culture, history, and social background. If given adequate support, these
local not-for-profits in emerging markets could make a lasting impact.

The proposition. Emerging markets and developing countries are in need
of community engagement. By appropriating funds to not-for-profits that
are making quantifiable impacts on the ground in these areas, the Project
Forward ecosystem will ensure the growth of communities in the direst
need.  In addition to encouraging volunteering, Forward Coins can be used
in non-volunteer activities, potentially in government-sanctioned or gov-
ernment-sponsored initiatives. Additionally, the opportunity for sponsor-
ship of Forward Coins through a recurring revenue stream (such as a line
item in a municipal budget) could result in sustained impact that garners
broad community support.

Winners
••   Donors. Forward Coins monetize volunteer hours so that donors know
     the quantifiable impact that their philanthropic dollars are making.
     Because of differences in exchange rates, donors in developed coun-
     tries can also see their donated dollars sponsor more hours and drive
     more social impact. Additionally, this would enable them to publicly
     demonstrate their organization’s commitment to positive social change
     with a tangible result that could easily be linked to their social media
     accounts.
••   Communities and not-for-profit organizations. With a transparent flow
     of resources incentivizing community members to become more


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        47
     involved in not-for-profits, local communities can improve the social
     conditions for all parties involved. This perpetuates community sup-
     port more than any outside organization could by coming in and pro-
     viding resources.
••   Volunteers. By improving conditions in areas with unemployment rates
     in the high double digits, Project Forward encourages volunteers to be
     engaged in their local communities and develop skills and relation-
     ships through organized volunteering. The incentives derived from
     Forward Coins and earned through constructive community engage-
     ment will likely go to food, medicine, shelter, and education. Although
     the option to “pay it forward” will still be available, the opportunity to
     improve access to basic necessities while also assisting their communi-
     ties will be an extremely attractive proposition to a younger generation
     that seeks to be a proactive force.

  Emerging markets potentially provide the fastest growing and most
impactful avenue for Project Forward, given the reduced red tape and
potential for municipal support. The reality is, most not-for-profit organi-
zations in the United States and Europe have country offices in developing
countries, where arguably the need is greatest.

Expected Impact
••   Increased rates of volunteerism and social engagement. Individuals
     will be able to do well while doing good and find a new incentive to
     assist communities and people in need.
••   Newly gained education in digital currencies and wallets. Users can
     develop an appreciation for a type of stored value that will likely char-
     acterize future transactions in the global marketplace.
••   Creation of new social value in the world. The Forward Coin cur-
     rency is not just a cryptocurrency but more importantly is also a social
     currency that individuals can use with the knowledge that it was
     earned through socially impactful means.
••   Long-term scaled vision for social impact. In the United States alone,
     Project Forward anticipates engaging up to 5 million new volunteers
     per year. This figure, multiplied by the 52-hour median volunteer rate
     (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2016) would produce 260 million new
     volunteer hours associated with Project Forward per year. Conserva-
     tively estimating that 10 percent of the existing 62 million volunteers
     (6.2 million) would also participate in Project Forward leads to the fol-
     lowing annual Project Forward social impact forecast: assuming the
     $24.14 per hour value of volunteer time estimated by the Corporation


48                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
    for National and Community Service for 2016 (Independent Sector
    2017), 11.2 million volunteers per year × 52 volunteer hours per year =
    over $14 billion in volunteer monetization per year. The importance of
    volunteering is not limited to the United States, and the $14 billion in
    volunteer monetization for the United States alone is a conservative
    estimate for Project Forward’s value creation globally.

Potential Challenges and Frequently Asked
Questions
How does Project Forward prevent fraud?
Because Forward Coins are on the blockchain, they are trackable and veri-
fied, which allows for an auditing process. Any not-for-profits that commit
fraud would be risking their reputation, one of their most important assets,
to make a nominal sum. Additionally, individuals will be limited to the
number of coins they may earn per month.
Why not a point system instead?
Points are not traceable or reusable on a large scale. Because a Forward
Coin is based on the blockchain, it is traceable and reusable, so the positive
value of volunteering can have a multiplying impact on society. Simply, a
Forward Coin is valuable because there is no doubt how it is earned, and
because it can be reused, its value multiples. In addition, the point system
removes a sense of legitimacy that a currency contributes to the global
environment. To effectively solve an issue as pertinent as increasing volun-
teerism, we must ensure that the strongest methods are used.
How do sponsors benefit?
In addition to contributing toward the promotion of volunteerism, spon-
sors donating to Project Forward will receive significant tax benefits
because Project Forward is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit. Sponsoring can also be
an opportunity for additional brand loyalty through widescale branding
using our website, for participating in exclusive events, and for reaching a
younger audience over social media.
Is there something similar to Project Forward?
   The system most similar to Project Forward is a community currency
such as Ithacash,2 used in Ithaca, New York. Ithaca Dollars are used to
reward shopping locally, provide grant support to causes, and make credit
available for micro and community-based enterprises. Partner institutions,

2
   Find a complete description of how Ithacash works at http://ithacash.com/#the-
marketplace.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                           49
residents, and visitors to the Ithaca community may also purchase Ithaca
Dollars. A variable buy-in bonus is added on such purchases as a gratuity
for the commitment to purchasing locally. Ithacash can be earned by shop-
ping, paying, and posting listings in the app. Participants can also sell
goods in the marketplace, work for a place that accepts Ithacash, or add
personal value to the system. The main incentive that individuals have for
using this technology is that they can bolster their local economy and feed
off the ecosystem they are directly involved in and care about. However,
Ithacash does not operate on the blockchain and is specifically designed to
bolster one local community.




50                         Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
References
CAF (Charities Aid Foundation). 2016. CAF World Giving Index 2016. https://
  www.cafamerica.org/wp-content/uploads/1950A_WGI_2016_REPORT_
  WEB_241016-1.pdf
CyberGrants 2015. “Corporate Volunteer Programs: A Primer for Companies
   Interested in Philanthropy.” CyberGrants blog, November 10. http://www
   .cybergrants.com/blog/corporate-volunteer-programs-a-primer-for-compa-
   nies-interested-in-philanthropy-201511.html.
Independent Sector. 2017. “Independent Sector Releases New Value of Volunteer
   Time of $24.14 Per Hour.” https://www.independentsector.org/resource
   /the-value-of-volunteer-time/.
Oxford University Press. 2017. “Blockchain—Definition of Blockchain in English.”
   https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/blockchain.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2003. “Volunteering in the United States, 2003.”
   Press Release USDL-03-888, December 17. https://www.bls.gov/news.release
   /archives/volun_12172003.pdf.
———. 2016. “Volunteering in the United States, 2015.” Press Release USDL-16-
  0363, February 25. https://www.bls.gov/news.release/volun.nr0.htm.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                           51
Chapter 5
Portable Toilet Solution:
Sustainable Sanitation for the
Base of the Pyramid
Team SAVE: Sanitation Availability for Various Economies
Rheena Paola Go, used water operations manager, Laguna Water
Harriette Berdan, used water facility manager, Laguna Water
Nariyah Marie Ilagan, used water facility manager, Laguna Water
Glenny Ermita, territory manager, Laguna Water
Havenlynne Garcia, key accounts manager, Laguna Water
Dustin Ibanez, communications and branding specialist, Laguna Water



Abstract
Sanitation means more than just the improvement of health and well-being
of people. It is an avenue that uplifts human dignity. Given its importance,
sanitation should be available and accessible to all; no one should lack
proper sanitation. An elixir to the many challenges the world is facing,
sanitation is a right and a responsibility of all.
   Most Filipinos who belong to the base of the pyramid (BoP) openly
defecate in the fields, bushes, and seashores, which poses a wide range of
risks to human health and the environment. To help those low-income
communities gain access to proper sanitation, Team SAVE proposes to
provide them with portable sanitation units. The Portable Toilet Solution
(PTS), which is based on a utility business model, depends on two levels
of cross-subsidies: (a) between the water supply and sanitation services
and (b) across customer classes, to make the system available and afford-
able for all.
   To ensure sustainability of the program and address the lack of aware-
ness about the importance of sanitation, the program must be a collabora-
tion between the public and private sectors and should involve the target
communities.
   The proposal will be piloted in the province of Laguna. The program’s
implementation will benefit from the existing public-private partnership
between the provincial government of Laguna and Laguna Water, a water
and wastewater service provider. The program can then be replicated and
scaled up elsewhere in the Philippines and in other developing countries.

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                      53
Problem and Context: The Importance of
Improving Access to Adequate Sanitation
     Clean water and sanitation are not only about hygiene and dis-
     ease, they’re about dignity too… Everyone, and that means ALL
     the people in the world, has the right to a healthy life and a life
     with dignity. In other words: everyone has the right to
     sanitation.
         —King Willem-Alexander, UN Secretary General Advisory
                 Board on Water and Sanitation (COHRE et al. 2008)

   Ensuring access to clean water and adequate sanitation plays a vital role
in achieving other sustainable development goals. The United Nations
Children’s Fund and World Health Organization (UNICEF and WHO)
Joint Monitoring Programme reported (2015) that the world was able to
meet its Millennium Development Goal for safe drinking water. That
achievement has given more than 90 percent of the world’s population
access to improved water sources. However, the sanitation target was not
achieved. Although countries have made good progress on sanitation, 2.4
billion people still use inadequate sanitary facilities.
   In the Philippines, the people and the government have given low prior-
ity to improving access to proper sanitation. More than 30 million Filipinos
lack adequate sanitation. Of those, 7.8 million do not have toilets and must
resort to open defecation (UNICEF and WHO 2015). In addition to ensur-
ing access to toilet facilities, sanitation programs should include the treat-
ment of wastewater produced by each household, because poor sanitation
leads to various health and environmental problems and economic losses.
   Many families exposed to improper sanitation belong to the socioeco-
nomic group called the base of the pyramid (BoP). Either they do not have
the financial capacity to build their own toilet facilities, or constructing a
toilet in their dwelling is physically impossible.
   The location for implementing Team SAVE’s PTS program is the prov-
ince of Laguna, which has the largest body of freshwater in the Philippines—
Laguna Lake. The lake has been called the world’s largest septic tank
because of the high levels of domestic waste that pour into the lake from
informal settlements and other communities nearby. Also, in 2008 the
province experienced an outbreak of typhoid fever caused by poor sanita-
tion. An estimated 50,000 households throughout the province still have
no access to proper sanitation—the same number of families who openly
defecate (DOH 2015).



54                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
             Solution: Portable Toilet Solution That
             Uses a Utility Business Model Supported
             by a Public-Private Partnership and
             Community Involvement
             To help the marginalized sector gain access to a healthier life, Team
             SAVE proposes providing the lowest-income populations with access to
             sanitation systems through the Portable Toilet Solution (PTS). To ensure
             the program’s availability and affordability, we have based it on a utility
             business model that will be supported by a public-private partnership
             and by community involvement. The model has two levels of
             cross-subsidies: (a) between the water supply and sanitation services and
             (b) across customer classes. The public-private partnerships and com-
             munity involvement will ensure sustainability of the service by creating
             demand and ensuring supply.
               Under the PTS system, BoP households will be given a portable toilet
             bundled in their water service connection. The toilets will have a collection
             system to ensure proper disposal and treatment of household waste in a
             wastewater treatment facility (figure 1).



Figure 1  Overview of the Portable Toilet Solution




             Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                       55
   PTS is an avenue to improve health, alleviate poverty, and increase pro-
ductivity of BoP families. Its design will ensure that households are com-
fortable using and maintaining the portable units. A cartridge containing
the waste from the toilets will be collected by Laguna Water’s roving vehicle
from each household for pre-treatment in an acceptance station before
seamlessly being integrated into the utility’s existing wastewater infrastruc-
ture and treatment facility. The utility will be responsible for the collection,
transport, and treatment of wastes.


The PTS Pilot
Team SAVE will conduct a two-phase pilot to ensure scalability and repli-
cability of the PTS model. The first phase will focus on the technical com-
ponent of the PTS—the technology and infrastructure of the system. The
second phase will focus on the commercial component, specifically the
utility business model.
  In the first phase, the project will gather consumer feedback on the por-
table toilets and treatment schemes. Twenty households will be targeted to
participate in providing consumer insights, customer experience, cost-to-
serve (capital expenditure and operational expense), and technology reli-
ability. There will be two vendors involved in the study for parallel checking
of the best-fit toilet. Vendor 1 technology will be tested for one month and
Vendor 2 technology for another month in those 20 households. The por-
table toilets will be redesigned based on the consumers’ feedback.
  The second phase of the pilot will involve collecting feedback from 30
households that are using the final versions of the portable toilets from the two
vendors and their treatment schemes. The feedback will stress-test the utility
business model, including validation of the economics of the project. The suc-
cess of the second phase will determine the launch of the PTS service in 2018.


Business Model Implementation
The proposal involves implementing the PTS system using a utility busi-
ness model. The program will work with communities to strengthen their
awareness of sanitation. The partnership between Laguna Water and the
provincial government of Laguna will enhance the PTS system’s sustain-
ability (figure 2).
  Laguna Water will contract with the manufacturers to design the porta-
ble toilet in a way that considers functionality and sustainability. The man-
ufacturers’ relationship with Laguna Water is purely as a vendor.


56                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Figure 2  Structure of Implementation




              Laguna Water will then offer the portable toilets to BoP consumers. The
            utility will be responsible for the collection, transport, and treatment of
            wastes. Team SAVE will develop various educational and informational
            programs to increase communities’ awareness of the importance of proper
            sanitation to the health of people and the environment. In addition, the
            government can champion the social acceptance of sanitation through
            implementation of ordinances and regulation.


            Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                     57
  To reduce the cost of the PTS to BoP consumers, Laguna Water will inte-
grate subsidies into its utility business model where possible across ser-
vices (water supply and sanitation) and across customer classes (the
wealthier customer base and BoP consumers). The business model will
bundle PTS with its water supply services and with other wastewater ser-
vices (figure 3 and table 1). Those include sewerage services for areas with


Figure 3  Utility Business Model




         Sample Computation for Bundling of Wastewater
Table 1  
          Service at X% of Water Charge
Water Consumption (m3)                                   10                15
Basic Charge for Residential (A)                       181.32            271.98
Environment Fee at X% of Basic Charge (C)            X * 181.32         X * 271.98
Vatable Charge (V)                                      A+C               A+C
VAT (12%) (T)                                          0.12 * V          0.12 * V
Total Amount Due                                        V+T               V+T



58                                 Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
sewers and desludging services for areas with septic tanks. The bundling
will reduce the cost to BoP consumers, compared with a stand-alone ser-
vice offering.
  The involvement and participation of the community in the pilot will
be critical to determine the viability of the PTS prior to its commercial
launch. The BoP households that participate in the pilot study will natu-
rally be the ambassadors of the PTS as the inaugural users. Their accep-
tance can influence others to shift their traditional practice of open
defecation to a more convenient, healthier, and safer means of waste
disposal.


Expected Impact
Communicating the importance of sanitation is essential in increasing
communities’ awareness of how the use of the PTS will prevent the spread
of waterborne diseases like diarrhea, typhoid, and cholera, among others.
In the Philippines, the lack of clean water and proper sanitation are the
main causes of death for 55 people daily, on average. (National Sewerage
and Septage Management Program as cited by Jones, 2015).
   Owning a toilet is a sign of progress. By addressing the problem of
open defecation in Laguna, the province will give BoP families privacy in
performing hygienic practices, which in turn will give them a sense of
dignity, improve their self-worth, and boost their confidence. Moreover,
sending sewage to a treatment facility ensures that the effluent complies
with quality standards before being discharged to receiving inland water
bodies. Treatment is essential in closing the loop for public water use
because it aids in the natural water purification process—through water
cycling—and is therefore a more sustainable process for generating reus-
able water.
   The PTS business model’s cross-subsidizing of sanitation charges will
lower costs to the marginalized sector and increase the availability of san-
itation services. Increased access to sanitation also will reduce health
costs attributed to waterborne diseases, which are caused by exposure to
unsanitary conditions and untreated waste reaching the groundwater.
That savings frees public funds for other improvement projects. The
involvement of the private sector in a public endeavor also will free other
government resources, which are typically scarce in developing countries
like the Philippines. With a public-private partnership, the government
can use its funds for other equally important social initiatives to benefit
the public.



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                      59
Comparable Product Offerings
Container toilets are being offered elsewhere in the developing world, but
none have proved to be scalable and sustainable. The business model used
by some private companies, nongovernmental organizations, or partner-
ships of those, is as a stand-alone service. Ghana, Kenya, and Peru were
among the first to benefit from the toilet technologies of Clean Team,
Banza, and XRunner, respectively.
   The technologies used by the comparable container toilets also focused
only on the design and customers’ ease of use. Sustainability remains a
challenge in such systems, given the maintenance cost and other expenses
of the portable toilets they offer. The fees also are burdensome to the BoP
households when they are paid by the customer alone. Where they are sub-
sidized by donor institutions on a limited arrangement, long-term viability
is quite fragile.
   In addition, program models that distribute container toilets only
strengthen the supply chain; they do not incorporate the creation of
demand. Such models lack promotional techniques to transform the social
mind-set and reform the behavior of consumers regarding the importance
of sanitation. Both are key ingredients in creating a sustainable business
model.


Potential Challenges
One of the challenges that the team may encounter when introducing PTS
is the BoP community’s acceptance of the program. Throughout the prov-
ince of Laguna, an estimated 50,000 households still have no access to
proper sanitation, which is the same number of families without toilet
facilities.
   Although most of Laguna’s population has a hygienic lifestyle, those
behaviors are not being translated to effective sanitation practices because
of lack of knowledge and information. Thus, Team SAVE will focus on mak-
ing the community aware of the importance of sanitation and of the danger
of open defecation. Our Information, Education and Communication
Campaign: SANITARY (Sanitation Is Necessary) will reach out to the mar-
ginalized sector not only by holding seminars but also by conducting a
social experiment, such as showing the impact of sanitation using a diorama.
This initiative can contribute to breaking social norms and can change the
community’s behavior.
   Another challenge is that the BoP communities are usually situated in
environments that may be narrow, rocky, flood-prone, and difficult to

60                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
reach. Locating the toilet may be a primary concern. With the PTS’s porta-
bility, however, space may not be a problem.
   Sustaining the business side of the project also may be a challenge in
some communities. However, charging sanitation service fees can be an
effective tool in instilling a sense of ownership, which can strengthen the
accountability of users. As part of the public-private partnerships of the
PTS system’s business model, Laguna Water will ensure access to improved
sanitation. Along with the system’s ease of use and maintenance, and the
social benefits of proper treatment, the PTS system is designed to be
sustainable.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                     61
References
Jones, S. 2017. “A Lack of Clean Water and Sanitation in the Philippines Kills 55
   People Every Day.” VICE News, March 28. https://news.vice.com
   /article/a-lack-of-clean-water-and-sanitation-in-the-philippines-kills-55-
   people-every-day.
COHRE (Center for Housing Rights and Evictions), SDC (Swiss Agency for
  Development and Cooperation), UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human
  Settlements Programme), and WaterAid. 2008. “Sanitation: A Human Rights
  Imperative.” COHRE, Geneva.
Department of Health, the Philippines. 2015. Field Health Service Information
  System Annual Report.
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund) and WHO (World Health
  Organization). 2015. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water: 2015 Update
  and MDG Assessment. New York: UNICEF.



Additional Reading
Department of Health, the Philippines. 2008. “Calamba Typhoid Outbreak.”
  Health Policy Notes 1 (5). http://www.doh.gov.ph/sites/default/files/publica-
  tions/Vol1Issue5April2008_3.pdf.
“Sanitation.” UNICEF database. Last updated July 2017. https://data.unicef.org
   /topic/water-and-sanitation/sanitation/.
UN Water. 2014. “A Post-2015 Global Goal for Water: Synthesis of Key Findings
  and Recommendations from UN-Water.” http://www.un.org/waterforlifede-
  cade/pdf/27_01_2014_un-water_paper_on_a_post2015_global_goal_for_
  water.pdf.
World Bank, Water and Sanitation Program, East Asia and the Pacific. 2008.
  Economic Impacts of Sanitation in the Philippines: A Five-Country Study
  Conducted in Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, the Philippines, and Vietnam
  under the Economics of Sanitation Initiative (ESI). Jakarta, Indonesia: World
  Bank.




62                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Chapter 6
A Socio-productive Model for
Entrepreneurial Education and
the Promotion of Business
Activity for Women Who Are
Victims of Armed Conflict
“She Is Who Walks, Thinks, Dreams, Inspires, and
Improves Lives”

Team: She-Is
Nadia Fernanda Sánchez, founder-director
Nathalia Montoya, international affairs director
Laura Duarte, human rights director
Marcela Cubides, communications director
Nancy Cortez, human talent director
Lucia Gomez,co-founder
Jorge Sapoznikow, board member and mentor



Abstract
The nonprofit foundation She-Is empowers women by recognizing their
peace entrepreneurship and acknowledging their very essence as entrepre-
neurs. She-Is strengthens productive units through its social brand that
promotes the efforts, worth, and representation of women who have been
directly affected by armed conflict and who face challenging life situations
as a result of the violence they have endured.
   She-Is implements a socio-productive model of entrepreneurial educa-
tion and promotes business activity for women who are survivors of armed
conflict. In Colombia, the She-Is foundation and its campaign is the first of
its kind, with a social brand that seeks to champion women in postconflict
situations as successful entrepreneurs by harnessing women’s knowledge to
positively impact the peace process. This innovative model harmonizes the
social brand with an approach that emphasizes soft skills and company



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                       63
start-ups. This model also establishes a pattern for meeting sustainable
development goals through economic empowerment.


Problem and Context
The armed conflict that has raged in Colombia for more than 50 years is
having far-reaching consequences and has affected the human develop-
ment patterns and indicators of the population groups that have suffered
both directly and indirectly. A study of the phenomenon and of the various
practical steps under way will help form the conceptual basis needed to
understand how to transition toward postconflict development. Among
the many groups that to-date suffer disproportionately from internal
armed conflict, women constitute one of every two victims of conflict in
the country. Women lag far behind other population groups in Colombia
in terms of development indicators, which is a source of serious concern.
These indicators include the individual plight of women in their road
toward reclaiming their civil, social, economic, and cultural freedoms and
rights.
   In 2008, the Colombian Constitutional Court exposed several of the
varying risks and vulnerability factors that explain how and why women
are affected differently by conflict (Constitutional Court of the Republic of
Colombia 2008). These factors are subsumed in the two main findings of
the National Unit for Integral Reparation and Assistance for Victims
(UARIV):

i.	 Women face specific risks because of their gender, which accentuate
     their vulnerability in armed conflict; (ii) their situations as survivors
     who are then obliged to assume family, economic and social roles to
     which they are not accustomed, and which impose undue and abrupt
     physical and psychological burdens on them (UARIV 2012, 10).
ii.	 (i) The risk of sexual violence, sexual exploitation or sexual abuse
     during armed conflict; (ii) the risk of being exploited or enslaved by
     illegal armed groups to carry out domestic tasks and roles considered
     “women-appropriate” in a society with patriarchal traits; (iii) the risk
     of forced recruitment of their sons and daughters by illegal armed
     groups, or other kinds of even more serious threats against them
     (UARIV 2012, 10).

  According to the Unique Registry of Victims in Colombia (RUV), there
are currently 8,160,987 victims of the armed conflict and the situation in
recent times has been worsening: By the end of 2013, 2.7 million women


64                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Table 1  Means by Which Colombian Women Have Been Victimized
                                                                                               Percentage of women
                                                                                           affected by armed conflict per
 Victimization factor                                    Number of women                        victimizing factor (%)
 Forced displacement                                          3,780,677                                  82.25
 Homicide                                                      458,781                                    9.98
 Forced disappearance, loss of movable                         164,958                                    3.58
 and immovable property, terrorist acts,
 kidnappings, and others
 Threat                                                         191,784                                   4.17
Source: UARIV database of women and armed conflict. Accessed July 26, 2017, http://rni.unidadvictimas.gov.co/reportes.




                       were confirmed victims/survivors. By the middle of 2015, there were 3.7
                       million confirmed women victims. These figures imply that within just a
                       year and a half, the number of confirmed victims grew by one million,
                       representing a 37 percent increase. Between mid-2015 and May 2017,
                       4,596,200 women were registered as victims. Displacement of 3,780,677
                       people continues to be the indicator with the highest number of registered
                       cases, followed by 458,781 victims killed, 191,784 women who have been
                       threatened, 77,100 who have been forcibly disappeared, 47,627 who have
                       lost their property or estates, and 40,231 who have been affected by terror-
                       ist acts, attacks, combat, and harassment.1
                          Table 1 provides information on the various ways women have been vic-
                       timized during conflict.
                          In the past 15 years, women in situations of violence have been provided
                       welfare-oriented programs by the Colombian government. The programs
                       provided by the state have not included the necessary follow-up and sus-
                       tainability measures for socio-economic improvement. For this reason, the
                       government programs should be viewed as only a partial solution. It is
                       therefore necessary to create a model that encompasses capacity building
                       and historical memory to achieve economic empowerment as empowered
                       women are a sign of a nation destined inevitably for success.


                       Solution: Implement She-Is
                       The She-Is foundation is aware of the territorial challenges facing Colombia
                       in its postconflict phase. The stage is set for transforming the lives of all
                       Colombians. In this regard, the foundation sees that the way to achieve peace
                       and reconciliation is by strengthening cooperation and interinstitutional

                       1
                             The registry’s database is at http://rni.unidadvictimas.gov.co/RUV.


                       Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                               65
coordination among public, private, and academic stakeholders, who
together can generate circles of opportunity and higher quality of life for the
entire population.
   Undoubtedly, one of the pillars of the new postconflict plans will be the
development of cross-cutting proposals that focus on (a) gender equity for
women, (b) entrepreneurship and social innovation, (c) integral reparation
for victims of conflict, and (d) economic empowerment. These are the
guiding principles of She-Is (see box 1 for a list of She-Is projects).
   The construction of this social action model requires increasingly spe-
cific actions and more in-depth research into the social issues facing
women. Such research must be interdisciplinary and use a sequential
approach that adds value to the analyses already conducted in this area.
Despite being a relatively new line of action in public policy,
socio-productive entrepreneurship has proved to be an effective tool for
promoting certain aspects of the reconstruction of the socioeconomic fab-
ric. Also, because individual and collective efforts at reconstruction of the
social fabric can unexpectedly have negative repercussions, it is even more
important to have solid research to base decisions on.
   The She-Is foundation is the first organization with a holistic model that
covers and encompasses the entire value chain of economic empowerment
and that presents not only evidence-based plans and quick results, but also
the measurable outcomes that have been lacking in the fragmented pro-
grams and ongoing efforts of various organizations that support women
(see box 2 for reasons to opt for the She-Is pilot program).
   The beneficiaries of the project are women between the ages of 18 and 45
who have been victims of armed conflict, forced displacement, and poverty
in Colombia. Many of the women have already been involved in informal
business as their main form of subsistence. As such, the program offers
assistance and training to build these efforts into sustainable productive
units (businesses), with an emphasis on creating regional clusters of com-
plementary industries. Accordingly, these efforts comprise the holistic pro-
cess toward collective reconciliation, reparation, and dignifying women’s
human rights and their historic memory, with a social brand that high-
lights the potential of the women’s entrepreneurial ideas bringing visibility
to their individual stories and work.

The She-Is Foundation
••   As a legal entity, the She-Is Foundation is a recently established non-
     profit institution. Nevertheless, over the past two years, the foundation
     has been promoting actions at the global and regional level to empower
     women, strengthen the labor profile of women across various work


66                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Box 1: She-Is Projects
  She-Is Esmeralda: The aim of this project is to empower women who are
  victims of conflict and multidimensional poverty, with emphasis on work in
  apparel, textiles, and handicrafts for women throughout the country.

  She-Is Women of Peace
  Through this program, women build sustainable peace through entrepreneur-
  ial, social, political and cultural ecosystems within their region and are
  empowered to develop projects that transform and motivate them. This
  ultimately allows them to effectively promote and bring visibility to entrepre-
  neurial projects that affect women in a variety of sectors in the economy.

  Lines of work under this project:

  •	 She-Is Macondo: Intervention track in Fundación and Banana Zone in
     Magdalena, furthering entrepreneurships of agricultural products.
  •	 She-Is Tropico: Intervention track in Santa Marta focused on furthering
     entrepreneurship of homemade artisanal marmalades for peace.
  •	 She-Is Andina: Intervention track for peace entrepreneurs in the depart-
     ments of Colombia’s Andean region.

  She-Is Peace Doves
  This coaching and leadership project is aimed at empowering and guiding
  women in the recognition of historical memory and human rights and in
  their transition to sustainable entrepreneurship.
     Through courses and leadership coaching, as well as trainings, forums and
  workshops, the She-Is Ambassadors of Peace program, otherwise known as
  the “Gaviotas de Paz” (Peace Doves) program, develops a variety of educa-
  tional projects to give women a better understanding of their roles and their
  rights in the context of the peace process, to make their voices heard, to
  give them more visibility in their lives, and to empower them as leaders, as
  entrepreneurs, and as ambassadors of peace.

  Research Center
  The center will house relevant project information and data and focus on
  the production of relevant public policy content on women and the economy,
  economic inequity, and social mobility of women in postconflict contexts to
  impact public policy outcomes. It will also further the preparation of
  documentation on productive start-ups for the economic and postconflict
  development of women and their families.

  She-Is Global
  Internationalization and implementation of the model as a campaign and
  social brand and that will work to identify new productive work units of
  women in other countries.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                 67
       Five Reasons to Opt for the She-Is Pilot
Box 2: 
       Program
     1.	   Creates social mobility
     2.	   Develops entrepreneurship for the postconflict period and for peace
     3.	   Offers reparation through broad-based entrepreneurship
     4.	   Provides a line of research on development economics focused on women
     5.	   Creates productive links and acquisition of technological skills
     6.	   Establishes the first social brand that identifies women in the process of
           reparation and peace



       specializations, promote gender equity, reduce the education and wage
       gap with population groups, and advance the implementation of social
       entrepreneurship as an instrument of economic transformation. The
       members of the foundation have cross-cutting experience in their own
       right in the social field, in areas such as international project manage-
       ment, business development, designing and developing public policy,
       and advising and consulting in entrepreneurship, gender equality, sus-
       tainable economic development, international relations, and territorial
       development for governments and multilateral organizations. As a result
       of the foregoing, the proposals created by the foundation have been rec-
       ognized internationally and nationally. Recognition further includes:
••     Young Woman Entrepreneur Award 2017, the Young Americas
       Business Trust (YABT), the Organization of American States (OAS),
       and PepsiCo Latin America, in a joint effort to create better opportu-
       nities for young women in the Americas
••     Nomination for the Viva Premios Schmidheiny 2017, Costa Rica
••     All Ladies League “Iconic Women: Nurturing A Culture & Ecosystem
       for Innovation” Women Economic Forum Global Award, India
••     International recognition at the Global Entrepreneurship Summit,
       held in Kenya in 2015, as one of the most promising ventures for
       peacebuilding in Colombia in the postconflict stage
••     Iberoamerican Women’s Award of the Network of Iberoamerican
       Youth, by the government of Peru
••     Nomination for the Nelson Mandela Innovation Award in the category
       of youth at the global level
••     Pontifical Xavierian University Award for transformative models in
       societies that are building peace
••     Award of the Cross of Excellence from the Governor of Cundinamarca
       and the Municipality of Cajica in Colombia for the organization’s pro-
       gram model and support to women victims

68                                  Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Pilot Project
The pilot program will have an estimated 90 women in the productive stage
and 280 women receiving marketing support. The beneficiaries will be
women between the ages of 18 and 45 who have been victims of armed con-
flict, forced displacement, and multidimensional poverty in Colombia. In
each activity, the beneficiaries will be grouped by sector and specific skills.
The pilot program will begin in the northern Caribbean region in the depart-
ment of Guajira (in the city of Rioacha) and the department of Magdalena
(in the city and municipality of Fundación) and will include work in the
Banana Zone, in the town of Ciénaga near Santa Marta, as well as other rural
zones/municipalities such as Puebloviejo and Aracataca. The pilot project
chose to start in these particular municipalities as they have on a national
level been the ones that have most suffered the scourges of the conflict and
the areas with the least government presence. The successful implementa-
tion in the northern region, the She-Is Foundation, will expand to the south-
ern region of Colombia in the department of Nariño (city of Tumaco) and
the department of Putumayo (in the municipality of Mocoa).
   The project will be aligned with prioritized focus areas that address key
challenges of the Colombian conflict:

••   Peacebuilding
••   Sustainable rural development
••   Reparations for victims of the conflict and postconflict
••   Reconciliation
••   Empowerment
••   Visibility of and reparation for women

  The socio-productive model for entrepreneurial education and the pro-
motion of business activity for women who are victims of armed conflict in
Colombia will have three hubs or production centers in the department of
Magdalena: in the municipalities of Fundación-Aracataca and Gran Vía
(Banana Zone), and the municipality of Puebloviejo.
  With pro-bono engagement of a Latina American law firm, the She-Is
Foundation will be expanding into other countries in Latin and Central
America such as Mexico, Peru, Bolivia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua, and Argentina.

General Profile of Participating Women
She-Is women are survivors of the armed conflict in Colombia for whom
dispossession of land, internal displacement, murder of spouse and

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         69
relatives, and sexual abuse are the most common afflictions. The type of
hardships experienced will be reflected in the first segmentation criteria.
   Similarly, a large number of women find themselves in vulnerable social
situations, as measured in Colombia by the NBI (Unsatisfied Basic Needs)
and the IPM (Multidimensional Poverty Index) indexes.
   When these indexes exceed 33 percent in terms of lack or deprivation of
safe habitable living, health, education, basic sanitation, childhood, and
environment, the women are destined to fall and stay in a poverty trap.
Geographic zones selected in Colombia’s Caribbean region, such as the
municipality of Fundación and the rural zone of Tasajera in the municipal-
ity of Sitionuevo, are areas that have an NBI around 60 percent and an IPM
close to 50 percent. Fundación is among the municipalities with the high-
est number of victims of the Colombian conflict, totaling around 27,000 as
of 2015. Of this total, 50 percent are women. This factor also will be
reflected in the first segmentation criteria.

Broad Outline of Main Actions

1.	 Acquire physical infrastructure for the She-Is model (Mentoring in
     Learning Circles) that are the physical spaces for the creation and the
     provision of workshops and technical assistance, that focus on dignify-
     ing human rights, historic memory, entrepreneurship and branding.
2.	 Establish a baseline for She-Is women.
3.	 Recruit skilled individuals: professional female mentors.
4.	 Design, structure, lay out, and digitalize manuals, protocols, and meth-
     odologies for the She-Is model.
5.	 Design and develop the social brand platform and online market place
     for She-Is women to sell their products.
6.	 Develop the mentoring program for soft skills in entrepreneurship.
7.	 Strengthen the entrepreneurial capacity of productive units.
8.	 Inject seed funding for fixed assets and working capital.
9.	 Promote She-Is as a global movement and brand.
10.	 Conduct fieldwork, identify issues already on the table, and enable the
     development of socio-productive work units (UAPTs) otherwise
     known as associations or co-working units.

Technical Details of Project
Following a consistent evaluation of the criteria previously described, the
She-Is Project manages the selection of candidates through the develop-
ment of an Impact Evaluation Matrix with the intent of mapping and


70                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
characterizing early entrepreneurship behaviors that focus on soft skills,
employability, and acquisition of technical knowledge in business manage-
ment. This process allows She-Is to establish an Impact Measurement
Baseline of the women and is essential at the onset of the project as accord-
ing to the Global Employment Rate (TGP) of the National Department of
Statistics (DANE) indexes, a large number of women are forced, out of
necessity, to be involved in informal businesses as a main form of subsis-
tence, often which lack the entrepreneurial, financial, or productive stan-
dards to be able to succeed and be a sustainable source of income for
women.
   The matrix takes into account three fundamental dimensions, each of
which has its own weight: (a) socioeconomic: the extent to which interven-
tion by She-Is is required (weight:35 percent);(b) entrepreneurial-productive:
the potential and scalability of the business idea or subsistence business
(weight: 45 percent); and (c) intra-enterprise: the level of experience and
soft skills existing in the business before intervention by She-Is (weight: 20
percent).
   The management of the She-Is Foundation also seeks to forge links with
municipal and departmental authorities, with municipal offices or local
governments, to get to know female leaders who could provide feedback
about their experiences, review databases on social investment programs,
and help develop a far more efficient baseline. We have already established
a timetable for the rollout of the model in the municipalities of Fundación,
Magdalena, and Corinto, in the department of Cauca, as well as Sibundoy,
Putumayo, and Riohacha Guajira.
   Our goal is to ensure that, in the long term, the She-Is model will become
the cornerstone for the first Socioeconomic Center for She-Is Women and
that it will focus on entrepreneurship and business development in the
postconflict era. Such a commitment is not accounted for among the key
points discussed at the peace negotiations in Havana. In addition, our aim
is for She-Is to cover the entire chain of production, to generate sustain-
ability. As we explained at the outset, we are already thinking in terms of
generating demand for the output of producers and for the She-Is model.
When the pilot project is up and running, we expect to be serving 45–90
women, comprising three to six productive units in world-class strategic
sectors and clusters for Magdalena and Colombia.

Financial Considerations and Potential Partners
••   Minimum period for generating first management impacts: 4–6
     months.
••   Estimated cost for 4-month period: US$28,000


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        71
••   Estimated cost for 6-month period: US$49,460
••   Estimated cost for 12-month period: US$82,000

An annual financial sustainability plan that focuses on the diversification
of the foundation’s income will be prepared on the basis of negotiations
with interinstitutional actors such as the following:

1.	 Institutional investors: Agencia Presidencial para la Cooperación
    (Presidential Agency for Cooperation); Ministerio del Postconflicto
    (Postconflict Ministry)
2.	 International development aid agencies: U.S. Agency for International
    Development (USAID)—United States government; Inter-American
    Development Bank (IADB); Organization of American States (OAS);
    other international development funds
3.	 Private corporations: AVIATUR Group, Bancamia, among others
4.	 Academic system: Red de Transformación Social de la Universidad
    Javeriana (Social Transformation Network of the Pontifical Xavierian
    University)


Recent Developments with the She-Is
Project
A collaboration agreement and strategic alliance was recently finalized with
Bancamía, an important social Colombian bank that allocates and raises
microcredit resources for clients at the base of the social pyramid. Bancamía
will provide technical assistance with financial training to the productive
units formed by the She-Is model and will make the necessary evaluations for
the allocation of microcredits for prospective units that, once certified, might
require productive investment in two areas: fixed assets and working capital.
  The Social Transformation Network of the Pontifical Xavierian University
and the university itself have offered to support the project by providing
technical advisory services in the implementation of the She-Is model in
the proposed regions, as well as support evaluating the initiative’s technical
and methodological suitability.
  Both the foundation and its model have recently been very visible in
national and interregional media, such as radio, TV, and written press; the
foundation’s director has been advocating for women’s issues in public pol-
icy discussion forums in Colombia and in international forums such as the
Global Entrepreneurship Summit in Kenya; and the foundation has been
nominated for the Nelson Mandela Innovation Award. Because of this

72                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Figure 1  She-Is Model



                                                                      •• Sensitization
 •• Thriving women                                                    •• Soft skills
 •• Idealistic women                    Achievement of peace          •• Start and development of
 •• Empowered women                       entrepreneurship               Productive Association Units
                                                                         of Work (PAUWs)




                       Recognition of the
                        women of peace                SHE-IS the social brand
                                                     of peace commercializing
                                                              PAUWs




                                        Achievement of peace
 Strengthening the business               entrepreneurship
 model of PAUWs                                                       First social business brand
                                                                      for postconflict




                  attention, national and municipal leaders have submitted proposals to
                  partner with our initiative and to extend its reach well beyond the areas
                  initially envisaged: a measurable socioeconomic impact.
                     Similarly, we recently submitted a proposal to collaborate and form a stra-
                  tegic alliance and partnership with the Herencia de Timbiqui, a development
                  foundation focused on cultural projects with women of African descent to
                  catalyze the development of productive units that are led by women and that
                  focus on the supply of biodiversity-related and artisanal products and services
                  that can be included in tourism service supply chains in the state of Magdalena.
                  We are still continuing discussions to increase our possible strategic allies.


                  Impact Assessment
                  Qualitative Results
                  The following indicators and evaluations will be used to assess the qualita-
                  tive results and impact of the She-Is foundation:

                  Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                   73
••   Assessment of the psychosocial characteristics of women before and
     after their participation in the program
••   Periodic evaluation of cognitive acquisition of the techniques taught in
     the seminars in the Learning Circles
••   Evaluation of intrapersonal and interpersonal behavioral changes,
     seeking to assess the psychological impact of these changes on day-to-
     day decision making
••   Assessment of participants’ management of personal finances during
     and after the pilot

Public Policy Analysis
The following questions will be used to analyze the project in terms of pub-
lic policy:
   To what extent can the experiences women gained in the She-Is pilot be
repeated, reproduced, and adapted to other dimensions of, scales of, and
experiences with public policy to support victims and actions to mitigate
conditions of extreme poverty and social vulnerability?
   What insights have been gained in social research on development as a
result of the project?
   Which socioeconomic transformation models contribute to the attain-
ment of sustainable targets such as poverty elimination, economic empow-
erment, family ties, and sustainable development with gender equity?


Philosophy
She-Is who has the very big challenge of exploring the exponential and
growing model of women’s empowerment through social innovation.
She-Is who invites you to change, She-Is who welcomes you to her commu-
nity to reduce the inequality gaps and reach different regions. She is a girl,
a young mother, a daughter, a sister, a grandmother, a wife, who together
with him construct reciprocity, providing the spaces to breach the gender
equality gap. She-Is the one who lives her everyday life, as a businesswoman
and an ambassador of peace.




74                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
References
UARIV (Unit for Integral Reparation and Assistance for Victims). 2012. “Mujeres
  y Conflicto Armado [Women and Armed Conflict].” https://www.unidadvicti-
  mas.gov.co/sites/default/files/documentosbiblioteca/mujeres.PDF
Corte Constitucional, Government of Colombia. 2008. “Adoption of Measures for
   the Protection of Women Victims of Forced Displacement Because of Armed
   Conflict.” Auto 092. http://www.corteconstitucional.gov.co/relatoria/autos
   /2008/a092-08.htm.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         75
Appendix: Honorable Mention
The Appendix presents abstracts of  the submissions among the finalists
that received honorable mentions. They appear below in alphabetical order
of proposal title.


Commodity Bonds: A Practical Solution
to Crisis Vulnerability in Commodity-
Dependent Developing Countries
Team: The Commodity Band
Rafael Proença, Master in Public Administration in International Development
   (MPA/ID), Harvard University–Kennedy School of Government, Class of 2018
Mohamed Qamar, MPA/ID, Harvard University–Kennedy School of Government,
   Class of 2018
Marc-André Simard, MPA/ID, Harvard University–Kennedy School of Government,
   Class of 2018
Haiyang Zhang, MPA/ID, Harvard University–Kennedy School of Government,
   Class of 2018


Abstract
Over two-thirds of developing countries’ economies are highly dependent
on commodities. These Commodity Dependent Developing Countries
(CDDCs) face lower long-term growth prospects and higher risks of enter-
ing and remaining in international debt crises. Commodity bonds—bond
contracts with coupon payments linked to the price of a country’s main
commodity export—are an efficient way of promoting crisis resilience in
CDDCs. The idea of commodity bonds is not new. However, commodity
bond markets never achieved enough scale to become a viable option for
CDDCs.
   Here we review past experience, identify barriers to adoption, and pro-
pose a novel arrangement to overcome these challenges. In our solution,
the World Bank plays an important role in disentangling sovereign risk
from commodity risk, making the commodity bond market more attrac-
tive to both debt issuing countries and private sector lenders. We illustrate
the proposal with an application to Mongolia—a country with over 40 per-
cent of export revenue from copper alone. Finally, we present a practical
implementation plan to create a large, liquid commodity bond market that
would present a new option for CDDCs to increase economic resilience
and enhance long-term growth.

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        77
Filling the Credit Gap: Improving SME
Accounting Standards and Data Collection
in India
Team DataRISE
Anant Majumdar, Columbia University
Saurabh Goel, Columbia University


Abstract
The growth of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) is critical to the
overall economic growth of developing nations. However, many businesses
in developing economies do not have sufficient access to the financing they
need—they often lack both the financial data and the collateral necessary
to acquire loans. Alternative lending, which takes advantage of nontradi-
tional data sources, has the potential to mitigate this issue. However, sur-
veys of alternative lenders suggest that a lack of proper accounting data
currently hinders the ability of SMEs to obtain financing from these lend-
ers. Consequently, alternative lending has yet to make a meaningful dent in
the current SME credit gap.
   To address this issue, the DataRISE team proposes a comprehensive,
dual-platform solution available to both SMEs and alternative lenders. This
system would take advantage of existing digital payment infrastructure to
greatly improve accounting practices for SMEs and make these data readily
available to alternative lenders, thereby reducing customer acquisition
costs and enabling greater scale. By better connecting previously excluded
businesses to lenders, our platform has the potential to boost SME growth
in developing nations around the world. Currently, recent developments
and economic conditions in India make the country an optimal environ-
ment to implement our solution. Eventually, this service can expand to
other emerging markets.




78                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Innovative Solutions to a Sustainable
Blood Supply Chain Management System:
A Technology-Driven Donor Management
System in Nigeria
Team Haima Health Initiative (HHI)
Bukola Bolarinwa (Haima Health Initiative)
Nkechi Azinge (Haima Health Initiative)
Chiedozie Nwafor (Haima Health initiative)


Abstract
The use of blood and blood products has become an integral part of mod-
ern medical practice globally, with about 108 million pints of blood uti-
lized per annum. Every country needs a regular and safe mechanism for
the supply of blood. A World Health Organization World Blood Donor
Day Report in 2013 stated that in low-income countries, there is a huge
demand for blood transfusion, mostly occasioned by complications in
pregnancy or in children under age five who suffer from anemia.
   Haima Health Initiative (HHI) is deploying mobile and web technology
to build a sustainable blood supply chain system in Nigeria, hence mobiliz-
ing efforts toward meeting Nigeria’s annual blood requirement of 1.4–1.7
million pints. Currently, Nigeria faces a 62 percent deficit in needed blood
supplies.
   This project has developed a digital blood bank with an online database
of viable, voluntary, unremunerated blood donors who are connected to
patients in times of emergency. It provides an excellent opportunity for
scale, health sustainability, economic advancement, and public sector and
private sector collaboration.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                      79
Wicked Problems, Simple Solutions, and a
New Generation of Changemakers
Team Water Brainiacs
Nishtha Manocha, National University of Singapore
Björn Foortse, National University of Singapore


Abstract
Achieving the United Nations’ sustainable development goals is a mam-
moth task that requires cooperation among different disciplines, struc-
tured classical solutions, and new out-of-the-box approaches. In addition
to setting up new organizations to meet set targets, changemakers must
reorganize existing systems by identifying elements that can work together
to benefit the multiple stakeholders involved. Our proposed framework
aims to improve the chances of achieving the sustainable development
goals by adding more helping hands to the fight while, in the process, train-
ing an entire generation of future changemakers.
  This idea explores the development of a symbiotic relationship between
communities and universities to aid in achieving the sustainable develop-
ment goals. We propose that universities adopt local communities as study
areas for their students’ final-year projects. The sustainable development
goals will guide the definition of the project objectives. Local communities
will serve as multifaceted, cross-disciplinary case studies and benefit from
the completed projects. The educated, young, and ambitious students will
obtain the chance to experience real-world problems, and the university
will gain local expertise and data sets that enable further sophisticated
problem solving. The data collected during the course of these projects will
enable efficiency measurement, performance quantification, and priority
identification. This, in turn, will aid in the reassessment of objectives and
will facilitate improvement in the effectiveness of funding allocation.
  The feasibility and scalability of the idea are explored in more detail in
the proposal. Discussions include the stakeholder management frame-
work, scale-up strategy, incentivization program for private investors, a
funding strategy, and means to address potential “soft” problems that may
surface during the implementation.




80                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
