ACCESS                                                 IN SIDE-A-SCHOOL COMPONENTS                                                        LEYEND
                                                                                                                                1.   Public Water network
                                                                                                                                2.   Water Meter
                                                                                                                                3.   Public sewage network
                                                                                                                                4.   External Manhole
OUTSIDE A                                                         INSIDE A SCHOOL BUILDING                                      5.   Internal Water Network
                                                                                                                                6.   Tank
 SCHOOL                                                                                                                         7.   Pump
                                                                                                                                8.   Elevated Tank
                                                                                                                                9.   Drinking Fountain
                                                                                                                               10.   Trough sink
                                                                                                                               11.   Toilet
                                                                                                                               12.   Urinal
                                                                                                                               13.   Internal Sewage Network
                                                                                                                               14.   Internal Partitions in a Restroom
                                                                                                                               15.   Rainwater Drainage Network




                                                                                                   15


                                                              8                          14             12
                                                                                    11                          10




                                                                             9




                                                                                   5
                                                                  7                                                         hole
                                                                                                                         Man




                                                                         6
                                                                                              13


                          2

                                       4
                   1


                              3




Technical Note 2

Evaluation to the Water and
Sanitation System in Schools:
Comprehensive School Water and
Sanitation System (SIASE)



                       Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H St. NW
Washington DC, 20433 EE.UU.
Phone: 202-473-1000
Web site: www.worldbank.org

This document is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
Bank or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of
any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this publication is copyrighted. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
Bank, 1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org
Graphic and design: Claudia Rospigliosi




   Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
INTRODUCTION
As it prepared the first School Infrastructure Census (2014 CIE), the Ministry of Education of Perú was
given advice from the World Bank for the purposes of analyzing the physical status of public school
infrastructure. The results were the input to prepare the National School Infrastructure Plan (PNIE), as
the core school infrastructure planning instrument as of 2025. The experience gained on this analysis
encouraged the preparation of a Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE) that may
be applied in other countries to evaluate their own realities, in terms of school infrastructure.
Based on the CIE analysis1 58 % of the school students in Peru require more toilets, sinks, and partitions
to assure privacy and safety in their school restrooms, and 25 % of them require more urinals.

Número de ESCOLARES por tipo de intervención para indicador de idoneidad
de servicios higiénicos
                       2.259.216
2.500.000

2.000.000

1.500.000
                                                                                          984.902
1.000.000
                                                           464.622
 500.000
                                                                                                                    181.069
         0
               Ampliación de inodoros/           Mantenimiento de inodoros/              Ampliación             Mantenimiento
                lavaderos/separadores              lavaderos/separadores                 de urinarios            de urinarios


Although CIE collects data on water access and sanitation in schools2, there are limitations, in terms
of the information gathered from all the comprehensive water and sanitation system components and
the restroom quality to estimate the demand. An example of the latter would be to know if gender
segregated restrooms for boys and girls exist and are kept; this is linked to student privacy requirements.
In addition, neither CIE nor the country have sufficient data that allow evaluating the conditions of the
restrooms inside the school buildings, the system’s operativity or maintenance status. This affects the
definition of operation and maintenance cost efficient interventions.

On the other hand, there are gaps in the law regarding school water and sanitation. Not all the
components of a comprehensive system are addressed in Peru. Almost all the regulations, directives or
instructions focus on design and availability, but fail to include other characteristics, such as operativity,
maintenance status, and/ or functionality of such components.




1.	 Schools (IE) were classified, based on their water and sanitation facility status, namely: with suitable access (facility has
    water supply and excreta and wastewater disposal system), with unsuitable access (facility lacks either the water supply
    service or the excreta and wastewater disposal system), and with no access (facility lacks both services.)
2.	 Set of sanitary elements located outside the school building that make up the water supply service and the wastewater
    disposal service.


             Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)   i
In addition, the existing regulations, directives, and instructions have not been included in one single
regulatory framework; several existing regulations have not been enacted, and others are still in force,
although they were issued over two decades ago. Although the National Construction Standards of
Peru are the framework on which all the construction standards rely and hold specific sections for
schools, it is apparent that having a specific regulation for schools from the Education Sector that is
differentiated for each geographic or climate area could help to meet technical and cultural needs in
the school communities.

This approach reveals a need to reorient the focus on an integrating and organized view of the school
water and sanitation system, for the purposes of overcoming the lack of information and regulations
about all its components, including aspects, such as quality, operation, and maintenance.
This technical note has been prepared by the World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Program as part of
the technical assistance Peru School Infrastructure Program (P152216). This work was led by Malva
Baskovich, water supply and sanitation specialist, supported by a consultant team integrated by Doris
Alfaro, Cecilia Montes Jave, Mercy Sandoval, Abel Bellido and Andres Quispe.




ii Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION	i

PURPOSE OF THE NOTE	                                                                                                             2

METHODOLOGICAL INTRODUCTION OF SIASE	                                                                                            3
Support	3
Organization	5
A Useful Tool for the School Water and Sanitation System Analysis 	                                                          10

CONCLUSIONS	13

REFERENCES	14

ANNEX 1 	                                                                                                                    15




            Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)   1
PURPOSE OF THE NOTE
To describe the methodology of SIASE, which is an organized and comprehensive system of school water
and sanitation indicators that encompasses, both inside and outside a school’s space, and involves all
the comprehensive system’s components, and its analysis allows to identify the interventions that are
necessary to provide a complete and quality service, either at local or nationwide level.
Its application will contribute to have a baseline on school reality in a specific geographic space
available.




2 Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
Methodological Introduction of SIASE
Support
Access to quality water, sanitation, and hygiene services in the schools, houses, and community offers
a series of benefits associated to school attendance of boys and girls and an impact on school students’
health and nutrition. Evidence of such benefits and impacts are shown in the Table below:

Table 1. Evidence of the Benefits brought by the Water and Sanitation System in Schools

 Benefit                    Impact on the population         Impact on the population
 Water service to the       Girls’ attendance to school      It has been proven that a reduction of 15 minutes in the time
 community                                                   devoted to haul water to a family home would represent an 8
                                                             % to 12 % increased attendance to school for 5- to 15- year old
                                                             girls3. A reduction of one (1) hour in such time would represent
                                                             a 10 % increased enrollment for such population group in
                                                             Yemen, and a 12 % increased enrollment in Pakistan4.
 Access to school           Increased school enrollment      In the case of India, elementary school enrollment (children
 sanitation                 and decreased student            ages 6 to 10) increased 12 %, namely, 607,000 students;
                            dropouts                         middle school enrollment (children ages 11 to 14) increased 8
                                                             %, namely, 75,000 students5. It was also proven that impact
                                                             generated by interventions on school infrastructure usually
                                                             declines over time, whereas latrine constructions caused an
                                                             impact on enrollment for three additional years6.
 Access to segregated       Female children’s and            Impact on female children’s and adolescents’ attendance
 school sanitation for      adolescents’ attendance          to school is caused not only by the discomforts related to
 men and women              to school, once concerns         menstruation, but also by concerns about privacy and safety.
                            about privacy and safety are     According to a report by UNESCO, it is estimated that 1 out of
                            solved.                          every 10 girls in Sub- Saharan Africa does not attend school
                                                             (IE) during her period. According to some estimations, this is
                                                             equivalent to 20 % of any given school year7.
 Hygiene in water and       Changes in school students’      It has been proven that hygiene programs should be an integral
 sanitation interventions   behavior                         part of water and sanitation interventions, for the purposes of
                                                             achieving behavioral changes. In addition, it has been proven
                                                             that such change is feasible as long as there are existing water
                                                             and sanitation services8.




3.	 Céline Nauges and Jon Strand. Water hauling and girls´school attendance: some new evidence from Ghana. Toulouse
    School of Economics / World Bank. May 2011.
4.	 Koolwal and van de Walle. WP. 2010.
5.	 Sanitation and Education. Anjali Adukia. Harvard University, November 2013. Job Market Paper.
6.	 Sanitation and Education. Anjali Adukia. Harvard University, November 2013. Job Market Paper.
7.	http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/es/la-menstruacion-causa-ausentismo-escolar-de-las-ninas-en-el-mundo.
8.	 Hygiene Promotion -the backbone of BRAC WASH: Embedding long-term change in communities. Abu Taleb Biswas and
    Peter McIntyre. BRAC / IRC. February 2015.




             Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE) 3
 Benefit                     Impact on the population         Impact on the population
 Access to water,            Increased number of school       WHO has estimated that 1.863 billion school attendance days
 sanitation, and hygiene     attendance days, as a result     would be gained, as a result of decreased diarrheic diseases, if
 services in the family      of decreased diarrheic           everybody had access to water and sanitation services in their
 homes                       diseases                         homes. Helminthiasis, that is transmitted directly from the
                                                              ground, can reduce the cognitive potential and can indirectly
                                                              result in school absence, attention deficit, and dropout. Studies
                                                              on this disease point out that 100 % of these infections that
                                                              are caused by helminths can be prevented with a suitable
                                                              access to quality water, sanitation, and hygiene services9.
 Access to potable water, Decreased chronic                   It was found that children in Bangladesh experienced a 50
 upgraded restrooms, and malnutrition.                        % improvement in their chronic malnutrition rates against
 handwashing with soap                                        the control group that showed no improvement at all. Similar
 services                                                     results were shown in Sudan and Mexico10.

These impacts on school age boys and girls highlight an urgent need for the countries to address inter-
ventions that will assure access to quality water, sanitation, and hygiene, from a comprehensive analy-
sis of all the components that make it up. As a result of such analysis, policies, programs, and plans that
could contribute to improve results, in terms of school attendance, learning, health, and nutrition for
children and young people, shall be defined.
In the face of a lack of comprehensive information on water and sanitation, both outside and inside
schools, SIASE is proposed as a methodological alternative to assure the provision of a quality service
to students and the school community. A summary of the main existing barriers and the benefits offered
by SIASE is shown in the table below.

Table 2. Benefits offered by SIASE in the face of the Existing Barriers

 Existing Barriers                                                Benefits offered by SIASE
 Lack of a comprehensive view of the water and sanitation         The school water and sanitation system involves a series of
 system                                                           specific indicators that assure that the whole service chain
                                                                  is included. Each and every indicator can be evaluated in-
                                                                  depth from a technical, statistical, legal, and costing point
                                                                  of view.
 Lack of connection between the water supply and sewerage         A quality service is assured, by identifying the supply capa-
 outside a school (IE) and the water supply and sewerage          city and the quality of the system outside, and connecting it
 inside the school, in such areas that are benefited with a       to the service inside a IE.
 network service.
                                                                  Confirmation of the existence or non-existence of a service
                                                                  outside a IE shall allow to decide on the technological
                                                                  solution to be proposed for inside a IE.
 No existing data that evaluate the whole school system, and      SIASE’s organization in five indicators, each one of them
 thus can propose ad- hoc interventions                           comprising of specific components, offers guidance in the
                                                                  design of research studies or censuses on comprehensive
                                                                  school water and sanitation infrastructure.




9.	 Evidence base: Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Interventions. Peter van Maanen. WASH Section, UNICEF, HQ New York.
    September 2010. Literature review.
10.	Beyond Malnutrition. The Role of Sanitation in Stunted Growth. Charles W. Schmidt. Environmental Health Perspectives.
    Volume 122, number 11. November 2014.


4 Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
 Existing Barriers                                                Benefits offered by SIASE
 Need for further control on the quantity and the quality of      Managing a comprehensive system helps towards timely
 the service at school                                            decision- making on the following issues: (i) if the available
                                                                  restrooms in the schools are sufficient, in terms of quantity
                                                                  and (ii) if the restrooms require some sort of improvement
                                                                  (upgrading or maintenance) or replacement.
 Dissemination of the regulations and the instructions that       An organized view of the system helps to evaluate the
 promote it, such as Housing, Education, and Health.              relevance of generating supplementary regulations on all
                                                                  the parts of the system, and the interrelation that should be
                                                                  generated between the sectors, for the purposes of meeting
                                                                  these school population’s needs.



Organization
SIASE establishes a comprehensive view that involves two spaces: the first one, outside a school, where
the type of access to water and the excreta and wastewater disposal systems from school and the
community where these are located, are evaluated; and the second one, which specifically focuses on
the availability and the conditions for water and sewerage services inside a school. This initial view
helps to understand the interrelation between the access outside and the conditions inside a school and
the comprehensive view of the water and sanitation system; this facilitates defining the interventions
that assure the provision of quality. Graph 1 shows the emphasis between the outside and the inside
factors.
It must be pointed out that this view that covers the service, both outside and inside a school, applies
to areas where there is an existing water and sewerage network service supply.
Secondly, based on functionality, this comprehensive system is organized in five indicators that have
been identified, based on the roles they play in the system:
•	 Access to water and sanitation,
•	 Storage and pumping system,
•	 Suitability (of the restrooms),
•	 (Water) Drinking Fountains,
•	 Rainwater drainage network.
Each indicator involves in turn a series of components that have been identified along their route down
the system. The emphasis of this organization lies in the fact that its thoroughness removes the risks
of failure for this system, if all the components are operative and given ongoing maintenance. Table 3
shows SIASE’s organization and the connection between each indicator and its components.




              Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE) 5
                                                                                                                       ACCESS                                                                                           LEYEND
                                                                                                                                                   IN SIDE-A-SCHOOL COMPONENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.   Public Water network
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.   Water Meter
                                                                                                                                                                                                              3.   Public sewage network
                                                                                                                                                                                                              4.   External Manhole
                                                                                                                       OUTSIDE A                          INSIDE A SCHOOL BUILDING                            5.   Internal Water Network
                                                                                                                                                                                                              6.   Tank
                                                                                                                        SCHOOL                                                                                7.   Pump
                                                                                                                                                                                                              8.   Elevated Tank
                                                                                                                                                                                                              9.   Drinking Fountain
                                                                                                                                                                                                             10.   Trough sink
                                                                                                                                                                                                             11.   Toilet
                                                                                                                                                                                                             12.   Urinal
                                                                                                                                                                                                             13.   Internal Sewage Network
                                                                                                                                                                                                             14.   Internal Partitions in a Restroom
                                                                                                                                                                                                             15.   Rainwater Drainage Network




                                                                                                                                                                                         15


                                                                                                                                                      8                        14             12
                                                                                                                                                                          11                       10




                                                                                                                                                                     9




                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                          7                                                 hole
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Man
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Graph 1. The Comprehensive Water and Sanitation System’s Components




                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                    13


                                                                                                                                       2

                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                   1




6 Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
                                                                                                                                           3
Table 3. SIASE’s Organization, based on its Indicators and Components

No.   Indicator           Definition                          Components            Details of each Component

1     Access to water     It is relevant to the school’s      Water:                a) Public Water network
      and sanitation      probable situation whether it       Public Water          It is the set of pipes that have been
                          has or not public water and         network               installed underground a street, and
                          sewerage networks in the            Water Meter           supply water to a school.
                          local area, and thus, to have
                                                                                    It is made up of a distribution service
                          the option of a connection
                                                                                    pipe that reaches the Water Meter,
                          to the networks, or, as an
                                                                                    and from there, it enters the school
                          alternative, to require other in
                                                                                    building.
                          situ water and sanitation access
                          modalities.

                                                                                    b) Water Meter
                                                                                    It is the device that measures the
                                                                                    amount of water that runs through
                                                                                    it into a school building. It is usually
                                                                                    located on the ground at the entrance
                                                                                    of the school building.
                                                                                    It is made up of a body or casing that
                                                                                    holds other several elements inside it,
                                                                                    and it is installed underground, inside
                                                                                    a box with a lid.

                                                              Sewage:               c) Public Sewage Network
                                                              Public sewage         It is a set of pipes that have been
                                                              network               installed underground a street, and
                                                              External manhole      receive the wastewater discharge from
                                                                                    the school building.
                                                                                    It is made up of a sewer service pipe
                                                                                    and a manhole.

                                                                                    d) External Manhole
                                                                                    It is a box built underground, and its
                                                                                    function is to allow the meeting and
                                                                                    change of direction of the sewage
                                                                                    pipes, and facilitate pipe maintenance
                                                                                    whenever there are any clogs.
                                                                                    It is made up of the box’s body, frame,
                                                                                    and lid. The lid is the visible part of the
                                                                                    box, and it is ground level.

2     Storage and         It is relevant to a need for, and Tank                    e) Tank
      Pumping System      the existence or non- existence Pump                      An underground buried water storage
                          of, a water storage system at     Elevated Tank           tank underneath the school building.
                          the school building, for the
                                                                                    It is made up of a body that includes
                          purposes of assuring sufficient
                                                                                    walls and ceiling, where the lid is
                          water volume availability
                                                                                    located, and water inlet and outlet
                          during the school day, by means
                                                                                    pipes.
                          of three components.




           Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE) 7
 No.    Indicator            Definition                          Components            Details of each Component

                                                                                       f) Pump
                                                                                       The water pump is an engine- driven
                                                                                       machine that pumps water from the
                                                                                       tank; it is located in the lower part,
                                                                                       towards the elevated tank.
                                                                                       It is made up of a body or casing that
                                                                                       holds elements that pump the water.
                                                                                       It works jointly with an engine that
                                                                                       provides energy to the pump.

                                                                                       g) Elevated Tank
                                                                                       It is a water storage tank that is
                                                                                       located in the upper part of the school
                                                                                       building; it allows to compensate the
                                                                                       consumption variations during the day,
                                                                                       and keep the necessary service pressure
                                                                                       in the water distribution network.
                                                                                       It is made up of a supporting structure,
                                                                                       walls, and a ceiling, with a lid on top of
                                                                                       it, and water inlet and outlet pipes.
                                                                                       All three components: the tank, the
                                                                                       pump, and the elevated tank operate
                                                                                       jointly to assure water supply to the
                                                                                       school.

 3      Suitability of the   It is relevant to the schools’      Internal water        h) Internal Water Network
        Restrooms            requirements for a full set of      network               A set of elements that carry and
                             sanitation fixtures with their      Internal sewage       distribute potable water inside a
                             corresponding networks and          network               school building.
                             water and sanitation service.       Trough sinks
                                                                                       It is made up of pipes and accessories
                                                                 Toilet
                                                                                       for direction changes and joints
                                                                 Urinal
                                                                                       between pipes and the sanitation
                                                                 Internal partitions
                                                                                       fixtures.
                                                                 in the restrooms

                                                                                       i) Internal Sewage Network
                                                                                       A set of elements that receive
                                                                                       wastewater from the sanitation fixtures
                                                                                       and dispose of them outside the school
                                                                                       building.
                                                                                       It is made up of pipes, manholes, and
                                                                                       accessories for direction changes
                                                                                       and joints between pipes and the
                                                                                       sanitation fixtures




8 Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
No.   Indicator           Definition                          Components            Details of each Component

                                                                                    j) Trough sink
                                                                                    It is a sanitation fixture that provides
                                                                                    water for grooming purposes.
                                                                                    It is generally concrete- built. It may
                                                                                    be installed mounted against the wall,
                                                                                    either inside or outside a restroom.
                                                                                    It is made up of a set of faucets, a sink,
                                                                                    and a sewerage pipeline.

                                                                                    k) Toilet
                                                                                    It is sanitation fixture that is used to
                                                                                    deposit and dispose of excreta and
                                                                                    urine.
                                                                                    Toilets are installed inside a restroom,
                                                                                    in private modules that have been
                                                                                    separated by partitions.
                                                                                    Each toilet comprises a water tank, the
                                                                                    toilet itself, and a sewage pipe.

                                                                                    l) Urinal
                                                                                    It is a sanitation fixture that allows
                                                                                    disposing of urine. Urinals can be
                                                                                    either individually anchored to the
                                                                                    wall, or can be trough- like placed on
                                                                                    the floor.
                                                                                    Urinals are installed inside a restroom
                                                                                    and comprise a spreader, a pan, and a
                                                                                    sewage pipe.

                                                                                    m) Internal Partitions in a Restroom
                                                                                    They allow separating each one ofthe
                                                                                    toilets in private modules.
                                                                                    They comprise screens or walls and
                                                                                    a door that is closed from inside the
                                                                                    module.

4     Water Drinking      They are proposed as a new       Drinking Fountain        n) Drinking Fountain
      Fountains           requirement to be implemented                             It is a sanitation fixture that supplies
                          in the schools; they meet                                 water for human consumption; it is
                          a potential demand for an                                 located in a place of easy access inside
                          individual drinking service that                          the school building.
                          provides water for direct human
                                                                                    It usually comprises a faucet on a
                          consumption.
                                                                                    pedestal that is fed by a service pipe
                                                                                    from the internal water distribution
                                                                                    network.




           Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE) 9
 No.    Indicator            Definition                          Components             Details of each Component

 5      Rainwater        It is relevant to the requirement       Rainwater              o) Rainwater Drainage Network
        Drainage Network for a school to be supplied with        drainage system        It allows collect rainwater that falls on
                         a basic rainwater drainage                                     the building surfaces and draining the
                         system in all its school                                       water to the lower part of the building.
                         buildings. Basically, it is made
                                                                                        It is made up of air chutes and
                         up of a chute and downspouts.
                                                                                        rainwater downspouts



A Useful Tool for the School Water and Sanitation
System Analysis
The organization and definition of the indicators and their components were the first milestone to apply
the system analysis methodology. In this way, the interventions required to provide the school water
and sanitation service with the required quality will be identified.
For the purposes of assuring a thorough analysis of the school water and sanitation situation, a
methodology to estimate the intervention needs was established; such methodology followed these
steps: (i) defining the analysis criteria of the components that have been organized in indicators;
such analysis shall be carried out, by considering units, such as environment, building, and grounds,
that have been taken into account for a school’s consolidation and (ii) identifying the assessment
of the water and sanitation services status in schools, by defining the type of physical and material
intervention demanded by each school, for each one of the 15 components that make up the school
water and sanitation system; such assessment is described in five sections: (a) basic assessment unit,
(b) identification of questions and information sources, (c) rules for decision- making, (d) operational
definitions of the rules for decision- making, and (e) the algorithm to identify the intervention type per
school. This methodology is explained in detail in the Technical Note on the process of identifying the
water and sanitation gap11.
Once the intervention needs have been identified, SIASE facilitates cost assignments to the interventions.
In this way, the people in charge can have all the information they need for decision- making purposes;
this in turn will promote their actual execution and for all the water and sanitation problems to be
solved at school level. In this way, an operative, maintained, comprehensive, and sustainable service
will be available.
The cost methodology was prepared by taking the following steps: (i) assigning cost units to the SIASE
components, based on the units for need estimations, (ii) consulting multiple sources, given the lack
of official information in Peru12, such as project samples, budgets for typical modules, (iii) appraising
at market prices to consider reduced margins of error, (iv) estimating coefficients for replacement,
moderate and mild rehabilitation costs for an elevated tank, maintenance costs for sanitation fixtures,
chutes, maintenance of downspouts, (v) combining the costs of the sanitary specialty, the cost of the
structures, the architecture, and the electrical installations, and the transportation costs, by taking into
account scenarios, such as the new bioclimatic zones. Technical Note 1: Identification of Investment
Needs in School Water and Sanitation Infrastructure in Peru, reviews in detail the cost allocation
methodology for the proposed interventions.



11.	 See Technical Note 1: Identification of Investment Needs in School Water and Sanitation Infrastructure in Peru
12.	 For further details, refer to Technical Note 1: Identification of Investment Needs in School Water and Sanitation
     Infrastructure in Peru


10 Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
Although most proposed interventions were established, based on the existing regulations, it must be
pointed out that these regulations fail to cover all the necessary aspects; there are even no regulations in
the country with regard to the Drinking Fountain indicator. SIASE included an analysis to the regulations
with regard to the indicators and their components, for the purposes of establishing which components
require legal support, and what aspects with regard to quality, operation, and maintenance should
include guidelines, principles, or guides. As an example, Table 4 shows the proposed intervention and
the basic criteria for the suitability indicator, as well as its relation with the regulations. Annex 1 shows
the proposed interventions for the other indicators and the existing regulations.

Table 4. Proposed Interventions for the Suitability Indicator

 Intervention                                                                                                There are no
                       Basic Criteria                                             Existing Regulations
 Name                                                                                                        Regulations for This
 Toilet                Toilets deteriorate frequently, for instance, they get     RM-022-2015-MINEDU.
 Maintenance           clogged, as a result of introducing strange elements       Technical instructions
                       into them, and some of its parts get broken (tank lid,     for maintenance of
                       accessories); this limits their functionality.             school buildings.
                       Partition structures are also frequently damaged.
                       Toilets should be located in private partition-
                       separated modules.
 Urinal                Urinals deteriorate frequently, for instance, they get     RM-022-2015-MINEDU.
 Maintenance           clogged, as a result of introducing strange elements       Technical instructions
                       into them, and the spreader gets broken; this limits       for maintenance of
                       their functionality.                                       school buildings.
                       Installed urinals shall be suitably operated and given
                       maintenance for them to keep their functionality.
 Sink faucet           Sinks deteriorate frequently, for instance, they get       RM-022-2015-MINEDU.
 maintenance           clogged, as a result of introducing strange elements       Technical instructions
                       into them, and their faucets deteriorate, as well; this    for maintenance of
                       limits their functionality.                                school buildings.
                       Installed faucets shall be operated and given
                       maintenance for them to keep their functionality.
 Toilet                Toilets deteriorate frequently, to the point of            04 RSG N°
 Installation          becoming unusable. In other cases, the number of           295-2014-inicial
                       existing toilets may turn out to be insufficient for the   MINEDU. It provides a
                       number of students.                                        specific description of
                                                                                  restroom equipment
                       A suitable number of new toilets need to be installed
                                                                                  and furniture
                       with their corresponding partitions, so that they can
                                                                                  characteristics.
                       provide a suitable service, in terms of excreta and
                       wastewater disposal.                                       TN 03 on Urban
                                                                                  Elementary- High
                                                                                  School Design RJ 338-83
                                                                                  INIED.
                                                                                  Technical Regulation
                                                                                  on S 200 Building.
                                                                                  Sanitary installations
                                                                                  for buildings.




                Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE) 11
 Intervention                                                                                              There are no
                     Basic Criteria                                             Existing Regulations
 Name                                                                                                      Regulations for This
 Urinal              Urinals deteriorate frequently, to the point of                                       There are no specific
 Installation        becoming unusable. In other cases, the number of                                      regulations for
                     existing urinals may turn out to be insufficient for the                              urinals. The same
                     number of students.                                                                   regulations for
                                                                                                           toilets apply here, in
                     A sufficient number or suitable size of urinals need
                                                                                                           terms of defining the
                     to be installed, so that they provide a suitable urine
                                                                                                           number of students
                     disposal service.
                                                                                                           per urinal.
 Sink faucet         Sinks deteriorate frequently, to the point of                                         There are no specific
 installation        becoming unusable. In other cases, the number of                                      regulations for
                     existing sinks may turn out to be insufficient for the                                sinks. The same
                     number of students.                                                                   regulations for
                                                                                                           toilets apply here, in
                     New sinks need to be installed, so that they provide
                                                                                                           terms of defining the
                     a suitable water supply service for grooming
                                                                                                           number of students
                     purposes.
                                                                                                           per sink.




12 Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
CONCLUSIONS
•	 SIASE is a useful tool for planning purposes to be used by the authorities or stakeholders in
   the public and private sector, both at sub- national and national level, with regard to the school
   water and sanitation system. SIASE’s comprehensive view that involves the outside- the- school
   part (connection to the community networks) and the inside- the- school part, assures that the
   intervention proposals effectively solve all the system needs. A look to the school infrastructure, as it
   is associated to an educational project for the country with a comprehensive view to the educational
   processes is promoted.

•	 SIASE’s contribution focuses on supporting that the Sustainable Development Goals are met,
   especially Goal 6 (Ensure water availability and sustainable management and sanitation for all), as
   they look for achieving universal and equal access to potable water and suitable sanitation special
   attention to the needs of women and children and people living in vulnerable conditions.

•	 SIASE’s sustainability towards improving educational quality will be accomplished, as operation,
   maintenance, and hygiene elements are included in school management, as well as in the school
   syllabus. Impact on the households with interventions that involve school children has been proven;
   for instance, the Handwashing Initiative has proven that only those households with school age
   children who have been benefited with a handwashing syllabus showed improved handwashing
   practices. Those households with children attending the selected schools showed a significantly
   increased handwashing behavior, as reported in two out of a total of four critical moments (the
   number of surveyed households that reported their members washed their hands with soap before
   meals increased by 23.6 %, and the number of surveyed households that reported parents washed
   their hands with soap before feeding their children increased by 27.8%), against the control group.
   Finally, direct observations that were carried out only to those households with children attending
   intervened schools and the control group showed substantial effects in two out of a total of four
   critical moments (the number of households with children attending intervened schools that
   reported their members washed their hands with soap before meals was 61 % larger than those in
   the control group.) Likewise, parents in households with children attending intervened schools were
   69 % more prone to wash their hands before preparing meals than those in the control group.)13

•	 SIASE’s scope will increase with the involvement of those sectors that are committed to the
   supply capacity of the school water and sanitation system, both outside and inside a school. In
   Peru, it is the responsibility of the Ministry of Housing, Construction, and Sanitation to provide
   potable water, and collect, treat, and provide final disposal of, wastewater in the community; it is
   the responsibility of the Ministry of Health to look after the quality of the water sanitary quality
   assessment, and finally, it is the responsibility of the Ministry of Education to extend, improve, and
   provide school infrastructure to the country in a concerted way between the various government
   levels – central, regional, and local.




13.	 Perú: Iniciativa Lavado de Manos: Lecciones de la evaluación de impacto. Banco Mundial. Síntesis de investigación 72344.
     Julio 2012 (Peru: Handwashing Initiative: Impact Evaluation Lessons. World Bank. Research Summary 72344. July 2012.)


             Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE) 13
REFERENCES
•	 Agua: Panorama General. Banco Mundial.
    http://www.bancomundial.org/es/topic/water/overview
•	 Agua, saneamiento e higiene. UNICEF.
    http://www.unicef.org/spanish/wash/index_schools.html
•	 Agua y saneamiento: Evidencias para políticas públicas con enfoque en derechos humanos y resultados
    en salud pública. Organización Panamericana de la Salud, Oficina Sanitaria Panamericana, Oficina
    Regional para las Américas de la Organización Mundial de la Salud. EUA. 2011.
•	 CONPES 3831. Declaración de Importancia Estratégica del Plan Nacional de Infraestructura Educativa
    para la Implementación de la Jornada Única Escolar, Bogotá, Colombia. Junio 2015.
•	 Koopman. J. Diarrhea and School Toilet Hygiene in Cali, Colombia. 1978
•	 Mantenimiento de instalaciones sanitarias. Guía No. 2 UNESCO, Oficina Regional para América
    Latina y el Caribe. 1999
•	 Plan Nacional de Inversiones para el sector saneamiento 2014 – 2021, PISSAN, setiembre 2014. Perú.
•	 Reglamento Nacional de Edificaciones DS N° 011-2006-VIVIENDA. Perú.
•	 UNICEF, Agua, Saneamiento e Higiene (WASH) en las Escuelas. 2012.




14 Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
Annex 1
Proposal for Interventions, per Indicator
Indicator: Water Storage and Pumping System

                                                                                                         There are no
 Intervention name        Basic criteria                          Existing regulations
                                                                                                         regulations for this
 For the water supply system
 School grounds           School must start procedures for        RNE – OS 050 (SD No. 011-2006
 connected to the         connection with the water supply        Vivienda): It establishes the
 public potable water     authority to get successfully           minimum requirements for water
 network                  connected to the public network.        distribution network design for
                          Such network is located outside the     human consumption
                          school building, and it comprises
                                                                  National Metrology Service Orders
                          a distribution service pipe that
                                                                  No. 001-2011/SNM INDECOPI;
                          reaches the Water Meter.
                                                                  NMP 005-1:2011, NMP 005-
                          This intervention also includes the     2:2011, NMP 005-3:2011. Specific
                          Water Meter component.                  aspects about meters
                                                                  2006 Technical Standard for
                                                                  Comfort, Safety, and Specialties.
                                                                  It includes the House Intake
                                                                  component.14
 Using rainwater and      A school may have a rainwater or        2006 Technical Standard for
 setting up a water       surface water (from a river or a        Comfort, Safety, and Specialties.
 treatment compact        lake) source, an intake area, and       Rainwater use.
 plant                    a collection and conduction or
                                                                  Law 17752 on water management.
                          supplying element to a compact
                                                                  Water priority use.
                          type treatment plant (for small
                          flows) that is suitable to a school’s   Standard OS. 020 Water Treatment
                          size and corresponding number           Plant for human consumption.
                          of students, a storage tank, and        Design characteristics.
                          other internal elements that allow
                          a school to meet its potable water
                          supply requirements.
                          This system will be set up in
                          schools located in the jungle area.
 Construction of a        A school may have an underground        2006 Technical Standard for
 water well and a         water source (water well), and a        Comfort, Safety, and Specialties. It
 chlorination system      water chlorination system will be       takes into account a system with
                          added to it, for the purposes of        wells.
                          meeting the school’s potable water
                                                                  RNE S200 Sanitary installations
                          requirements.
                                                                  for buildings. Private supply
                          This system is proposed for schools     system installations.
                          located in the Coast and Andes
                          Mountains areas.




14.	 This is a technical paper that has not been upgraded to a Standard to date, but it is available among the sector papers.


             Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE) 15
                                                                                                          There are no
 Intervention name           Basic criteria                         Existing regulations
                                                                                                          regulations for this
 For the sanitation system
 School grounds              When the school building is located RNE – OS 070 (SD No. 011-
 connected to the            in a community that has a public    2006 Vivienda): It establishes
 public sewerage             sewerage network available.         the minimum requirements for
 network                                                         wastewater network design.
                             School must start procedures for
                             connection with the sewerage        2006 Technical Standard for
                             authority to get successfully       Comfort, Safety, and Specialties.
                             connected to the public network.    It includes the House intake and
                             Such network is located outside the the house connection to the Public
                             school building, and it comprises   Network components.
                             a distribution service pipe and a
                             manhole.
 In situ excreta and         Intervention is taken into account     Technical Standard I.S. 020.
 wastewater disposal         whenever a school is located           General Criteria for Septic
 and treatment               in climatic zones that are not         Tank design, construction, and
                             floodplains.                           operation, as an alternative
                                                                    for wastewater treatment and
                             A school may have a system that
                                                                    disposal.
                             allows it to successfully dispose of
                             its excreta and wastewater.            RM-184-2012 VIVIENDA. Technical
                                                                    Options Guide for potable water
                                                                    supply and sanitation in rural
                                                                    villages.
                                                                    Technical Standards for elementary
                                                                    and high school conventional
                                                                    building designs – 2009. They
                                                                    refer to the Guide to Adjust
                                                                    Prototypes to Rural schools that
                                                                    proposes four types of latrines for
                                                                    non prone to flodding zones.
                                                                    Technical Standards for elementary
                                                                    and high school building designs
                                                                    – 2011. They take into account
                                                                    rural service modules that include
                                                                    restrooms or latrines.
                                                                    Technical Standards for pre-
                                                                    school level conventional building
                                                                    designs, RSG No. 295-2014-ED.
                                                                    They take into account aspects,
                                                                    such as soil characteristics, the
                                                                    public sewerage network, the
                                                                    septic tank or biodigester.




16 Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
                                                                                                        There are no
Intervention name       Basic criteria                          Existing regulations
                                                                                                        regulations for this
Without a defined       This group of schools demand an in                                              There are no
intervention.           situ sanitation system, but they are                                            specific regulations,
                        located in floodplain zones.                                                    with regard to
                                                                                                        interventions in
                        Urban and rural communities
                                                                                                        floodplain zones.
                        that lack conventional sewerage
                                                                                                        However, the
                        systems may use non- conventional
                                                                                                        Ministry of Housing,
                        or alternative excreta and
                                                                                                        Construction, and
                        wastewater disposal and treatment
                                                                                                        Sanitation (MVCS)
                        systems. The array of technological
                                                                                                        has issued Ministerial
                        options is quite limited, as these
                                                                                                        Resolution (RM) 173-
                        communities are located in
                                                                                                        2016 “Technological
                        floodplain zones. Nevertheless, an
                                                                                                        Options Guide for
                        excreta and wastewater disposal
                                                                                                        water supply for
                        system can be installed in a school.
                                                                                                        human consumption
                                                                                                        for human
                                                                                                        consumption and
                                                                                                        sanitation systems in
                                                                                                        rural villages,” and
                                                                                                        considers how prone
                                                                                                        a zone is to flooding,
                                                                                                        as one of the design
                                                                                                        criteria.


Indicator: Water Storage and Pumping System

                                                                                                        There are no
Intervention name       Basic criteria                          Existing regulations
                                                                                                        regulations for this
At elevado tank level
Elevated tank           A school needs to set up an indirect Technical instructions for school
requires mild           water supply system that shall be    building maintenance, 2015.
rehabilitation          located in the school building.      Maintenance to the elevated tank
                                                             and tank are a priority.
                        The tank may be slightly
                        deteriorated, showing signs, such    2006 Technical Standard for
                        as cracks on the stucco.             Comfort, Safety, and Specialties.
                                                             It describes the direct and indirect
                                                             water supply systems
                                                                RNE IS 010. It defines aspects
                                                                related to the tank and the pump
Elevated tank           A school needs to set up an indirect The same standards apply
requires moderate       water supply system that shall be
rehabilitation          located in the school building.
                        The tank may be moderately
                        deteriorated, showing signs,
                        such as minor stucco falling off
                        (moderate cracks; therefore, a
                        moderate rehabilitation shall be
                        required for the tank to be in good
                        shape again.




            Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE) 17
                                                                                                          There are no
 Intervention name        Basic criteria                           Existing regulations
                                                                                                          regulations for this
 Elevated tank            A school needs to set up an indirect The same standards apply.
 requires to be           water supply system that shall be
 replaced                 located in the school building.
                          The tank may show deep cracks
                          and openings that might go through
                          the wall; therefore, the elevated
                          tank requires to be replaced.
 At school building grounds level
 Elevated tank            A school needs to set up an indirect The same standards apply.
 requires to be           water supply system that shall be
 installed                located in the school building.
                          The system shall be made up of a
                          directly fed elevated tank, if the
                          water source has enough pressure
                          for some hours to fill the tank.
 Tank and water pump A school needs to set up an indirect The same standards apply.
 require to be installed water supply system that shall be
                         located in the school building.
                          The system shall be made up of
                          a tank and an elevated tank; if
                          pressure from the water source
                          fails to fill the elevated tank, water
                          will be carried to the tank and shall
                          be pumped to the elevated tank
                          with a pump.


Indicator: Drinking Fountain

                                                                                                          There are no
 Intervention name        Basic criteria                           Existing regulations
                                                                                                          regulations for this
 Installation of          It is necessary that consumption of                                             The Mexican
 Drinking Fountains.      potable water is encouraged as a                                                regulations were
                          habit, for the purposes of reducing                                             taken as a reference.
                          sugary drinks consumption.
                          Installation of Drinking Fountains
                          inside a school is necessary.
                          They should be located at
                          easily accessible points and be
                          permanently available to the entire
                          school community.




18 Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
Indicator: Rainwater Drainage Network

                                                                                                         There are no
Intervention name        Basic criteria                          Existing regulations
                                                                                                         regulations for this
Maintenance is           Both chutes and downspouts can          Standard OS.060 Urban rainwater
required                 show deterioration, such as holes       drainage that establishes general
                         or breaking, smashing or twisting       design criteria.
                         in a small section of a chute or
                         pipe, in such a way that they still
                         operate, but in a limited way.
                         They need rehabilitation back to
                         their normal conditions, so that
                         they keep on providing suitable
                         rainwater handling service at
                         school.
Replacement is           Both chutes and downspouts can          The same Standard OS.060 on
required                 show deterioration, such as holes       urban rainwater drainage applies.
                         or breaking, smashing or twisting
                         along a significant section of a
                         chute or pipe, in such a way that
                         they become inoperative and can
                         no longer provide their service.
                         Rainwater drainage system needs
                         to be replaced, so that its suitable
                         rainwater handling service is
                         restored at school.
Installation is          There are schools that have             The same Standard OS.060
required                 no rainwater drainage system,           applies.
                         although they need it
                         Rainwater drainage system needs
                         to be installed, so that a suitable
                         rainwater handling service is
                         provided at school.




             Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE) 19
Evaluation to the Water and Sanitation System in Schools: Comprehensive School Water and Sanitation System (SIASE)
