Insights for
Global Development
Solutions
Insights for Global
Development Solutions
The Development Digest is a half-yearly publication that features key
works from teams based at the World Bank Group Global Knowledge
and Research Hub in Malaysia.

           Ahmad Hafiz Abdul Aziz, Amanda Zarka, Claudia Meza-
Cuadra, Constantino Hevia, Djauhari Sitorus, Fabian Mendez-Ramos,
Fanny Weiner, Faris Hadad-Zervos, Harry Moroz, Huong Thi Lan Tran,
Jana Kunicova, Lee Min Hui, Mauro Testaverde, Mohammad Amin,
Nisha Singh, Norman Loayza, Richard Record, Sharmila Devadas,
Soren Davidsen, Ulrich Zachau and Victoria Kwakwa.

         Joshua Foong

Cover Photo attribution: © Dominic Sansoni / World Bank

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this report
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the
World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does
not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on
any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of the
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Please contact jfoong@worldbank.org if you have questions or
comments with respect to content.
TABLE OF CONTENTS


WELCOME TO ISSUE THREE ........••.•.....................•.•.................5


ISLAMIC FINANCE FOR DEVELOPMENT ..............•.•................. 7


DATA FOR DEVELOPMENT ..............•.......................•............... 17


COUNTING GDP ...............................•.........................•.............. 27


ASEAN AT 50 ..........••......................•.......................•................ 31


MIGRATING TO OPPORTUNITY ....•.......................•••.............. 40


IMMIGRANTS AND PRODUCTIVITY ....................•................ 48


LEARNING FROM MALAYSIA ........•.•.....................•.•.............. 53


MICROFINANCE REVOLUTION ......•.•.....................•.•.........•.... 59


WOMEN IN PRIVATE-SECTOR MALAYSIA .........•.•.............. 65


INDUSTRIAL POLICIES VS PUBLIC GOODS .........•.•............... 71


ASSESSING FORECAST UNCERTAINTY ..............•.•.............. 76
Selamat Datang! (Welcome!)

The World Bank Group Global Knowledge and
Research Hub in Malaysia is pleased to present the
third issue of the Development Digest, a
publication that features key research conducted by
various specialists across the World Bank Group
over the past six months.
The World Bank Group Global Knowledge and Research Hub in
Malaysia publishes the Development Digest every six months,
presenting key research emerging from the Hub. The focus of the
Development Digest is to share Malaysia’s people-centered
developmental expertise and to present new policy research on local,
regional, and global issues.

        The Development Digest seeks to capture the
        work of the Hub, combining frontier research
        from the Development Economics (DEC)
        teams, Global Practices (GP) teams, and the
        Country Management Unit based in
        Malaysia, in one easy-to-read magazine-type
        publication.
We begin this issue with an update on green Islamic financing, where
Malaysia leads the way with the issuance of the world’s first green
corporate sukuk. Then, we move into topics like ASEAN at 50, open data,
the role of GDP in development, migration, and microfinance. Other
articles include one on industrial policies versus public goods to spur
growth, and another on economic forecasting.

The Digest is a snapshot of the rich diversity of work in the Malaysia
Hub, which continues to feature Malaysia’s development experience
and growing role as a center of expertise for global development
solutions.

We wish you an insightful read!



                  at the World Bank Group Global Knowledge and
Research Hub in Malaysia
Income growth is not the sole aim of economic
development. To many, an equally important, albeit
less quantifiable, outcome is a sense of progress for
the entire community, and a confidence that
prosperity is shared equitably – and sustainably –
across society for the long term.
                   sustainable development looks beyond GDP growth
and can strengthen nations for generations to come. However, rising
income inequality has impeded social mobility, increased social tensions,
and undermined effective governance in many countries in recent
decades. In the World Bank Group, we are firmly committed to our twin
goals of helping reduce the number of people living in extreme poverty,
and to promote shared prosperity, particularly among the bottom 40
percent of the population.

Investments in infrastructure are essential for meeting both goals.
Whether it be by connecting farmers to markets or by providing families
with electricity and clean water, infrastructure investments can
transform lives for the better. However, analysts estimate that
developing countries require between US$1.7 trillion annually in
infrastructure investment just to keep up with the rate of growth, while
actual investment pledged each year is closer to US$880 billion – far short
of the region’s needs.

        To close this huge infrastructure gap, we need
        more options for investment financing.
It would be better yet if these options adhere to our principles of
sustainable development, particularly given the specter of climate
change. A tall order, but not impossible.




Recently, with support from the World Bank, Malaysia launched a new
initiative that addresses both these principles: financing sustainable,
climate-resilient growth.

When Islamic finance shot to prominence in 2008, performing well even
during the global downturn, the investment community started taking
notice. Though representing a tiny portion of the global financial market,
the growth of Islamic finance has been rapid. By 2015, the industry had
surpassed US$1.88 trillion in size and its banking assets had doubled in
merely four years.
        Islamic finance may just provide that extra
        helping hand to deliver more infrastructure to
        emerging markets and developing economies.
Central to the premise is the sukuk, a bond that generates returns to
investors without infringing Islamic Shari’ah principles, which prohibits
the payment of interest. Given that the Islamic capital market is still
relatively small, sovereign and quasi-sovereign sukuk can be used to
finance infrastructure projects that can facilitate further inflows of private
capital. Project-specific sukuk, instead of general-purpose sukuk, may be
particularly helpful in bolstering infrastructure financing.




In parallel, another development pioneered by
the World Bank Group – ‘green bonds’ – is also
making headway. Since 2008, the World Bank
has issued US$10 billion in bonds through our
green bond program for climate-sensitive
investments, and has brought greater
transparency and clarity to issuers and investors
by participating in the crafting of the Green
Bond Principles (voluntary guidelines framing
the issuance of green bonds) and by setting best
market practice for reporting on the use of
proceeds. New issuances in the global market
are expected to exceed US$120 billion in 2017.

        Enter Malaysia with its innovative ‘green
        sukuk’ initiative, which will channel sukuk for
        climate-friendly investments, thus helping
        close the gap for both infrastructure and green
        finance.
Malaysia is already a global leader in leveraging Islamic finance for
infrastructure development, issuing more than 60 percent of the world’s
infrastructure sukuk. Now, the country’s regulators are taking it one step
further and using investments to achieve a public good. Launched this
July with the issuance by a Malaysian company of RM250 million (about
US$59 million) in bonds to finance a 50-megawatt solar photovoltaic
plant, the ‘green sukuk’ is a bold new tool for development.
The framework underlying this instrument is the result of collaboration
between the Securities Commission of Malaysia, the Central Bank of
Malaysia, and the World Bank Group. This was envisioned when
Malaysia and the World Bank Group celebrated 58 years of partnership
with the formal opening of our Global Knowledge and Research Hub in
Malaysia in 2016.

The ‘green sukuk’ is one of various corporate fixed-income securities of
this type coming out of Malaysia.

         We hope that many similar issuances will
         follow, in Malaysia and in other countries, and
         that innovative green financing becomes the
         norm, not the exception.
This development would take us one step closer towards our goal of
sustainable and inclusive growth.



This article was first published on World Bank’s East Asia & Pacific On the Rise
blog and the South China Morning Post. To access the blog, visit
bit.ly/VK_greensukuk. To access the opinion editorial, visit
bit.ly/SCMP_greensukuk.

                         is the World Bank Vice President for the East Asia
and Pacific.
          the World Bank Group Global Knowledge and Research Hub
joined a Technical Working Group with the Central Bank of Malaysia and
the Securities Commission in supporting the Malaysia Green Finance
Program, leveraging our experience and expertise in green financing. The
program aims to encourage investments in green or sustainable projects
through the development of green Islamic finance markets; initially in
Malaysia, and subsequently, in the ASEAN region.

The program has supported the launch of the first green sukuk in the
world on June 27, 2017. The sukuk is a green Islamic bond, where the
proceeds are used to fund a specific environmentally-sustainable
infrastructure project, such as the construction of renewable energy
generation facilities.

        Green sukuk have the potential to further
        broaden this market as well as to help bridge
        the gap between the conventional and Islamic
        financial worlds.
The sukuk should be attractive to conventional investors if they offer
reasonable risk-adjusted returns and are properly marketed. A sukuk that
meets these criteria and provides funding for an environmentally-
sustainable project could be particularly attractive to environment-
focused investors for two principal reasons.

First, sukuk provide investors with a high degree of certainty that their
money will be used for a specific purpose. To comply with the
underlying Shari’ah principles, the funds raised through the issuance of
a sukuk must be applied to investments in identifiable assets or ventures.
Therefore, if a sukuk is structured to provide funds for a specified
infrastructure project, such as a renewable energy project, there is little
chance the investors’ money will be diverted and used for another
purpose.

Second, many more environment-focused investment products exist on
the equity side of the capital markets than on the fixed-income side.
Since most investors in environment sustainability want to know
precisely how their money will be used, bonds that are general
obligations of an issuer have limited appeal unless all activities of the
issuer meet the investor’s environmental standards. Sukuk, which are
most like a conventional fixed-income security, could help fill the fixed-
income supply gap for environmental investors, to the extent the
proceeds of a sukuk are earmarked for an environmentally-beneficial
purpose.

The Global Knowledge and Research Hub has been partnering with
public and private institutions in Malaysia and elsewhere to develop
modern and integrated financial services and markets. It is through this
partnership that the new green Islamic finance initiative has been
spearheaded, and will contribute a new and innovative financial product
that can be used throughout the world.



This article was first published on World Bank’s East Asia & Pacific On the Rise
blog. To access the blog, visit bit.ly/WB_greensukuk.

                              is the World Bank Country Manager for
Malaysia.
LEARN ABOUT

GREEN
SUKUK
                                 INTRODUCING



                             GREEN
                             SUKUK
                                                          SUKUK
  GREEN FINANCE
                                               Sukuk re certific tes representin
 M l si l unched its first                      ssets th t re mutu ll owned b
 reen Isl mic bond to fin nce                  both bu er nd seller. These ssets
sust in ble, clim te-resilient                 could be in specific sh rī’ h-
 rowth in countries.                           compli nt project or investment
                                                ctivit th t prohibits interest.
WHAT IS
GREEN SUKUK?


                                        Asi requires $1.7 trillion    e r in
                                        infr structure investments, while
                                          ctu l investment pled ed e ch
                                         e r is closer to $880 billion—f r
                                        short of the re ion’s needs. Green
                                        sukuk c n help close the p.




   Proceeds from
  reen sukuk must
  be used onl for
  clim te-friendl
    investments.


                        Green sukuk
                      brid es the      p
                    between convention l
                     nd Isl mic fin nci l
                     worlds. It is in line
                                                               A new nd
                    with the objectives of
                                                          innov tive fin nci l
                     sh rī’ h to protect
                                                          product th t c n be
                      the environment.
                                                            used round the
                                                                 world.
GREEN SUKUK CAN
HELP SAVE THE PLANET


                                                                   Ensures funds re ch nneled
                                                                       to environment ll
                                                                      sust in ble projects


                                                                   Green sukuk provides investors
                                                                   with hi h de ree of cert int
                               Meets sust in bilit                 th t their monies will be used
                                  requirements                     solel to fin nce reen projects.
                                                                   Funds r ised will not be used
                                                                   for other purposes.
                              Appe ls to Isl mic fin nci l
                              m rket nd c n deliver
                              more infr structure
   Attr cts bro d
                              fin ncin to emer in
    investor b se
                              m rket nd developin
                              economies.

Green sukuk is open to
convention l nd reen
investors. It is ttr ctive
for investors seekin
clim te-friendl investments
th t re sh rī’ h compli nt.




                                                             For more inform tion, visit:
                                                             • worldb nk.or /m l si
                                                             • http://bit.l /SRIfr m work
Data is becoming increasingly relevant for economic
development. For Malaysia to achieve high-income
status by 2020, improving the availability and
quality of data can further drive productivity in the
private sector, in academic research, as well as help
make public service delivery more efficient.
Towards High Income
THE WORLD is witnessing an unprecedented explosion of data, which
impacts development through various channels; better policy-making
and public service delivery, empowering homegrown research, and
enabling private-sector economic growth. Enhanced data is both an input
and a result of the digital economy.

Rapid technological improvement has resulted in a greater volume and
wider range of data. Digital data, which in 2013 amounted to 46 sextillion
(1021) bytes, overtook analog data around 1998. For about three decades,
computing power has doubled approximately every 18 months,
generating yottabytes (10248 bytes) of data. This will continue to grow
rapidly in the future.

        Data collection, management, and dissemination
        is evolving rapidly, streaming into a digital
        economy expected to add US$1.4 trillion into the
        global economy by 2020.
Data improvements are creating opportunities for policymakers,
researchers, companies, and citizen groups to make better, more timely
and more informed decisions, enhance accountability, and increase
economic growth.

The public sector is increasingly using data to formulate, monitor and
evaluate policies, as well as to improve public service delivery. The
research communities and academia are using data to undertake
empirical analysis that could feed into other parts of the economy. The
private sector is using data for product development, market analysis,
and evidence-based decision-making or assessment.

For instance, reliable and timely microdata is an essential ingredient for
research and policy analysis. It allows public policies to target
households, schools or municipalities, raising possibilities to assess
distributional impact, track implementation and monitor results. Access
to data can also improve service delivery as it raises the capacity of
citizens to provide feedback, while strengthening government
accountability.

Advances in technology allow rapid information disclosure, enabling
businesses to gain different insights on market structure and service
delivery.

DEVELOPMENT DIGEST - OCTOBER 2017                                       18
Focus on Malaysia
Realizing data’s potential impact on Malaysia’s economic development
calls for a more cooperative and open data ecosystem. The demand for
statistical products and services in Malaysia keeps growing in quantity
and sophistication.

        Data is the fuel that runs the digital economy,
        which is estimated to be 18 percent of
        Malaysia’s GDP. Improving the open data
        environment will be critical for Malaysia’s
        data ecosystem to match that of high-income
        economies.
Many developed economies have shown that creating a conducive
environment for data sharing leverages the growing opportunities that
policy analysis, service delivery, or the digital economy can offer. Malaysia’s
data systems have credibility, but could further move into an integrated
ecosystem that can properly support Malaysia’s development agenda.

The current national statistical system can be described as a “federated
system”. The Department of Statistics Malaysia (DOSM) is the largest
statistical agency in the country. The Statistics Act gives DOSM wide
authority to collect and interpret statistics. However, DOSM has no
similar mandate to coordinate or direct the national statistical system.
Thus, databases maintained by various ministries are sometimes not
fully integrated at the national level; combined with unclear policies for
data dissemination, this constrains the amount of data made public.

DOSM recognizes the need to constantly evolve to meet growing
information needs for the formulation and monitoring of government
policies. Yet users keep asking for more detailed and timelier statistics,
which DOSM aims to serve as part of the DOSM Transformation Plan
2015–2020.

The private sector also has a role to play. A major challenge for the
private sector in Malaysia is its reluctance to share data due to privacy
policies or corporate competitiveness. If more data could be pooled and
shared, public benefits could be generated. The private sector is warming
up in adopting big data analytics (BDA) and the Malaysia Digital
Economy Corporation (MDEC) is providing a structured BDA
framework to increase its adoption rate.


DEVELOPMENT DIGEST - OCTOBER 2017                                           19
The Rise of Open Data and Implementation
Challenges
Open data is a tool for transparency, accountability, and innovation.
More open data also means more opportunities to conduct better
research. High-income countries that have higher degrees of openness
have more publications per capita (1.9 on average, compared to the
overall average of 0.8).

A survey conducted by the World Bank locally in September 2016 had
more than 75 percent of data-using survey respondents agreeing that
data availability contributes to Malaysia’s research capacity. However,
89.5 percent of them reported that the data was inadequate in terms of
granularity needed for rigorous economic research.

As of 2016, Malaysia’s ranking in the Open Data Barometer (ODB) – a
global measure of how countries are publishing and using open data –
was 53, lower than most advanced economies and many regional
economies. Recognizing the room for improvement, the Malaysian
Administrative Modernization and Management Planning Unit
(MAMPU) has released 1,982 data sets, and aims to release 7,000 datasets
by 2020. There is a clear government aspiration to be among the top 30
countries in the ODB.

Indeed, MAMPU requested the support of the World Bank Group to
carry out an Open Data Readiness Assessment (ODRA) exercise to
evaluate the open data environment in Malaysia in a more holistic
manner. It is the first country in ASEAN to implement the ODRA
methodology, which focused on how open data could support the
government efforts to move towards more effective, transparent and
accountable public service delivery.

        The ODRA concludes that Malaysia is well-
        placed to realize significant socio-economic
        gains from open data if it can successfully
        address some remaining obstacles to openness.




DEVELOPMENT DIGEST - OCTOBER 2017                                    20
Increasing the Strategic Use and Impact of
Data in Development
Civil society, the business community and academia in Malaysia are avid
consumers of various types of data. Key institutions such as DOSM or
MAMPU have adapted their means of communication and
dissemination with technology, emphasizing online communications to
reach a broader public audience. The next frontier is including the private
sector and civil society more forcefully to ensure data relevance, and
strengthen data analysis collaborations with the private sector and
researchers.

Ongoing policy and public service delivery data reforms will strengthen
a system that is already very strong and credible. These efforts need to be
matched by a broader ecosystem approach that further facilitates the
exchange of granular data among public, private and research
communities to reap all its potential benefits.

The statistical infrastructure in Malaysia needs to be restructured to reap
efficiency in response to growing demand. Statistical offices in more-
developed countries have gradually moved from being organized
around economic and social statistics (e.g. national accounts) into
specialized units (e.g. survey departments) that serve multiple statistic
outputs. This is complemented with an increased use of administrative
data to reduce the need of dedicated surveys.

Further, clearer legal and policy environments for data management in
Malaysia would facilitate open data dissemination. Data holders are not
always confident about the application of general rules and regulations
related to privacy and confidentiality, and individual agencies may also
face specific internal data management regulations. This creates a
fragmented data management environment, where most data exchanges
are decided on a case-by-case basis, with senior managerial approval
necessary for most approvals.

Strengthening the interaction between data providers and users would
serve to better understand current and future data demands. This can be
complemented with efforts to educate the users and the public on
understanding data. In addition, reinforcing on-going efforts to
strengthen data providers’ websites could provide complementary
sources of information to gather up-to-date information on user
expectations.




DEVELOPMENT DIGEST - OCTOBER 2017                                        21
Liberalizing more products could be done through a forward-looking
microdata release policy that sets clear principles for dissemination and
anonymity protection. Government agencies can then actively seek out
stakeholders to provide more granular data for high-demand areas,
publishing data inventories, and having standardized and streamlined
procedures for requesting data. It could also be supported by increasing
use of a ‘secure room’, where microdata can be released to researchers.




Making data “open” promotes eﬃciencies, increases transparency,
creates economic opportunities, and increases people’s participation in
the contribution of ideas.

        By unlocking data, the government can leverage the
        creative and rigorous policy recommendations
        from the research community for its policy analysis
        and planning.
Data is vital for research and economic development, and the movement
towards open data is gaining traction. Malaysia is already well-
positioned to take its open data program forward, in line with the 11th
Malaysia Plan’s aspirations of becoming a digitally-strong and mature
society. Connecting the various existing elements of its open data
environment better can only help to generate additional and significant
returns.



For the full report of the Malaysia Economic Monitor June 2017: Data for
Development, visit bit.ly/MEM_201706.
    MALAYSIA’S DATA ECOSYSTEM

                                            2      Malaysia's Statistics Act does not empower the
        MALAYSIA’S
                                                   Department of Statistics Malaysia to coordinate or
     CURRENT                                       direct the national statistical system.
       DATA
    ECOSYSTEM



                                           PUBLIC SECTOR             PRIVATE SECTOR         RESEARCH SECTOR
                                        PUBLIC SECTOR            PRIVATE SECTOR         RESEARCH SECTOR
1
    Malaysia's statistical
    system is decentralized
    with multiple production                                 3                                                    4
                                                                                                              4
    units, requiring strong         Databases by various     3             Restrictive data dissemination
    coordination and                ministries are sometimes               policies limit access to data by
    leadership.                     not fully integrated.                  government agencies and the public.




    User feedback is              Enhanced data collaboration              2
    important to ensure           within the public sector and
                                  amongst the public sector, private
    data relevance.
                                  sector & research community.
    3
3                                                                                        OPTIMAL
                                                                                       OPTIMAL
                                                                                          DATA
                                                                                         DATA
                                                                                       ECOSYSTEM
                                                                                      ECOSYSTEM
                                                                                        FOR MALAYSIA
                                                                                       FOR MALAYSIA




                               MAJOR IMPACTS IN:                                        1
                                                                                         Malaysia's data
    4                                                                                    ecosystem has
        PUBLIC SECTOR            RESEARCH SECTOR           PRIVATE SECTOR
                                                                                         credibility but needs
      Better public service        Empowering              Enabling private              to accelerate its
    delivery & policy-making    homegrown research          sector growth                modernization to
                                                                                         become an integrated
                  Supporting Malaysia’s development agenda                               ecosystem.
 WHY WE NEED OPEN DATA




                 High-quality data is
                 crucial for evidence-
                 based policy-making.



                 The public sector is
                 increasingly using data
                 to formulate, monitor
                 and evaluate policies
                 to improve public
                 service delivery.                   RESEARCH
PUBLIC SECTOR
                                               Reliable and timely
                                               microdata is essential for
                                               research and policy analysis.

                 Timely and relevant data
                 is important for private
                 sector development.           Limited access to granular
                                               data is a key constraint to
                                               research in Malaysia.
                 The private sector uses
                 data and information to       More granular data is needed
                 plan eﬀectively and           to improve Malaysia’s
                 improve performance.          research productivity and
                 Wider sharing of public and   quality.
                 private data generates
PRIVATE SECTOR   public benefits.
THE CHALLENGES OF
DATA FRAGMENTATION
TO POLICY-MAKING

 1      URBAN TRANSPORT
        PLANNING

     Urban transport planning and
     delivery in greater Kuala Lumpur
     often rely on non-comparable data
     units and definitions.
     Better integrated data systems                                       2
     would improve the analysis of
                                         IMMIGRANT
     current travel demands and          LABOR ISSUES
     patterns.

                                         Malaysia can benefit from a more
                                         integrated migration system to
                                         control irregular immigration.
 3      SOCIAL PROTECTION                Agencies working in silos may
        PROGRAMS                         contribute to the oversupply and
                                         undersupply of immigrant labor in
                                         certain sectors of the economy.
     Better coordination is important
     for Malaysian agencies involved
     in policy development and
     implementation of social
     protection.                                                          4
                                         PLANNING FOR
     A lack of coordination
     contributes to the fragmentation    SMART CITIES
     of data management and
     duplication of programs.
                                         An increased and more eﬀective
                                         use of data can improve the
                                         management of cities.

                                         For example, policy analysis of
                                         local-level data has helped reduce
                                         crime in Malaysia, benefiting the
                                         population.
    GETTING HIGH-QUALITY DATA

                                         STANDARDS                             CLIENT-ORIENTED

   DISAGGREGATION                      St nd rdi ed d t                     D t should meet the
                                        ssists polic -m kers                needs of users nd reﬂect
 D t should be                         to m ke comp risons                  import nt re s of interest
 dis    re ted suﬀicientl               nd dr w useful
 to inform decisions on                decisions
 policies nd pro r ms on
 specific re s



         TIMELY
                                                ACCESSIBILITY
D t should be dissemin ted
in timel m nner to incre se            D t should be widel ccessible nd
the eﬀectiveness of d t                us ble to the public while lso t kin
  n l sis nd service deliver .         steps to preserve person l priv c




                                                                                      CRITERIA OF
                                                                                      HIGH QUALITY
    ROLE OF DATA                                                                      DATA
    PRODUCERS




                          COLLECT
                        COLLECT                                              COLLABORATE
              Collect
              Cre te nd    compile inform
                        nd compile          tioninto
                                    inform tion  in
                                                                                overnment nd
                                                                  Work with overnments       ndservice
                                                                                                service
           Cre nteinform  tion processin
                     nd compile           s stem
                                inform tion  into
                                                                  providers     improve  d t   ccessibilit
                                                               Work with overnments nd service of
                                                                             to reduce the diﬀicult
            n inform tion processin s stem
                                                                  for users
                                                                   ccess
                                                               providers      d t for
                                                                          to reduce
                                                                         to           users
                                                                                    the diﬀicult of
                                                                ccess to d t for users

                                                                             INFORM
               DISSEMINATE                                                 INFORM
             DISSEMINATE                                  Publici
                                                          Re ul rl ed    t v ctu
                                                                      inform   il bilit
                                                                                     l ndwidel
                                                                                           potentindl solicit
                                                                                                      d t users
                 -to-use, m
    Provide e s -to-use    ndchine- nd nd
                              m chine                  Re feedb
                                                           ul wh
                                                          on  rl ckt dfrom
                                                                  inform      t lilusers.
                                                                            d v
                                                                        t isctu           nd receive
                                                                                    ble potenti
                                                                                    nd           ld t feedb
                                                                                                         usersck
         rch-friendl
    rese e
 Provide   s -to-use d
         rch-friendl  d t
                       ndt m chine nd                  on wh t d t is v il ble nd receive feedb ck
 rese rch-friendl d t
The recent debate in Malaysia on whether it makes
more sense to measure Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) in ringgit or in dollars is a healthy one. It
reflects a sound interest by many segments of
Malaysian society in statistics that measure
economic development and how it changes
people’s living standards.
When it Comes to Development, Does
Counting GDP Count?
THIS IS the fundamental question: what does GDP really mean in the
daily life of Malaysians? There are sound arguments on both sides. In a
way, both are right, depending on which perspective is taken.

In the World Bank, we use different ways of measuring GDP, depending
on what kind of comparison we would like to make. For the most part,
and when it comes to measuring how the living standards of Malaysians
are changing over time, it makes sense to calculate incomes, production
or spending in ringgit terms.

In doing so, we correct for the effects of inflation by adjusting nominal
changes into real terms, to capture real change over time – be it quarter
by quarter, or year by year. In other words, we develop a real GDP
estimate that is linked to constant prices from a base year, and therefore
captures real growth in income over time, removing the impact of
inflation. In this case, it does not matter if this is done in ringgit, dollars,
bushels of wheat or any other unit of account. This allows us to have a
clear picture of real changes over time.

         It is important that we not lose sight of the fact
         that in practice, prices are constantly changing
         across the economy for fundamental reasons
         other than inflation.
For instance, this could be a change in the supply of a Malaysian export
or the demand for it, which pushes real prices up and down. These are
important changes to look at and that they reflect real changes in the
country. It is the same with looking at the exchange rate, which is just
another price.

Now, Malaysian companies and manufacturers who trade
internationally will rightly worry about how their costs (especially the
costs of inputs they must import) and sales (especially their exports)
change due to movements in the exchange rate. If their profit margins
drop because their dollar-denominated imported inputs are more
expensive with the higher exchange rate to the dollar, they may feel that
the country’s strong GDP growth statistics mean little. The same thing
applies to Malaysian parents whose children study abroad, and who



DEVELOPMENT DIGEST - OCTOBER 2017                                            28
must spend more ringgit to meet the same educational expenses they had
last year.

These are legitimate concerns, but not ones that can be resolved by
changing the way we measure GDP. Rather, we should focus not on
changing the estimate, but rather by looking at the large number of
factors impacting the exchange rate – many of which are outside of the
control of policymakers.

At this point, it should be noted that in some cases, it does make sense to
measure GDP in US dollars. This applies in cases where we need to
compare Malaysia with other countries, say for example either the size of
the economy, or the share of the population living below the local
poverty line. To do this we need to convert into a common measurement.
This could be any currency, but in practice it is usually the US Dollar.

        However, the real question is whether GDP is
        a useful measure of development, irrespective
        of whether it is denominated in ringgit or in
        US dollar.




Malaysia has set itself the goal of becoming a high-income economy
within a generation. In purely mathematical terms, this means reaching
a specific threshold. In the World Bank, we consider countries to be
“high-income” if they have a GNI (Gross National Income, a measure
close to GDP) of at least US$ 12,235 per capita in 2018. We use the “Atlas
method”, which means we take a three-year average exchange rate,
adjusted for inflation, to lessen the effect of fluctuations and abrupt
changes.

This is just one indicator of progress. The true nature of a successful and
prosperous nation cannot be distilled into one number, whether GDP,
GNI or any other statistic. Malaysia’s true prosperity is to be reflected in
the productivity of its human capital, in the opportunities facing Small
and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) to grow, flourish and even fail, and in
an economy where entrepreneurs and risk-takers face level playing fields
and equal chances to succeed, and to fail.

Finally, and perhaps most importantly, measuring growth in GDP or
GNI in per capita terms – no matter what the currency – is just an average.
It’s a useful tool, but one that tells us very little about who is benefitting
from growth and how wealth and prosperity is shared across the
population. Is GDP growth being shared by all? Are the incomes of the
highest and lowest earners converging or moving apart? This is of equal
importance for policymakers, who concern themselves not only with
triggering growth, but also its dispersion across regions and segments of
the population.

Capturing this type of development requires counting a lot more than
just one number. So, the real question should be: “Is GDP growth
enough?”



This article was first published on World Bank’s East Asia & Pacific On the Rise
blog and The Star Malaysia. To access the blog, visit bit.ly/WB_GDP. To access
the opinion editorial, visit bit.ly/Star_GDP.

                        is World Bank Group Representative to
Malaysia and Country Manager.

                      is World Bank’s Lead Economist for Malaysia.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) is 50 years old in 2017. Created as a
loosely-constructed regional organization by five
countries at the height of the Cold War, ASEAN has
come far. Today’s 10 member countries have
transformed ASEAN into a rapidly growing and
vibrant community stretching across the Southeast
Asian region.
The signing of ASEAN Declaration on 8 Aug 1967 in Bangkok gave birth to
ASEAN. Picture courtesy of ASEAN Secretariat.

                 ago, the visionary leaders of Indonesia, Malaysia,
Philippines, Singapore and Thailand founded ASEAN. As today’s 10
member countries of ASEAN celebrate the golden jubilee of the union,
they can look back on half a century of extraordinary achievements. The
story of ASEAN is an inspirational tale of collective development success:

    1.   The proportion of ASEAN people living in poverty, measured by
         an income of less than US$1.25 a day, has declined dramatically,
         from 47 percent in 1990 to 14 percent in 20151;
    2.   Net enrolment of children in primary education increased to 96
         percent;
    3.   The average under-five mortality rate has fallen to 25 in 2015,
         from an initial number of 82 out of every 1000 children in 20152.

In most large ASEAN economies, growth is projected to increase in 2017
and 2018*. Its expanding middle class is fueling this growth3.




1
  ASEAN: A Community of Opportunities, ASEAN Secretariat
2
  ASEAN Statistical Report on Millennium Development Goals 2017, ASEAN Secretariat
3
  Brueckner, Markus; Dabla-Norris, Era; Gradstein, Mark; Lederman, Daniel. 2017. The
rise of the middle class and economic growth in ASEAN. Policy Research working paper;
no. WPS 8068. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/426681495130074444/The-rise-of-the-middle-
class-and-economic-growth-in-ASEAN
Volunteers from the community cook traditional Lao recipes with more
nutritious ingredients to ensure that the children eat healthier meals. Lao PDR.
Photo: Bart Verweij / World Bank

First, nutrition. A thriving ASEAN means ASEAN people with good health,
skills, and opportunities – and good health and skills start early in life.
Adequate nutrition of young children and babies, even before they are born,
is essential for people to acquire the skills to attain their full potential.
Malnourished and stunted children, due to slow brain development, will
never be able to catch up. They will learn less, drop out of school more, and
will be less productive and will never contribute fully to society.
Collectively, this translates into reduced economic productivity and
billions of dollars in lost revenue over generations.

         Research shows that reducing the prevalence of
         chronic malnutrition or stunting can increase
         GDP by up to 11 percent a year4.
Why is good nutrition a priority for ASEAN? Because malnutrition and
stunting rates remain extraordinarily high in many developing countries
in the region, and around the world, despite progress with food security
(Figure 1).

4
 http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/460861439997767818/Stunting-Costing-and-Financing-
Overview-Brief.pdf
           Figure 1: 2015 Estimate of World Stunting Rates




                   % Reduction in Per Capita Income
                     -13                        0

Source: World Bank (2015), Calculations from September 2015 version of the
Joint Child Malnutrition Estimates (JME) dataset5
Note: Percentages are childhood stunting rates of current workforce



What can be done? Each ASEAN country faces its specific and unique
malnutrition challenges. Some countries have succeeded in reducing
stunting significantly, such as Thailand and Vietnam, and many are now
prioritizing the fight against stunting.

        Improving nutrition involves policies and
        programs in many areas, including health,
        water and sanitation, agriculture, food,
        community development, and education.
        Nonetheless, simple, inexpensive programs
        can make a big difference.
Indonesia, the Philippines, and Vietnam have been implementing
programs to deliver 10 basic and inexpensive interventions (Figure 2). A
World Bank evaluation shows that these interventions have proven to be
effective with a 76-to-1 benefit-cost ratio5.



Figure 2: 10 Basic and Inexpensive Interventions for Malnutrition and
                              Stunting


                                                      Multi Micronutrient
                                                      Supplementation in
                 Salt Iodization
                                                      Pregnancy Including
                                                      Iron-Folate

                 Calcium                              Energy-Protein
                 Supplementation                      Supplementation in
                 in Pregnancy                         Pregnancy


                 Vitamin A                            Zinc
                 Supplementation                      Supplementation in
                 in Childhood                         Childhood


                 Breastfeeding                        Complementary
                 Promotion                            Feeding Education


                 Complementary                        Severe Acute
                 Food                                 Malnutrition
                 Supplementation                      Management




        Improving nutrition and reducing stunting
        will benefit the poor the most. It will provide
        more people with the skills and opportunities
        they deserve. A nutritious ASEAN will be a
        more inclusive and prosperous ASEAN.



Second, can ASEAN labor markets become more integrated and
inclusive to provide greater opportunities for workers across member


5
 http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/536661487971403516/PRN05-March2017-Economic-
Costs-of-Stunting.pdf
countries? By 2025, 65-70 million new workers are expected to enter the
labor force of ASEAN. How can they benefit from the ASEAN Economic
Community? Approaches and policies will differ by skill levels:
»    For high skilled professionals, countries may consider establishing
     common standard professional certification program (with no or
     minimal additional national certification requirements). APEC has
     one for engineers, for example. Can ASEAN do the same, for
     engineers, accountants, architects and other professions?

»    For mid-skilled workers with vocational skills (plumbers, carpenters,
     legal assistants, etc.), a certification process could allow workers from
     one country to go to another for a job. This is already happening
     informally, with smartphone apps like “ServisHero.” How about
     formalizing it?

»    For low skilled workers, such as construction workers, harmonized
     labor regulations could provide appropriate legal protections and
     social safety. Such protection will help the nearly 90 percent of the 7
     million intra-ASEAN migrants who are low-skilled6.




Workers attend a production line at a shoe factory in Tangerang, Indonesia.
Photo: Adek Berry / AFP

Third, ASEAN is prioritizing financial inclusion. Currently, only about
50 percent of adults in ASEAN have an account at a financial institution.
In 2014, only 29 percent of workers in ASEAN reported receiving their
monthly salaries through an account from a financial institution, while
the remaining 71 percent are paid in cash by their employers7. Cash
payments are risky. Salary deposits directly into the accounts of workers

6
  ILO - Migrant Workers in Asean: The Hidden and Neglected Workforce -
http://apmigration.ilo.org/news/migrant-workers-in-asean-the-hidden-and-neglected-
workforce
7
  http://blogs.worldbank.org/eastasiapacific/how-to-scale-up-financial-inclusion-in-asean-
countries
at financial institutions are safer and can help workers save funds, build
credit histories, and over time access services such as consumer credit,
mortgages, education loans and insurance products. ASEAN is
discussing a specific financial inclusion target for 2020, with a goal that
70 percent of adults have savings accounts at financial institutions.

Financial inclusion will help reduce poverty further in ASEAN, directly,
and indirectly by making it easier to do business and to grow a business,
especially for small and medium sized firms, which account for the
overwhelming majority of ASEAN businesses and employment.




Fourth, ASEAN member countries have adopted the Master Plan on
ASEAN Connectivity (MPAC). Highway and rail projects are now
taking shape in the region. People can look forward to a future of
seamless transport of goods across borders. Along with improved roads,
rails, and port infrastructure, effective transport, border policies,
accompanying logistics and systems investments will be key to facilitate
smooth transport and travel across borders.




Key Physical Connectivity Projects in ASEAN. Source: ASEAN Secretariat

Many ASEAN Member Countries are reporting improvements on indices
such as Trading Across Borders, as measured by the World Bank Doing
Business Report8. transport of cross-border goods remain burdensome,
with many complex domestic regulations, country-by-country insurance

8
 Marcelo Gordillo, Darwin; Mandri-Perrott, Xavier Cledan; House, Ruth Schuyler; Marcelo
Gordillo, Darwin. 2016. East Asia and Pacific - Enhancing ASEAN connectivity monitoring
and evaluation. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/119821468023689664/East-Asia-and-Pacific-
Enhancing-ASEAN-connectivity-monitoring-and-evaluation
requirements, import-export paperwork for vehicles, and the lack of a
system for sharing advance manifest information.

Many trucks must unload and reload cargo at some border points, or go
empty on their return journeys. Four different insurance instruments are
required, for example, for vehicles to travel from Yangon to Da Nang,
and trains must be inspected at each border. Policies to promote seamless
transport might include, for example: (i) a unified insurance and vehicle
registry system; (ii) sharing of advance manifest information for cargo
transported via train (as happens with air plane travel); (iii) harmonized
logistics and trucking standards across participating member countries

         Working towards seamless transportation of
         goods across borders is key to unlock greater
         trade flows and integration in ASEAN.
A single insurance and vehicle registry system for ASEAN would ease
logistics, standardize screening processes and cutting down travel times.
This will allow for faster transportation of goods, lower costs and
increase overall efficiency.




Finally, the adverse effects of climate change are a reality in ASEAN.
The mean temperature in the region increased by 0.1 to 0.3 degree Celsius
per decade between 1951 and 2000; rainfall trends moved downward
from 1960 to 2000; and sea levels have risen one to three millimeters per
year9. Heat waves, droughts, floods, and cyclones have become more
intense and frequent.

Climate change and natural disasters hurt the poor most. One flood can
make a low-income family destitute. Effected shared early warning
systems (especially for typhoons and tsunamis), allowing each ASEAN
country to draw on all member countries’ “disaster intelligence” and
expertise, will help. With the support of Japan and the World Bank,
Cambodia, Lao PDR, and Myanmar are planning to establish SEADRIF,
the Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Insurance Facility, which aims to pool
risks, reduce disaster exposure, and ultimately protect the people most
at risk in participating countries.




9
 ASEAN Secretariat - http://environment.asean.org/asean-working-group-on-climate-
change/
The tropical storm "Sonca” in July 2017 led to the worst floods in the northeastern
province of Sakon Nakhon, Thailand, for two decades.

         Building disaster resilience will make ASEAN
         more inclusive and protect millions of lives.

For the last three decades, much of ASEAN has experienced strong
growth and growing middle-class wealth. Member countries aim at
making the ASEAN community ever more inclusive, while enjoying
continued robust economic growth. Policies and programs to improve
nutrition, integrate labor markets, increase financial access, provide for
seamless cross-border transport connectivity, and establish effective
disaster risk prevention and management—in addition to ASEAN’s core
agenda to open and facilitate trade, including through transparency
mechanisms such as the ASEAN Trade Repository (atr.asean.org)—will
help achieve these goals.




This article is adapted from a keynote speech at the ASEAN Economic Integration
Forum 2017 held in Bangkok on September 14, 2017. For more information, visit
http://www.unescap.org/events/asean-economic-integration-forum-2017.

                        is the Director for Malaysia, Thailand, and
Regional Partnerships in the East Asia and Pacific Region of the World
Bank.
Migration has been growing in Southeast Asia. The
mismatch in the region’s supply of and demand for
labor encourages workers to seek employment
around the region. Migrants can earn substantially
more when working abroad, with remittances
benefiting their households at home and helping to
reduce poverty. When migrants return home, they
bring back capital, knowledge, and skills. Migrants
can also help address labor market shortages, boost
production and stimulate competitiveness.
                      supply 8 percent of the world’s migrants and host
4 percent. Intraregional migration has grown strongly during the last
several decades. Indeed, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand have become
regional migration hubs, home to 6.5 million ASEAN migrants.

Workers move throughout Southeast Asia in search of economic
opportunity. Most of the migration consist of low-skilled and often
undocumented migrants looking for better-paying jobs.

        Through a series of agreements on subjects,
        including the ASEAN Economic Community
        (AEC)’s single regional market formed in 2015, the
        region has pursued an agenda of integration.
In part, because of these efforts, intraregional tariffs have declined
significantly, and intraregional trade has increased from 17 percent of the
region’s world trade in 1990 to about 25 percent today (OECD 2016).
However, regional integration is not complete.



    Figure 1: ASEAN actions to facilitate labor mobility, 1995–2015




While workers move between jobs and across sectors and even countries,
to take advantage of new economic opportunities, barriers to labor
mobility make such moves costly. As part of its efforts towards
integration, ASEAN member states have taken steps to reduce these
barriers. However, progress implementing regional commitments
related to labor mobility is limited. Moreover, the AEC’s focus on high-
skilled migration ignores most ASEAN migrants who are low-skilled.
    Figure 2: Average monthly wages in ASEAN countries in 2013




Source: ILO 2014



Lowering barriers to mobility in ASEAN would increase the welfare
gains workers that throughout ASEAN receive from economic
integration. Migration has generally small, but positive, impacts on the
employment and wages of workers in destination countries. Non-
migrating workers benefit because outmigration tends to boost wages in
sending countries. Migrant workers from countries with lower wages
benefit from migration because of significant differences in wages across
ASEAN countries. Family members who do not migrate benefit from
remittances.

International migration can have broader positive impacts on entire
economies. Most evidence from ASEAN suggests that migration has a
positive impact on economic growth and in some cases migrants seem to
have facilitated the upgrading of local skills.
ASEAN’s economic diversity means that there are significant
opportunities to migrate for work. Large intra-regional disparities in
income and population aging remain. Disparities in GDP per capita
adjusted for purchasing power are similarly large: in all but one of
ASEAN’s 10 largest migration corridors, the GDP per capita of the
destination country is at least twice that of the origin country.

However, barriers to labor mobility in the region limit the welfare gains
from migration by preventing some people from moving for work and
leading others to migrate informally. Informal migration is a significant
issue in ASEAN, most migrants in Thailand and Malaysia are informal.

        ASEAN countries that are more open to
        globalization and have developed more
        advanced migration systems tend to have
        lower costs of international labor mobility.
Labor mobility costs quantify the barriers that workers face when seeking to
change jobs across firms, sectors, or countries. For instance, Malaysia and
Singapore have the lowest international labor mobility costs in ASEAN.
However, no matter where workers wish to migrate in ASEAN, they face
mobility costs several times the annual average wage, suggesting that
weaknesses in the migration process may make migrating for work difficult.



  Figure 3: International labor mobility costs in ASEAN in the 2000s




Source: Holleweg, 2016
Systemic Issues Arise from Inefficient Migration
Processes
Migration systems are generally composed of the of the governance
system and four other components. These components work together to
reconcile the sometimes-divergent needs of host and source countries,
employers, and migrants.
»   The governance of the migration system refers to the legal and
    institutional framework organizing the system, and to bilateral
    agreements between sending and receiving countries.
»   The admissions component determines who migrates and in what
    numbers, through which entry paths, quantity restrictions, and
    recruitment. The employment component involves the terms of
    employment and the protection provided to workers.
»   The exit component involves the return of migrant workers to their
    source countries, encompassing sanctions and incentives in the host
    country designed to punish overstaying temporary migrants and
    reward those who return, diaspora engagement, and reintegration
    policies.
»   The enforcement component involves implementation of migration
    policy and oversight of the other components of the migration
    system.

Breakdowns and weaknesses in each component of the migration system
increase the cost of international migration. They can be grouped into
five major problem areas:
»   Migration systems can have difficulty responding to economic
    needs when restrictions on the number of migrants to a country are
    not aligned with labor market requirements.
»   Information asymmetries arise between migrants and employers.
    Migrants in ASEAN are heavily dependent on recruitment agencies
    and informal labor brokers to reduce these asymmetries.
»   Employers and recruitment agencies are able to exploit
    information asymmetries to extract rents from the migration
    system.
»   There is a lack of coordination among sending and receiving
    countries, as well as among these countries, employers, trade unions,
    workers, and migrants. Bilateral agreements that coordinate
    migration between ASEAN member countries often lack
    transparency and input from employers and migrants.
»   Both sending and receiving countries tend to focus on the short-
    term benefits and costs of migration. Programs to support returning
    migrants and to connect with diaspora are in their infancy.




DEVELOPMENT DIGEST - OCTOBER 2017                                     44
Labor mobility costs can be reduced by addressing breakdowns and
weaknesses in each component of the migration system. Appropriate
policies vary across countries, depending on whether they primarily
send or receive migrants, the maturity of their migration management
system, and their level of development.



»   Comprehensive          national    »   Transparent and clearly-defined
    migration strategies. A national       entry paths. With these, both
    migration plan should set both         employers and migrants are
    short- and long-term objectives        aware       of   the     eligibility
    for migration, coordinating            requirements and the selection
    migration policy with other            criteria for entry, including
    human capital strategies.              differentiating entry paths in
                                           conjunction with employment
»   Clearly-defined institutional          terms, with entry requirements
    framework. This helps reduce           linked to employment terms.
    time-consuming bureaucratic            Data-driven shortage lists can
    procedures, thus better serving        identify labor market shortages, to
    migrants.                              create a feedback loop between
                                           the immigration system and the
»   Bilateral agreements. Bilateral        labor market.
    agreements and MOUs can
    facilitate cooperation between     »   Evidence-based           quantity
    sending        and     receiving       restrictions. These should reflect
    countries, and provide the basis       economic needs and be adaptable
    to reconcile their interests and       to changing economic conditions,
    align their legislative and            relying on measurable indicators
    institutional frameworks.              that come from surveys and
                                           administrative data as well as
                                           innovative sources.

                                       »   Improved           Recruitment
                                           Oversight. This can both reduce
                                           labor mobility costs and
                                           improve      protections    for
                                           migrants. Expanding access to
                                           information      can     reduce
                                           information        asymmetries,
                                           improve matches between
                                           employers and workers while
                                           also diminishing the need for
                                           recruitment agencies.
                                           employment, or assistance
                                           with transportation, medical
»   Well-designed employment               examinations, and document
    terms.       This      includes        preparation (OECD 2013).
    calibration with entry paths to
    differentiate migrants by skill    »   Active diaspora engagement
    and productivity, flexible             policies. Returning migrants
    terms, and easy renewal.               bring both financial and
    Receiving countries can offer          human capital resources with
    better terms to highly-skilled         them. Members of the diaspora
    migrants, or to reward                 who remain abroad can be
    improved          productivity.        sources of learning for local
    Employment terms can be                experts and of financial
    made more flexible, allowing           connections to destination
    foreign workers to change              countries. In Malaysia, a recent
    employers.                             impact analysis of TalentCorp
                                           Malaysia’s Returning Expert
»   Better protections for migrant         Programme found positive
    workers.         Pre-departure         results. The program, which
    orientation    and    financial        provides incentives for high-
    literacy    programs       may         skilled Malaysians abroad to
    improve migrant workers’               repatriate, was found to
    employment          experience         increase the probability of
    abroad       by     expanding          return by 40 percent for
    knowledge of their rights, of          applicants with an existing job
    the destination country, and of        offer while having only a
    the complaint mechanisms               modest impact on government
    available. Sending countries           finances (Del Carpio et al.
    could also consider providing          2016).
    loans to migrant workers to
    assist them with the cost of       »   Reintegration of returning
    migration.                             workers. More research into
                                           how countries can help to
                                           reintegrate workers into their
                                           labor markets is necessary.
»   Exit sanctions and incentives
    to    encourage       voluntary        Source countries can offer
    repatriation. In addition to           reintegration    benefits    to
    negative      incentives     for       returning migrants, including
    employers to encourage on-             active labor market policies to
    time return, as in Malaysia and        help them to find jobs or start
    Singapore, wages might also            businesses on their return.
    be withheld or deposited in a
    compulsory savings scheme
    until workers return to their
    source     country.     Positive
    incentives for returns also
    exist, such as tax rebates,
    guarantees        of     future
»   Coordination of immigration               even more important to ensure
    law       enforcement.    This            that limited staff and resources
    involves coordinated internal             are leveraged to the greatest
    and      border    enforcement            extent possible.
    actions, and coordinated use of
    data among migration-related          »   Targeting of migration law
    agencies. Labor migration                 enforcement. Enforcement of
    agencies (which often hold                migration laws on employers –
    data on migrant workers and               in addition to migrant workers
    employers)       and    border            – can improve compliance
    enforcement agencies (which               with immigration laws. Efforts
    hold data on migrant exit and             to increase compliance with
    entry) can leverage their data            migration regulations among
    to undertake joint enforcement            employers should also involve
    efforts.     In    low-capacity           policies to reward compliance.
    environments, coordination is




This write-up is a summary of Migrating to Opportunity: Overcoming Barriers
to Labor Mobility in Southeast Asia; doi: 10.1596/978-1-4648-1106-7. A PDF
of the final, full-length book, once published, will be available at
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/ Please use the final version of the book for
citation, reproduction, and adaptation purposes.

                        and                      are Economists in the
World Bank’s East Asia and Pacific Social Protection and Jobs Unit.
How exactly do unskilled immigrant workers –
with at most secondary education – fit into a
dialogue about national productivity growth? Such
a discussion would revolve around the components
of labor productivity improvements - total factor
productivity (TFP) growth, a rise in the average skill
level, and physical capital deepening (keeping in
mind that TFP growth can be facilitated by the other
two components).
              about 245 million migrants worldwide – around 3 percent
of the world population. Roughly one-fifth are tertiary educated. Middle-
income countries have a smaller proportion of immigrants than high-
income countries (about 1 percent versus 12 percent). But for a number
of middle-income countries with more immigrants than others, there is
uneasiness about relying on unskilled foreigners as they strive to leap
from low-wage labor and imitation to high-skilled labor and innovation.

In a recent Research & Policy Brief (RPB), we discuss the channels
through which unskilled immigrant labor affects labor productivity. We
also attempt to summarize relevant empirical evidence.

        Although unskilled immigrant workers have
        low formal human capital, they can still
        contribute to productivity improvements by
        helping the national economy become more
        efficient and by generating incentives for the
        native labor force to upgrade their skills.
Channels: How Might Unskilled Immigrant
Labor Affect Productivity?
Mechanical (immediate) channels comprise (i) physical capital dilution
from an overall increase in workers; and (ii) lower skills intensity
following the increase in the proportion of unskilled workers. Both
adversely affect labor productivity.

Dynamic channels come into play as firms and workers adjust. Positive
effects could arise from:
»   Complementarity of immigrants vis-à-vis natives, when they are
    heterogeneous in skills. This can spur efficiency and higher skills
    intensity of the native workforce through task reallocation and
    specialization. The increase in the supply of workers for manual jobs
    allows natives to focus on more complex tasks. The re-entry of high-
    skilled natives, namely tertiary-educated women, into the labor force
    is also possible when low-cost domestic household services become
    available.

»   Scale and agglomeration economies, even if immigrants and natives
    are homogenous. An increase in labor supply can lower the cost
    structure of firms, supporting output expansion. This effect is
    particularly potent amid labor shortages and opportunities to enter
    new markets. Moreover, the pooling of task-specific labor can
    generate ideas for simple process improvements.

»   Increased competition, which, among similar workers, may
    incentivize natives to perform tasks more efficiently and to upgrade
    their skills.

»   Directed technological change, where firms adopt technologies and
    physical capital that are more suited to the efficient and intensive use
    of unskilled workers (i.e. possibly less “modern” but factor-supply
    appropriate), and which may contribute to increases in TFP.

Negative effects, on the other hand, may be triggered by:
»   Poor social cohesion because of trust and communication barriers.
    Immigrant diversity has been found to have some costs in terms of
    cohesion, notwithstanding overall beneficial effects.

»   Physical capital-skill complementarity whereby physical capital
    deepening is reduced as capital is less complementary to unskilled
    labor than skilled labor. This could lower TFP growth.




DEVELOPMENT DIGEST - OCTOBER 2017                                        50
Empirical Evidence: What is the Net Impact
on Productivity of an Influx of Unskilled
Immigrants?
For a sense of net effects – positive or negative, we looked at 22 primary
studies. Explicit analysis on skilled versus unskilled immigrants is rare.
So, most of the econometric results pertain to the effects of total
immigrants. They remain instructive, given the overwhelming direction
of migrant flows from less educated to more educated countries.

Our simple tabulation suggests that overall, total immigrant effects on
labor productivity are statistically insignificant to positive. Broken down
to the three components of labor productivity, positive effects from total
immigrants are especially apparent through TFP. There is no statistically
significant impact on physical capital per worker suggesting that capital
accumulation need not be adversely affected. Human capital per worker
is somewhat negatively affected, indicating that immigrants’
compositional effect on skills tends to outweigh the effect on natives’
skills upgrading. In the studies that analyze labor productivity alongside
all its three components, positive immigrant effects on TFP more than it
offsets the effects on physical capital and human capital per worker.

Outcomes vary across countries. Positive productivity effects from total
immigrants are obvious for the U.S. – analysis using state-level data links
task specialization of less-educated natives, induced by unskilled
immigrant inflows to TFP growth. Studies suggest that the
complementarity and scale channels operate in Malaysia, but also that
automation is somewhat hindered. Actual empirical evidence of net
productivity effects seems mixed, and not representative enough of the
economy tending to focus on the manufacturing sector. In contrast, there
is also the unique example of a large influx of skilled immigrants into
Israel (fleeing the collapse of the Soviet Union) not having positive effects
on productivity in the manufacturing sector.

        More than anything, cross-country evidence
        highlights that underlying the likelihood of
        positive net productivity effects is how
        immigrants link to specific gaps in the
        economy – regardless of skill level. And the
        response of agents, markets and institutions in
        host countries.

DEVELOPMENT DIGEST - OCTOBER 2017                                          51
The economic case for an outright ban on unskilled immigrant workers
is weak. But understanding economic needs, improving immigration
systems, and incentivizing behavior that benefits the economy are
imperative. To be fair, anxieties in middle income countries are not
misplaced. However, foreign workers form a broader conversation on
overall labor skills and technologies. For instance, how do nations ensure
quality human capital amid brain drain? Middle-income countries in fact
have emigrants that number two times of immigrants– about 3 percent
of their population. And high-skilled immigrants tend to leave a broad
range of countries for a narrow selection of mainly high-income
countries.



This article was first published on World Bank’s Let’s Talk Development blog.
To access the blog, visit bit.ly/WB_immigrants. To access the Research Policy
Brief, visit bit.ly/DECRG_immigrants.

                     is a research fellow in the Macroeconomics and
Growth team of the World Bank's Development Research Group.
The World Bank Group Global Knowledge and
Research Hub draws from Malaysia’s development
experience that can serve as valuable lessons for
other countries. Vietnam and Lao PDR are just two
of the countries that have benefited from this model
of capacity development through knowledge
exchanges with the Hub.
South-South Exchange - Outbound Knowledge
on National and Civil Service Transformation
CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT is usually associated with training,
seminars and perhaps study tours. Most of the countries the World Bank
works in require a significant boost in their capability to implement
policies, programs and projects. For training to be sustainable and have
high impact, it should be targeted to challenges in the public sector,
coupled with initiatives to improve organizational and institutional
capacity.

        There is now a model of capacity development
        via knowledge exchanges; namely, the Hub,
        which specializes in – and was specifically set
        up to engage in – bringing the Malaysia’s
        development experience to other countries.
This works best when the World Bank has an existing engagement in a
country, so that the knowledge exchange can be tailored to an issue that
the government is trying to solve. One of the key roles of the Hub is to
analyze, curate, and distill the elements of Malaysia’s experience that can
serve as valuable lessons for other countries.

Through the Hub, the World Bank facilitates knowledge exchanges
between Malaysian government officials and their counterparts from
other countries who seek to apply Malaysia’s learnings to their own
circumstances. Vietnam and Lao PDR are two ASEAN member nations
that have recently taken advantage of this capacity development model.

The Hub has recently completed an assessment of Malaysia’s experience
with its Performance Management and Delivery Unit (PEMANDU) and
is embarking on an assessment of Malaysia’s adoption of good regulatory
practices.

Together with our counterparts from the Malaysian government, we
headed north with the knowledge in hand in the interest of sharing these
experiences with our partners with corresponding interests.




DEVELOPMENT DIGEST - OCTOBER 2017                                       54
By 2035, Vietnam’s vision has it aspiring to become a prosperous,
creative, equitable and democratic nation. Achieving this ambitious goal
has set Vietnam on a path of transformation on multiple fronts –
economic, social, and political.


        At the core of this transformation is the re-orientation
        of the state’s economic management role.

This requires adapting Vietnam’s economic governance, so that the state
becomes a skilled facilitator of three types of relationships; among
government agencies, between the state and the market, and between the
state and the citizens. Through the international conference on
“Economic Governance for a Facilitating State,” jointly organized by the
Government of Vietnam and the World Bank in Hanoi earlier in 2016,
Malaysian officials shared their experiences, focusing on strengthening
institutions so they can facilitate better development outcomes.

Here are some lessons that Malaysia shared with Vietnam:
»   Coordinating interactions between agencies from the Prime
    Minister’s Department improved policy implementation in
    Malaysia. Although the National Transformation Programme (NTP)
    was implemented by line ministries and agencies, it was coordinated
    and rigorously monitored by PEMANDU. Coordination of the NTP
    from the center of government raised the profile of these initiatives
    and increased the stakes in their successes.
»   Malaysia’s transformation program had a manageable number of
    high-level priorities, which were broken down into detailed tasks.
    PEMANDU then helped the implementing ministries create
    implementation routines with deadlines, assigned responsibilities
    and measurable performance indicators. Ku Kok Peng, Executive
    Vice President of PEMANDU, emphasized the need for
    transformational leaders to be ruthless about prioritization and
    executing it through the discipline of action. Driving this process
    from the Prime Minister’s Department, PEMANDU relies on
    ministries, departments and agencies to implement the NTP, which
    in turn creates commitment, coordination, and collaboration among
    government agencies to deliver outcomes to citizens.

»   Malaysia’s government worked closely with business leaders to
    improve the regulatory environment. Malaysia enabled effective
    interactions between the government and businesses through the
    “Special Taskforce to Facilitate Business”, or PEMUDAH in Bahasa
    Malaysia (BM, Malaysia’s national language), which took charge of
    the regulatory reform. Made up of government and business
    captains, PEMUDAH has helped re-engineer business processes and
    reduce the steps required to provide licenses and business permits.
    Dato’ Latif Abdul Abu Seman, Deputy Director General of the
    Malaysia Productivity Corporation, spoke passionately at the
    conference about how this process has helped businesses focus on
    productive activities rather than spend time on filling forms.




The government of Lao PDR was exploring ways to improve the
management of the civil service, contain its wage bill, and create a more
performance-oriented civil workforce. The World Bank Governance and
Macro Fiscal Management teams conducted a knowledge exchange
between Malaysia and Lao PDR.

The wage bill currently represents an estimated 8.4 percent of GDP,
which is significantly higher than its ASEAN peers. At the same time,
public-sector employees are an estimated 2.8 percent of the population,
which is well above the 1.1 percent global average for developing
countries. With the current fiscal challenges, including a fiscal deficit of
around 6 percent of GDP in the fiscal year 2015-2016, and a public debt
increasing to around 70 percent of GDP, such a large wage bill is unlikely
to be sustainable. The World Bank is providing advice in this area
through its ongoing Public Expenditure Analysis.

Over the past decades, Malaysia has instituted several reforms focused
on increasing the performance orientation of its civil service. It has also
introduced measures, such as early exit for civil servants, to help
constrain the high wage bill.




        Malaysian authorities continue to work on similar
        issues like those of their counterparts from Lao
        PDR, while having experimented with various
        reform measures and have gleaned valuable
        lessons.

To better understand the civil service reform issues in Lao PDR, the
World Bank’s Malaysia-based team met with the team in Vientiane. They
then worked with the Malaysian Public Service Department to identify
the right officials to travel to Vientiane to share their experience with the
Lao PDR Ministry of Home Affairs (MOHA) and Ministry of Finance
(MOF).

The knowledge-sharing workshop took place in Vientiane with about 40
government officials actively participating. Three Malaysian officials
presented Malaysia’s experience in reforming pay and compensation, job
analysis, performance appraisal, and human resource management
information systems, while the World Bank team provided global
references and helped moderate the workshop.

As a next step, the World Bank discussed a follow-up knowledge-
exchange visit by the Malaysian officials that would go even deeper: a
week of coaching where they would work with the Lao counterparts on
specific issues such as developing job descriptions. Moving forward, the
World Bank will now be able to discuss a more detailed plan to continue
to support the government of Lao PDR on its civil service compensation
and performance agenda.

The proof will ultimately be in the ability of Lao PDR to adapt these
lessons to its own civil service reforms. These results will take time to
materialize. However, this event was successful in that it facilitated a
targeted, problem-driven knowledge exchange of the experience from
Malaysia to Lao PDR.



This article was first published on World Bank’s East Asia & Pacific On the
Rise, appearing on two blogs on World Bank engagement with Vietnam and
Laos. To access these blog posts, visit bit.ly/WB_Vietnam and
bit.ly/WB_Laos.

                   is Senior Public Sector Specialist at the World Bank,
based in the Global Knowledge and Research Hub in Malaysia.

                      is a Senior Governance Specialist in the World
Bank Vietnam Country Office.

                is a Senior Public Sector Management Specialist at the
World Bank, based in Lao PDR Country Office.

                    is a Consultant at the World Bank.
The Global Symposium on Microfinance
“Revolutionizing Microfinance: Insight. Innovation.
Inclusion”, held in May 2017 in Kuala Lumpur, was
an opportunity to develop a better understanding of
how microfinance institutions (MFIs) can be a part
of the evolving financial services ecosystem.
Global Symposium on Microfinance:
Revolutionizing Microfinance: Insight,
Innovation, Inclusion
FINANCIAL SERVICES for poor households has evolved from traditional
microcredit – specialized service providers offering a single basic
financial product – to financial inclusion. Today, both individuals and
businesses can access and use multiple financial services provided by
formal financial institutions. Low-income households need access to the
full range of financial services to generate income, build assets, smooth
consumption, and manage risks.

Today, the term “microfinance” generally refers to a broad set of financial
services tailored to fit the needs of low-income individuals. This has led
to a broader focus on the financial ecosystem, characterized by a
multidisciplinary approach bringing together finance, technology, and
development economics.

At its core, low-income people and businesses exist as financial services
consumers, interacting with providers to access financial services.
Multiple market functions are needed to support the core exchange
between supply and demand (see Figure 1), which are performed by a
range of different market actors – both public and private – motivated by
their own capacities and incentives.

By incorporating the interests and incentives of clients and other key
market players, and the influence of rules and supporting functions
about financial service provision, the market system framework
acknowledges that only by understanding the entire system can we
address the constraints to – and take advantage of the opportunities of –
increasing financial inclusion.

        There has been a realization that one-size-fits-
        all solutions do not create resilience, and
        overlapping needs of poor farmers,
        entrepreneurs, and workers are gradually
        recognized, thus developing financial
        products and support services tailored to their
        specific needs.



DEVELOPMENT DIGEST - OCTOBER 2017                                       60
The Global Symposium on Microfinance held on May 22nd and 23rd in
Kuala Lumpur, provided a discussion platform on how emerging digital
innovations can be harnessed to meet the needs and expectations of
individuals and micro and small enterprises.

The Symposium was organized by the World Bank Group Global
Knowledge and Research Hub in Kuala Lumpur in collaboration with
the Central Bank of Malaysia. The forum was also the venue for the
launch of the World Bank’s report on ‘Financial Inclusion in Malaysia”.
Digital technology and data allow financial service providers to more
effectively serve the financially excluded with a “customer-centric”
approach. Using specialized algorithms, providers can analyze
information on a customer’s mobile phone and social media data to
develop the credit profile of a client when they make lending decisions.
These digital footprints help financial service providers interact better
with customers, and provide a range of financial products and services
based on a deeper understanding of their financial needs.



For microfinance institutions, the use of digital channels can mitigate
cash risk and increase operational efficiency. Current microfinance
lending models are cash-intensive, and this exposes the institution and
customer to cash risk, such as during storage and transit, which incurs
additional costs. As such, time that could have been used more
productively is spent managing this risk.



Mobile banking supports new business models through mobile
technology and data analytics in credit scoring, decision and
underwriting processes. However, implementation has been led by
mobile network operators, and to some extent large commercial banks
and a small number of new cashless microfinance institutions. While
traditional institutes are known for their expertise in clients’ needs, they
must adapt and develop more capacity to stay competitive and relevant
to take advantage of mobile banking services or those that are soon to
become available in their countries. Additionally, crowdfunding can
improve access to finance for unserved and underserved borrowers
which creates cheaper, community-based financial products, and
facilitates access to digital investments for people with limited options to
receive financial returns on their savings.



There is a need for a range of different financial service providers, be it
banks and non-banks (telecommunications companies or FinTechs). Just
like Uber and Airbnb, which transformed the transportation and hotel
industries, innovation in algorithm-based credit risk assessment,
psychometrics testing and crowdfunding platforms are bound to change
the financial services industry.
Microfinance institutions and FinTechs face similar challenges in
building trust around new digital financial services, and ensuring
reliable and stable service delivery takes time. The latter is often limited
by poor telecommunications and energy infrastructure, especially in
remote areas. Providers should establish communication channels and
complaint resolution mechanisms which can address customers’ risk
perceptions. Using approaches like assisted digitization (step-by-step
demonstrations of processes that show transactions in passbooks or
receipts) to help the client transition to digital financial services should
also be considered.



Clients of new digital technologies may face new risks ranging from poor
customer recourse mechanisms, fraud, data privacy and security breach,
service unavailability, hidden fees, discrimination, and insolvency. It will
be critical for financial service providers to meet user expectations to
achieve financial inclusion.




An estimated two billion adults remain excluded from the formal
financial system. Bridging this financial access gap will require
incorporating new and diverse technologies to transcend the need for
traditional brick-and-mortar service delivery.

        The era of digital technologies and big data
        presents new opportunities to create better
        products that are tailored to customer needs,
        while addressing some of the challenges
        around transparency, fair treatment, and
        recourse.
Traditional MFIs need to adapt to rapidly changing financial services
ecosystem or risk falling behind. FinTech and other financial services
innovators have created low-cost commercial models that can be
leveraged by financial institutions to increase operational efficiency and
offer a wider array of products to low-income populations and MSMEs.
These fundamental changes to the financial services ecosystem driven by
innovation and digital technologies highlight the new and uncharted
risks that both regulators and providers need to acknowledge and
proactively address by re-thinking policy and risk management
frameworks as these are critical to reinforcing customer trust.

Even with alternative delivery channels, providers can still use face-to-
face interactions with MFI staff to deepen client engagement and build
relationships, due to the efficiency gains from technology. Partnerships
between mobile network operators and FSPs, and between platform
providers and financial institutions, demonstrate the role of building on
the core competencies of each partner to provide services that can meet
the needs of previously-unbanked customers.




This article highlighted key ideas raised at the 2017 Global Symposium on
Microfinance: “Revolutionizing Microfinance: Insight, Innovation, Inclusion”.
For more information on the symposium, visit bit.ly/GSM2017.

                       is Senior Financial Sector Specialist with the World
Bank Group.

                                is Senior Financial Sector Specialist with
the World Bank Group.

                 was Consultant with the Finance and Markets Global
Practice of the World Bank Group.
Using firm-level survey data collected by the World
Bank’s Enterprise Surveys (ES), the overall level of
women’s presence in Malaysia’s formal private
sector is analyzed as well as its distribution across
different firm-types. Malaysia’s experience is
benchmarked against the average for the following
comparator groups: other countries in the East Asia
& Pacific (EAP) region, upper-middle-income
countries and lower-middle-income countries.
              percent of all workers in Malaysia’s private sector are
women. This is at par with upper-middle-income countries and higher
than lower-middle-income countries, but lower than the regional
average (figure 1A). Malaysia outperforms only two countries in the
region - Vietnam and the Philippines where women equal 28 and 32
percent of all workers respectively. A roughly similar picture emerges
when looking at the proportion of women workers on a per-firm basis
(figure 1B).



  Figure 1: The proportion of women workers in Malaysia’s private
sector is comparable to the same in upper-middle-income economies

    Figure 1A: % of all workers in the private sector that are women




 Figure 1B: % of all workers in a typical private firm that are women




Source: Enterprise Surveys
About 64 percent of all women workers in Malaysia are employed in
large firms (100+ employees), 16 percent in medium firms (20 to 99
workers) and 20 percent in small firms (five to 19 workers). However,
distribution of men workers is almost similar, implying no gender-
specific bias by firm-size. Lack of gender-specific bias is also evident
when looking at the firm-level average. That is, the proportion of workers
that are women is roughly same for a typical small (34 percent), medium
(35 percent) and large firm (35 percent) in Malaysia. The above results
are also true for the comparator groups (Figure 2).



    Figure 2: Large firms employ most Malaysian women workers
             % of all women workers in differing firm sizes




Source: Enterprise Surveys



By sector, most women workers in Malaysia, 61 percent, are employed
in the manufacturing sector and only 14 percent in retail and 26 percent
in other services sectors. The high share of manufacturing here is also
observed in the comparator countries but less so than in Malaysia (Figure
3). In Malaysia, men workers are also disproportionately concentrated in
the manufacturing sector but not as much as women workers. Thus, there
is some bias in Malaysia among women workers relative to men workers
in favor of manufacturing and to some extent, retail, and against the other
services sectors. The stated bias is also observed in other countries; it is
more pronounced in the EAP region but less pronounced in upper- and
lower-middle-income countries.
   Figure 3: Manufacturing sector employs most Malaysian women
                              workers
               % of all women workers in firm sectors




Source: Enterprise Surveys




Women as top managers of the firms may open doors for other women
as employees as they are unlikely to discriminate against women job
candidates (the so-called “revolving door hypothesis”). Similarly, firms
that provide training to workers may be particularly attractive for
women workers who often lag behind men in technical education and
job experience. The ES data confirm both these hypotheses for Malaysia.

        A typical Malaysian firm with a female top
        manager has 45 percent workers who are
        women compared with 30 percent for a firm
        with a male top manager.
Similarly, 39 percent of workers are women in a typical Malaysian firm
that provides training versus only 33 percent otherwise. For the
comparators, only the revolving door hypothesis is confirmed.

Globalization or export orientation has also been linked to more jobs.
However, we find no such link for the case of Malaysia or the upper-
middle-income group, although the EAP region and lower-middle-
income countries do confirm the linkage.
A lingering concern is that women may be concentrated in low-paying
and vulnerable jobs relative to men. Is this the case for the private sector
in Malaysia? The ES data show that there is no tendency for women
workers in Malaysia to be disproportionately present in low-labor-
productivity firms or in firms with low sales and employment growth
rates. Whether women are engaged in less productive and dynamic
occupations within the same firm relative to men is the subject of future
research.




The role of labor laws in affecting employment is discussed in detail in
the literature. Here, we focus on six specific laws as compiled by the
World Bank’s Women, Business and Law (WBL, 2016) project. The laws
cover the following questions: Does the law mandate nondiscrimination
based on gender in hiring? Is it prohibited for prospective employers to
ask about family status? Is dismissal of pregnant workers prohibited?
Are mothers guaranteed an equivalent position after maternity leave?
Are employers required to provide break time for nursing mothers? Are
parents entitled to flexible/part-time schedules? A “yes” answer to these
questions implies that the law is gender-neutral or favorable to women’s
employment and unfavorable otherwise.

Malaysia’s is far behind all the comparators. In Malaysia, only 17 percent
of the laws (one out of six laws considered) is gender-neutral or favorable
towards women. In contrast, the corresponding figure is much higher at
39 percent in EAP, 45 percent in upper-middle-income and 46 percent in
the lower-middle-income group.

        Malaysia may further improve women’s labor
        market participation by appropriate reform of
        some of its labor laws.
The article looks at various issues related to women’s employment in
Malaysia’s formal private sector. Share of women among all workers in
Malaysia’s private sector is comparable to that in upper-middle-income
countries. Roughly consistent with men, most women workers are
employed in large firms. There seems to be bias among women workers
relative to men workers towards manufacturing and against other
services sectors. As expected, training provided by firms and having a
woman top manager is associated with a much higher share of women
workers at the firm than is the case otherwise. Changes in some labor
laws may help to further improve the presence of women workers.



This article is based on a more detailed Enterprise Note to be published by
Enterprise Analysis Unit, DECIG, World Bank.

                    is Senior Economist in Malaysia Country Office and
Enterprise Analysis Unit, DECIG, World Bank.

                   is Consultant in the Enterprise Analysis Unit, DECIG,
World Bank.
In the last decade, there has been a revival of
interest in industrial policies among policymakers
around the world. In principle, industrial
policymakers should eliminate relative distortions
across sectors, resolving or taking advantage of
externalities and spillovers in some sectors relative
to others.
                ministers around the world what they are worried about,
and they will likely reply “how to spur economic growth.” They all think
they must do something, but the question is what exactly. In the
aftermath of the economic crisis of 2008-2009, there has been a revival of
interest in industrial policies as governments looked for ways to increase
productivity in the face of severely constrained finance. Are industrial
policies the best instrument to increase productivity? Or is investing in
public goods a better use of scarce resources? Since the heydays of
industrial policies in the 1960s, these questions have been hotly debated.

Industrial policies consist of targeted government interventions to
promote specific economic sectors with the aim of increasing their
productivity and spreading positive externalities throughout the
economy. The main theoretical justification for industrial policies is the
need to address market imperfections.

In an environment with full information and strong governance, the
optimal design of industrial policies is in principle a simple matter:

         Policymakers should invest selectively to take
         advantage of the externalities and spillovers
         that some sectors have relative to others.
In practice, however, governments face two key issues: their imperfect
knowledge of existing constraints, incentives, and opportunities across
the economy; and their vulnerability to corruption, manipulation, and
rent-seeking. Developing countries—which tend to have weaker
institutions and lower capacity to implement complex policies—may
thus face greater risks when pursuing industrial policies.

Can the uncertainty about which sectors to invest in be overcome? Dani
Rodrik proposes that industrial policy be viewed as a discovery process,
whereby the public and private sectors collaborate to identify underlying
costs and opportunities10. In a recent report11, the Inter-American
Development Bank describes several instances of collaboration across

10
   Rodrik, Dani, Industrial Policy for the Twenty-First Century (November 2004). KSG
Working Paper No. RWP04-047. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=617544 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.617544
11
   Inter-American Development Bank: Rethinking Productive Development: Sound Policies
and Institutions for Economic Transformation -
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/6633#sthash.RJ7QnDd3.dpuf
Latin America, including the sugarcane industry in Argentina, the
tourism industry in Costa Rica, and shipbuilding programs in Uruguay.
This type of public-private collaboration, however, is hampered by the
risk that the private sector might profit from its informational advantage
and derive excessive rents by capturing government. Consider, for
instance, the case of the rice industry in Costa Rica: Private involvement
in the institution in charge of managing policies for the rice sector have
resulted in excessive support to rice producers and a decrease in
agricultural productivity. Consider also the recent experience in
Tunisia12: Firms highly connected to former president Ben Ali were found
to be most present in protected sectors including telecoms, automobiles,
and tourism.

          Governments, therefore, face a dilemma: To
          overcome the uncertainty that clouds the
          design of industrial policies, collaboration
          with the private sector may be necessary, but
          this could lead to state capture.



Not all industrial policies are the same, however. They can vary between
“vertical” policies that favor specific firms or narrow sectors and
“horizontal” policies that target broad sectors by improving their
business environment. The more “horizontal” these policies are, the more
they approach the characteristics of public goods. Countries around the
world have implemented industrial policies with varying degrees of
success.

An analysis of Chilean industrial policy, for instance, describes the use of
several vertical and horizontal policy instruments, though with a
growing emphasis on the latter in recent years13. Horizontal industrial
policies used in Chile include guarantees for loans to small enterprises,
subsidies to new exports, and a program to foster innovation; while
vertical industrial policies feature the creation of a semi-public
entrepreneurial institution—Fundación Chile—and a program to attract


12
   Freund, Caroline; Nucifora, Antonio; Rijkers, Bob. 2014. All in the family : state capture
in Tunisia. Policy Research working paper; no. WPS 6810. Washington, DC: World Bank
Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/440461468173649062/All-in-the-
family-state-capture-in-Tunisia
13
   Inter-American Development Bank: Industrial Policy in Chile -
www.iadb.org/en/research-and-data/publication-details,3169.html?pub_id=idb-wp-170
foreign direct investment in technology. As is often the case with vertical
industrial policies, Fundación Chile has had a few huge successes,
including the development of the salmon and blueberry industries, but
also many failed projects, such as the cultivation of the southern hake.

         Given the risks associated with industrial
         policies, policymakers should consider the
         best match between their government
         capacity and the type of policy to be pursued.
Vertical policies require greater capability to both implement policies and
avoid corruption than do horizontal policies. For example, while tax
incentives have been widely used to attract new investment and spur
economic growth, including in Singapore and Korea14, the cost of
implementing and enforcing these policies can be particularly high15.
Further, these implementation costs generally increase with the
complexity of subsidies and taxes involved in vertical industrial policies.
A committee reviewing the use of tax incentive policies in Papua New
Guinea16, for instance, highlighted a concern about the challenges of
implementing or effectively monitoring research and development and
infrastructure incentives in the face of scarce administrative and technical
capacity.




In a recent paper, we review the debate on industrial policies. Moreover,
we present an analytical framework that captures the informational
problems and trade-offs that policymakers face when choosing public
goods (e.g., public information, infrastructure, and law and order) or
targeted industrial policies (e.g., firm or sector-specific subsidies, grants,
and tax breaks). The model attempts to capture the possibility that
private entrepreneurs may misrepresent information about the social
value of their firms or industry in order to obtain special treatment from


14
   Vito Tanzi & Parthasarathi Shome, 1992."The Role of Taxation in the Development of
East Asian Economies," NBER Chapters, in: The Political Economy of Tax Reform,
NBER-EASE Volume 1, pages 31-65 <https://ideas.repec.org/h/nbr/nberch/8512.html>
15
   Ha-Joon Chang, 2010. "Industrial Policy: Can We Go Beyond an Unproductive
Confrontation?," Working Papers 2010/1, Turkish Economic Association.
<https://ideas.repec.org/p/tek/wpaper/2010-1.html>
16
   PNG Tax Committee. 2014. "Papua New Guinea Taxation Review (2013-2015), Issue
Paper No.5: An Examination of the Advantages and Disadvantages of Tax Incentives."
Papua New Guinea.
the government. We explore an optimal industrial and tax policy that is
robust to uncertainty about firm-specific productivity. It requires,
however, substantial government capacity, as the planner must be able
to set firm-specific taxes that are a function of firms’ claimed
productivity. The model then explores sub-optimal but simpler policies,
which are more appropriate when the planner does not have the ability
to set up an elaborate tax and compliance system. In this more realistic,
context, the model finds that providing public goods tends to be
preferable to industry or firm-specific industrial policies.

Evidence and theory point in the same direction: When there is
uncertainty regarding which firms and sectors have the greatest growth
potential and when government capacity is low and subject to
corruption, narrow industrial policies should be avoided in favor of
interventions that benefit the majority of firms and induce competition.

        When the pressure to do something for
        growth is acute and mounting, more public
        goods and less preferential treatment are best.

This article was first published on the Brookings Institution blog, which draws
from “Industrial Policies vs Public Goods under Asymmetric Information” by
Constantino Hevia, Norman Loayza, and Claudia Meza-Cuadra (World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper No. 6628). To download the paper, visit
bit.ly/WB_asymmetry.

                    is Lead Economist in the Development Research
Group at the World Bank.

                          is Assistant Professor of Economics at
Universidad Torcuato di Tella.

                              was Research Assistant in Macro Economics
and Growth, World Bank.
Assessments of uncertainty embedded in forecasts
are often missing. Accounting for this uncertainty
around baseline predictions, particularly in policy-
making and investment, is critical in making better
and more informed decisions. Here, a procedure to
assess risks associated with an economic or social
random variable is introduced. The procedure relies
on a Bayesian information-theoretical approach,
which allows the inclusion of judgment and
forecaster expertise.
The Bayesian Way
REGARDLESS OF the field, forecasts are widely used and yet
assessments of the embedded uncertainty—the magnitude of the
downside and upside risks of the prediction itself—are often missing.

Particularly in the areas of policy-making and investment, the
relationship between informed decisions and knowledge about foreseen
risks remains central. The lack of suitable predictive models and
rudimentary rules of thumb leaves policy-makers and investors making
decisions without proper knowledge of risks associated with a random
phenomenon.

Especially in economics, the construction of proper predictive models
should be of top priority before a policy or investment assessment is
generated. If a model is not able to predict outcomes reliably, it should
not be used as a policy benchmark.

        A density forecast is a risk management tool
        that helps depict and quantify risks, expected
        returns, or measures related to the risks
        associated with the forecasted variable. For
        policy-making purposes, the density forecasts
        help contextualize the risks associated with a
        policy variable and its outcomes.
To construct reliable density forecasts, a Bayesian information-theoretical
method that can be used is introduced here. The construction of reliable
forecasts is done using a combination of ex-post and ex-ante information,
for which the introduced method quantifies and evaluates the embedded
uncertainty in density predictions. The procedure includes
decompositions of ex-ante variance and skewness of the predicted
random variable. The ex-ante variance and skewness are decomposed in
risk factor shares. These variance and skewness decompositions
highlight the importance of ex-ante risk factor behaviors in shaping the
density forecasts.

Under a noisy informational framework, the introduced Bayesian
methodology adopts the Kullback-Leibler/relative-entropy function. Ex-
post (actual) and ex-ante (estimated) information could come with
measurement errors and other types of irregularities; hence, the Bayesian
entropy method relies on a principle that optimizes the noise around the

DEVELOPMENT DIGEST - OCTOBER 2017                                        77
predictions as information becomes available. As a Bayesian procedure,
it is desirable to incorporate prior information to improve the accuracy
of generated density forecasts.

        While established forecasting systems should
        be revised to enhance the quality of
        predictions, it means nothing if there are no
        transparent mechanisms to evaluate the
        forecasts’ reliability.
Elicited density forecasts are evaluated here via scoring rules, which are
statistics that quantifies, in ex-post manner, released forecasts’ accuracy.
A scoring rule is defined as a numerical ranking, based on the predictive
probability distribution and the materialized event. Proper scoring rules
provide forecasters an incentive to elicit their best, most accurate
predictions. Transparent scoring rule frameworks are encouraged to
distinguish forecasting skill heterogeneity. Further, sequential
compilation of scoring rule outcomes will allow future forecast
enhancements.

The objective of a proper scoring rule framework is twofold: to evaluate
the density forecast, and to incentivize the generation of better
predictions. In terms of evaluation, the scoring rule measures the quality
of elicited density forecasts. It also rewards the forecaster for his or her
probability predictions, and ranks density forecast outcomes. From the
perspective of forecast generation, a scoring rule has two purposes: to
encourage forecasters to make careful assessments, and to ensure that
forecasters retain their honesty during the process.

Although a few institutions and companies have achieved some progress
in generating probabilistic forecasts, they are still scarce and – when
available – are not clearly evaluated. Some central banks and financial
institutions have implemented predictive densities to assess inflation,
GDP growth, market volatility, exchange rates, etc. Examples include the
International Monetary Fund, Bank of England, the Reserve Bank of
India, and the European Central Bank, among others.

Information extracted from surveys on expectation and implied statistics
of forecasting models can be useful in assessing the uncertainty in
predictive density forecasts. While the use of ex-ante information is
becoming more common to predict uncertainty, there is still some
disagreement regarding its predictive power.


DEVELOPMENT DIGEST     OCTOBER 2017                                      78
        The Bayesian framework allows the incorporation
        of subjective and prior information on some
        parameters and statistics.
It is known that forecasters disagree in beliefs and in assigning prior
distributions. On that account, the methodology is flexible, to exploit
these differences in beliefs. Predictive densities need to be evaluated;
otherwise, the forecast exercise becomes meaningless and unreliable. The
prequential forecasting system framework is combined with statistical
“proper scoring rules” to assess the dynamic performance of the
Bayesian entropy-generated density forecasts.

As an alternative to proper scoring rules, the quality, evaluation, and
improvement of density forecasts can be assessed through probabilistic
forecast calibration procedures. Although calibration and scoring rules
are complementary procedures in assessing the quality of forecasts, the
scoring rule framework still allows the forecasters to be rewarded for
their probability predictions, and can be used to directly rank forecasters
or forecasting systems.




Here, the Bayesian entropy (BEN) procedure is introduced and used
empirically to generate density forecasts for solving an information-
theoretical problem. The methodology relies on prior information of
parameters and unobserved statistics, expectations of risk factors
statistics, and a two-piece normal distribution assumption. The
application generates density forecasts of world GDP growth associating
selected risk factors: term spreads, absolute deviations of headline
inflation targets, energy prices, and the S&P 500 index prices.

There are two key advantages of using the BEN procedure. First, prior
information of the underlying unknown and unobserved parameters – or
latent variables – can be incorporated to help the system find less noisy
levels of information. Second, the Bayesian entropy procedure recovers
and processes information when the underlying sampling model is
partly or incorrectly known, and the data is limited, partial or incomplete.

In the empirical application of predicting world GDP growth, the
associated ex-ante market information emerged from term spreads,
absolute deviations of inflation targets, energy prices, and the S&P 500
index prices. The recovered posterior series of the global GDP growth
variance and skewness were used to construct hypothetical BEN-
generated density forecasts. These world GDP growth BEN-generated
forecasts are monthly-elicited across the period of October 2005–August
2015 (See Figure 1). They were evaluated via the continuous ranked
probability score (CRPS), a proper scoring rule that measures the
reliability of the resulting forecasts. The unweighted and weighted
average CRPS scores show that the Bayesian entropy fan charts
outperform the naïve density forecasts, which are generated by a rule of
thumb using historical forecast error information and symmetric normal
distribution assumptions.



Figure 1: World GDP Density Forecast and Skewness Decomposition

                 Density Forecast: August 2015 Prediction




             Balance of Skewness: August 2015 Prediction




Source: Author
Noticeably, the estimated monthly BEN-generated density forecasts for
world GDP growth show predominantly negative values of skewness –
downside skewed density forecasts – across the time span of October
2005–August 2015. This spotlights two aspects of the model: its easiness
to incorporate prior information such as historical overprediction of
world GDP growth, and its ability to minimize noise under the relative
entropy setup.




Informed decisions are required to consider potential upside and
downside outcomes. For policy-making and investment purposes,
predictive models that consider the modeling of asymmetric density
forecasts provide superior reliability and decision-making advantage. In
addition, the generation of forecasting procedures that allow the
incorporation and updating of prior information is encouraged to obtain
more flexible models to enhance the reliability of elicited density
forecasts. Revision of established prequential systems is important in
practice to enhance forecast scores. The proper scoring rule framework is
also encouraged to transparently track the reliability of the predictions.

Assigning proper scores, such as the CRPS, provides strong incentives
for the forecaster to elicit his or her best and honest density predictions.
Evaluation of density forecasts through proper scoring rules brings
transparency and the opportunity to distinguish the heterogeneity of
forecasting model accuracy and forecaster skill.

        The recording of scoring rule rankings will
        allow the comparison of future predictions:
        forecasters and methods. This compilation of
        scores will help incentivize forecasting
        improvements.

For the full text of the Policy Research Working Paper, diagrams and reference
list, visit bit.ly/WB_uncertainty.

                          is an economist in the World Bank
Development Research Group.
