CONFIDENTIAL
FOR RESTRICTED USE ONLY (NOT FOR USE BY THIRD PARTIES)




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM

MEXICO

SISTEMA DE PAGOS ELECTRÓNICOS
INTERBANCARIOS (SPEI)
ASSESSMENT OF OBSERVANCE OF THE CPMI-IOSCO
PRINCIPLES FOR FINANCIAL MARKET INFRASTRUCTURE
JULY 2016




                       THE WORLD BANK GROUP
                       FINANCE & MARKETS GLOBAL PRACTICE
                       LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN VICE PRESIDENCY
                                                            CONTENTS

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................................................... i
II. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................... 1
III. OVERVIEW OF THE PAYMENT, CLEARING AND SETTLEMENT LANDSCAPE ...... 2
IV. SUMMARY ASSESSMENT .................................................................................................. 5
V. DETAILED ASSESSMENT REPORT ................................................................................. 11

Principle 1: Legal basis ................................................................................................................ 11
Principle 2: Governance ............................................................................................................... 16
Principle 3: Framework for the comprehensive management of risks ........................................ 25
Principle 4. Credit risk ................................................................................................................. 30
Principle 5. Collateral .................................................................................................................. 34
Principle 7: Liquidity risk ............................................................................................................ 36
Principle 8: Settlement finality .................................................................................................... 42
Principle 9: Money settlements .................................................................................................... 45
Principle 13: Participant-default rules and procedures ................................................................ 46
Principle 15: General business risk .............................................................................................. 49
Principle 16. Custody and investment risks ................................................................................. 51
Principle 17: Operational risk ...................................................................................................... 53
Principle 18. Access and participation requirements ................................................................... 63
Principle 19. Tiered participation arrangements .......................................................................... 67
Principle 21: Efficiency and effectiveness ................................................................................... 68
Principle 22: Communication procedures and standards ............................................................. 71
Principle 23: Disclosure of rules, key procedures, and market data ............................................ 72

VI. BANCO DE MEXICO’S RESPONSE TO THE ASSESSMENT ........................................ 74


Table 1: Ratings Summary of the Principles ................................................................................. 7
Table 2: List of Prioritized Recommendations for the FMI .......................................................... 7

Figure 1: The Mexican National Payments System ....................................................................... 2
                                  GLOSSARY

ACH       Automated clearinghouse
AML       Anti-money laundering
BANXICO   Banco de México
BIA       Business impact analysis
BCMS      Business Continuity Management System
BCP       Business continuity plan
BMV       Bolsa Mexicana de Valores
BONDES    Bonos de Desarrollo del Gobierno Federal
BREMS     Bonos de Regulación Monetaria
CASP      Centro de Atención de los Sistemas de Pagos
CCEN      Cámara de Compensación Electrónica Nacional
CECOBAN   Cecoban, S.A. de C.V.
CETES     Certificados de la Tesorería
CFT       Combating the financing of terrorism
CCP       Central counterparty
CCV       Contraparte Central de Valores de México, S.A. de C.V.
CD        Certificates of deposit
CEP       Comprobante electrónico de pago
CLS       Continuous Linked Settlement
CNBV      Comisión Nacional Bancaria y de Valores
COAS      Cliente de Operación Alterno del SPEI
COSO      Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
CSD       Central securities depository
CONSAR    Comisión Nacional del Sistema de Ahorro para el Retiro
CNFS      Comisión Nacional de Seguros y Fianzas
CPMI      Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure (formerly CPSS)
CPSS      Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems
DGTI      Dirección General de Tecnologías de la Información
DNS       Deferred net settlement system
DSP       Dirección de Sistemas de Pagos
DVD       Delivery versus delivery
DVP       Delivery versus payment
ETF       Estaciones de trabajo fortalecidas
FMI       Financial Market Infrastructure
FSAP      Financial Sector Assessment Program
ILS       Inyección de Líquidez Manual
IMF       International Monetary Fund
INDEVAL   S.D. Indeval Institución para el Depósito de Valores, S.A. de C.V.
IOSCO     International Organization of Securities Commission
IPAB      Instituto para la Protección al Ahorro Bancario
ISO       International Standards Organization
IT        Information technologies
KC        Key consideration
LFGTOC    Ley General de Títulos y Operaciones de Crédito
LTOSF     Ley para la Transparencia y Ordenamiento de los Servicios Financieros
MXN       Mexican peso
PFMI      Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures
POA       Procedimiento de Operación Alterno
PVP      Payment versus payment
RTGS     Real time gross settlement system
RSP      Módulo Reportos para Proporcionar Liquidez al Sistema de Pagos
RTO      Recovery time objective
SHCP     Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público
SLA      Service-level agreement
SIAC     Sistema de Atención a Cuentahabientes
SML      Securities Market Law
SOA      Operacion en Sitio Alterno
SPEI     Sistema de Pagos Electrónicos Interbancarios
SPEUA    Sistema de Pagos Electrónicos de Uso Ampliado
SPID     Sistema de Pagos Interbancarios en Dólares
SSS      Securities settlement system
STP      Straight-through-processing
SWIFT    Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication
TESOFE   Tesorería de la Federación
TOR      Terms of reference
USD      US dollar
VPN      Virtual private network
WB       World Bank
  I.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.      The Sistema de Pagos Electrónicos Interbancarios (SPEI) is an important pillar of
a complex payment and securities settlement infrastructure, through which the payments
of various markets are settled with finality. SPEI is a near real-time, hybrid electronic funds
transfer system owned and operated by Banco de Mexico (hereinafter, Banxico). It began
operations in 2004 replacing the previous system known as Sistema de Pagos Electronicos de
Uso Ampliado (SPEUA). SPEI processes large-value and retail payments alike, and currently
supports 15 different types of payments. SPEI provides settlement facilities for a number of
payment systems, including the Mexican peso leg of foreign exchange transactions settled at
Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS) Bank. Through SPEI, the Sistema de Depósito,
Administración, y Liquidación de Valores (DALÍ) – the securities settlement system operated
by INDEVAL – conducts its money settlements in central bank money based on Model 3
Delivery versus Payment (DVP). In addition, two payment card switches (Prosa, E-Global),
and the recently-established mobile payments clearinghouse (Sociedad Operadora de Pagos
Móviles, OPM) also settle their net balances in SPEI, although they are not interfaced with
Banxico. The Treasury of the Ministry of Finance (TESOFE) is a heavy user of SPEI, and has
played a crucial role in the system’s growth. In parallel, other systems and processes settle
directly in Banxico’s general ledger system (Sistema de Atención a Cuentahabientes, SIAC) –
also a systemically important payment system – which has other important functions, such as
the implementation of the monetary policy and intraday liquidity provision.

2.      In 2015, SPEI processed transactions for the equivalent of 10 times the country’s
GDP. Volumes have been growing by an annual average rate of 32 percent over the past five
years. In 2015, SPEI settled of 1.3 million transactions on average per day. SPEI operates on a
continuous basis, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and supports straight-through-processing
(STP) thus allowing crediting customers’ accounts within seconds from settlement. SPEI’s
hybrid settlement mechanism allows optimizing liquidity through netting, while settling
payments virtually in real-time – i.e., every 1.9 seconds on average. SPEI’s effectiveness is
measured against system availability and recovery time targets: in 2015, system availability
was 99.98 percent, and recovery time was measured at 30 minutes from the disruption. As of
April 2016, there were a total of 106 participants, including Banxico, of which 45 are
commercial banks and 18 are broker-dealers, and the rest represent a wide range of supervised
non-bank financial institutions.

3.      SPEI largely observes the PFMI. It is supported by well-founded legal basis, and
sound governance arrangements. It has developed a comprehensive risk management approach
with an emphasis on operational risk management. Business continuity and information
security policies are shaped according to internationally-accepted commercial standards. In
light of its design, it has limited exposure to financial risks, although it does take these risks
into account and mitigates them to a great extent. It fulfills a critical role in the national
payments system and the financial markets, and has facilitated the participation of a wide range
of financial institutions. Banxico pursue a sensible policy of recovering operational costs in
full, while decreasing participants’ fees over time. Banxico has disseminated SPEI’s key rules
and procedures, and other materials; also, it has completed the CPMI-IOSCO Disclosure
Framework.

4.      At the same time, a few areas and opportunities for improvement have been noted
in this report in light of enhancing PFMI observance. Some of these opportunities relate to
enhancing the comprehensive risk management framework to incorporate risks that, although


                                                i
do not stem from SPEI’s processes (e.g. credit and liquidity risk, participants’ default rules and
procedures with regard to intraday repo), have a bearing on its funding and settlement flows.
In this regard, international standards require that the haircut methodology also incorporate
assumptions of collateral value in extreme market conditions, and is independently validated.
SPEI’s governance, its efficiency and transparency would benefit from a formal participants’
consultation mechanism; among other objective, this body would ensure access to the FMI
decision-making by all participants on an equal footing. Risk management governance could
be strengthened in light of the emphasis that the PFMI place on this issue, and without prejudice
to the Board’s and Governor’s roles and responsibilities, by obtaining the Board’s endorsement
of SPEI risk management policy including risk-tolerance. Banxico should consider articulating
the risk-based access requirements, and establishing specific procedures for facilitating the
suspension and orderly exit of a participant that breaches, or no longer meet, these
requirements. Finally, other relatively minor suggestions have been provided that could be
taken up in the normal course of business.




                                                ii
 II.   INTRODUCTION

Assessor and objectives

5.       This report contains the assessment of the Sistema de Pagos Electrónicos
Interbancarios (SPEI) owned and operated by Banxico. This assessment was undertaken in the
context of the IMF-WB Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) to Mexico in April and
May 2016. The assessor was Maria Teresa Chimienti, World Bank Group. The assessor would
like to thank the Mexican counterparts for their excellent cooperation and generous hospitality.

6.      The objective of the assessment has been to identify potential risks related to the
financial market infrastructure (FMI) that may affect financial stability. While safe and
efficient FMIs contribute to maintaining and promoting financial stability and economic
growth, they may also concentrate risk. If not properly managed, FMIs can be sources of
financial shocks, such as liquidity dislocations and credit losses, or a major channel through
which these shocks are transmitted across domestic and international financial markets.

Scope of the assessment

7.      The scope of the assessment includes one systemically important payment system. SPEI
is assessed against all relevant principles of the PFMI. Banxico operates another systemically
important payment system – SIAC. Although this system falls outside of the scope of this
assessment, relevant aspects of SIAC that have a bearing on SPEI’s operations have been taken
into account. A detailed assessment of SIAC against the PFMI was not undertaken. In light of
the limited scope of this assessment, a jurisdictional assessment of the Authorities’
Responsibilities was not undertaken.

Methodology and Information used for the Assessment

8.      The information used in the assessment includes relevant national laws, regulations,
rules, and procedures governing the system and other available material. Other available
material included annual reports, SPEI disclosure framework, websites of Banxico and other
stakeholders; and other relevant documents. The assessment also benefited from discussions
with systems’ participants.

9.     The authorities prepared and shared the CPMI-IOSCO Disclosure Framework for SPEI.
Additional references to those shared in the disclosure framework became relevant in the
course of the discussions, and were shared with the assessor by the Banxico’s team.

10.    This assessment is based on information available as of May 2016. Information
available after May 2016 as well as planned reforms that had not been completed by May 2016
have not been taken into account in determining the assessment ratings.




                                               1
III.   OVERVIEW OF THE PAYMENT, CLEARING AND SETTLEMENT
       LANDSCAPE

12.    Banxico has taken a lead role in developing a comprehensive national payments system
(NPS). Banxico itself operates a number of the systems that comprise the Mexican payment,
clearing, and settlement landscape, SPEI being at the core of NPS (see Figure 1).

                   Figure 1: The Mexican National Payments System




•      In addition to SPEI, systemically important payment systems comprise the Sistema de
       Atención a Cuentahabientes, SIAC – a central bank-operated system for managing the
       current accounts that financial institutions and other public sector entities keep at
       Banxico through which it implements the monetary policy and also administers
       intraday liquidity. SIAC is a real-time gross settlement (RTGS) system, and has been
       operating since 1990. It fulfills the criteria set out in Payment Systems Law, thus is
       listed as one of the systems to which the Law applies. Every month, SIAC processes
       219 payment per day on average, for a total value of MXN 30,266 million.

•      INDEVAL is the only authorized central securities depository (CSD). It provides
       deposit and custody services for all securities registered in the Registro Nacional de
       Valores (RNV) and traded on Mexican financial markets. It operates a securities
       settlement system (SSS) – Sistema de Depósito, Administración, y Liquidación de
       Valores (DALÍ). DALI settles all kinds of operations with Mexican securities, which
       include government and private bonds, and equities. DALI also settles operations with
       foreign securities. INDEVAL also provides sub-custody services through cross-border
       CSD links. In addition, DALI provides securities lending and borrowing services.
       Balances in the DALI cash accounts are at all times fully backed by deposits in central




                                              2
        bank money in SPEI. DALI is a payment system 1 according to the criteria of the
        Payments System Law. DALI’s operations reach 15,000 per day, for an average value
        of about MXN 3,005 trillion.

•       Contraparte Central de Valores de México, S.A. de C.V. (CCV) is a central counterparty
        (CCP) for stocks traded on the Bolsa Mexicana de Valores (BMV). CCV is operated
        by the BMV who is also its main shareholder. CCV is a direct participant in DALI.
        CCV does not qualify as a payment system under the Payments System Law.

•       ASIGNA Compensación y Liquidación (ASIGNA) is the CCP for all derivatives
        contracts traded on MEXDER market and, starting in 2014 owing to a change in the
        regulatory framework, on trading platforms. ASIGNA is also a subsidiary of BMV.
        ASIGNA is not covered under the Payments System Law.

•       Banxico provides trade repository (TR) services, consistently with its mandate to foster
        financial sector development and the smooth functioning of the payment systems.

13.     In April 2016, Banxico launched the Sistema de Pagos Interbancarios en Dólares
(SPID) with the objective to facilitate and increase the efficiency of local USD-denominated
interbank transfers. This system allows reducing the heavy reliance on correspondent banks in
the US and on cheques in USD. SPID participants are banks that offer USD accounts to legal
persons in Mexico, and that meet enhanced anti-money laundering/combating the financing of
terrorism (AML/CFT) requirements. Banks maintain USD account in SIAC which they use to
fund their USD settlement accounts in SPID. The system allows no credit between participants
or with Banxico.

14.    There are a number of private sector and central bank-operated retail payment systems,
which are listed below:

•       Cámara de Compensación Electrónica Nacional (CCEN) is an automated
        clearinghouse authorized by Banxico to clear and settle cheques, interbank bank credit
        transfers and debit transfers on a T+1 basis. It is owned and operated by CECOBAN
        whose shareholders are 37 financial institutions. Net balances are settled with finality
        in SIAC.

•       PROSA and E-Global are two inter-connected payment card switches operated by two
        different consortiums of banks. Both settle net balances in SPEI, although they are not
        interfaced with Banxico.

•       Sociedad Operadora de Pagos Moviles de Mexico (OPM) is a recently licensed (March
        2015) clearinghouse for mobile-initiated bank transfers. It is owned by two banks and
        a mobile network operator. OPM settles in SPEI although it is not interfaced with this
        system.

•       Directo a Mexico is a service that allows sending money from a bank account in the US
        to any bank account in Mexico by establishing a direct link between the Mexican and
        American payment systems. Directo a Mexico was set up by Banxico and the US.

1
 DALI is a securities settlement system, the term “payment system” in the Payments System Law refers to a
systemically important financial market infrastructure.


                                                     3
       Federal Reserve. Since 2003, the system can be used to send government pension
       payments to recipients in Mexico. As of 2004, payments can be sent from any enrolled
       USA financial institution to any individual with a bank account in Mexico. Mexican
       migrants to the US can also send remittance payments to any of the 2,200 L@ Red de
       la Gente branches to beneficiaries in Mexico.

Regulation, supervision and oversight of FMIs

15.    The authorities responsible for the regulation, supervision and oversight of FMIs in
Mexico are the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito
Público, SHCP) – for the CSD/SSS and CCPs, the National Banking and Securities
Commission (Comisión Nacional Bancaria y de Valores, CNBV) – for the CSD/SSS and
CCPs, and Banxico for payment systems and FMIs in general.

16.     The faculties of Banxico to regulate and oversee payment systems are grounded in the
Banco de México’s Law and the Payments System Law. With regard to CSD/SSS and the
equity CCP, the Securities Market Law (SML) entrust the SHCP with the licensing of these
FMIs, and provides Banxico with broad powers to regulate and supervise them in conjunction
with the CNBV (e.g. prior authorization of internal regulations and amendments). It is worth
noting that by law Banxico participates in INDEVAL’s Board of Directors as an independent
member. Finally, the Tripartite Rules (Reglas a las que habrán de sujetarse los participantes
del mercado de contratos de derivados) issued by the SHCP, the CNBV, and Banxico also
confer to the latter extensive regulatory and supervisory powers with regard to the derivatives
CCP, some of them it exercises together with the CNBV. The regulation of the TR function
rests on Banxico’s Rules for Derivatives Transactions, which require financial institutions to
report all their derivatives transactions to Banxico.

17.    Banxico regulates and oversees retail payment systems on the basis of Banco de
México’s Law, the Ley para la Transparencia y Ordenamiento de los Servicios Financieros
(LTOSF) and a number of central bank regulations including Circular 3/2012 (Disposiciones
Aplicables a las Operaciones de las Instituciones de Crédito y de la Financiera Rural), Circular
4/2014 (Reglas Aplicables a las Cámaras de Compensación para Pagos con Tarjeta), and
Circular 3/2013 (Reglas para Cámaras de Compensación de Transferencias a través de
Dispositivos Móviles).

Planned reforms

18.     For the last several years, Banxico has been working to improve the functionality of
SPEI to conform to market needs. Since the last FSAP, the following developments are worth
noting in the context of this assessment: (i) the expansion of the operating hours to a 365/24/7
operating scheme – among other objectives, this development enables the efficient provision
and interoperability of mobile-based transfer services; (ii) the reform of the pricing policy
which resulted in decreased participants’ fees; (iii) the application of the PFMI which, among
other aspects, has led to the development of a comprehensive risk management framework and
the publication of the CPMI-IOSCO disclosure framework; and (iv) related to the previous
point, the development of (draft) policy and functions of Banxico with respect to FMIs,
including central bank-operated systems such as SPEI.

19.    To complete the “SPEI vision” Banxico has committed to enhancing further the
operational risk management of SPEI, with an emphasis on business continuity (e.g. by further


                                               4
enhancing backup infrastructure) and information security, as well as scalable capacity. In
addition, Banxico has identified the need to elaborate more detailed rules particularly for
situations of non-compliance, and to establish a formal participants’ consultation/feedback
mechanism.


IV.     SUMMARY ASSESSMENT

20.     At the outset, it should be noted that SPEI is a robust and sound FMI. It has adopted
international best practices and standards in all of the PFMI areas, particularly with regard to
legal basis, governance, operational risk management, access, efficiency, and transparency –
and fully observes several of the principles that are applicable to it.

21.     Five of the principles that are applicable to SPEI have been assessed as “broadly
observed”. These indicate non-serious issues of concern in the area of risk management
governance, stakeholders’ involvement (a cross-cutting issue to governance, efficiency, and
transparency), comprehensive risk management framework, and risk-based participation
requirements and orderly exit. None of the principles applicable to SPEI were assessed as
“partly observed” or “not observed”.

22.    The principles that were assessed as “broadly observed” and the rationale are described
below:

•       Principle 2 – Governance. Banxico has an explicit commitment towards the safety and
        efficiency (i.e. “smooth functioning”) of the payment system as a whole. This is laid
        down in article 2 of the Banco de México’s Law and supported in SPEI’s legal basis.
        SPEI’s governance derives from Banxico Internal Regulations and the Administrative
        Units Ascription Agreement whereby the Directorate General of Payment Systems and
        Corporate Services is entrusted with the administration of SPEI through the Payment
        System Department. The Banco de México’s Board of Governors has broad powers to
        decide upon internal policies as appropriate, but unlike internal audit, the risk
        management function does not report directly to the Board of Governors. In light of the
        emphasis that the PFMI place on risk management governance (Principle 2, KC 7), and
        without prejudice to the Board’s and Governor’s roles and responsibilities 2, it is
        recommended that SPEI risk management policy including risk-tolerance be endorsed
        by the Board of Governors. Banxico informs SPEI participants prior to implementing
        system changes. However, there is no obligation to collect participants’ opinions, nor
        did Banxico establish a formal mechanism for consultations.

•       Principle 3 – Framework for the comprehensive management of risks. The main
        risk that Banxico has identified relates to operational issues that could disrupt system’s
        operations. The framework for management of risks in SPEI is stipulated in the
        “Framework for the Comprehensive Management of Risks applicable to SPEI”, dated
        March 2016. This framework set out the procedures for risk identification and periodic
        evaluation. Risk management relies on preventive control measures including policies,
        procedures, and manuals. The scope of SPEI’s risk management framework includes
        the risks that arise in the system, those that derive from interdependencies with other

2
 See CPMI, “Application of the Principles for financial market infrastructures to central bank FMIs”, August
2015.


                                                      5
    systems, as well as those posed by the participants. On the other hand, Banxico should
    take a more integrated approach to risk identification and evaluation including of
    financial risks to the extent relevant to SPEI, and ensure that risk controls are applied
    consistently. The operational risks from interdependent FMIs are managed under the
    umbrella of business continuity arrangements that include all systems operated by
    Banxico and through the participants’ alternate operating procedure. SPEI provides
    participants with both positive and negative incentives to manage appropriately their
    risks.

•   Principle 5 – Collateral. SPEI as such does not undertake credit risk; however,
    Banxico is exposed to credit risk to the extent that it provides intraday liquidity through
    repos. On the other hand, current account overdrafts do not have any credit risk
    implications being these fully collateralized with cash at the central bank (e.g. depósitos
    de regulación monetaria). To mitigate credit risk from intraday repos, Banxico requires
    highly liquid collateral characterized by low credit and market risk. Collateral securities
    are marked-to-market daily, and Banxico’s valuation practices are prudent. Haircuts are
    conservative and have proved stable over time. The haircut ratios are updated once
    every three months. However, Banxico does not incorporate hypothetical extreme price
    moves in the haircut methodology. Moreover, the latter is not independently validated.
    The collateral management system (Módulo de Reportos para Proporcionar Liquidez
    al Sistema de Pagos, RSP) is operated efficiently through a link with the central
    securities depository and securities settlement system.

•   Principle 18 – Access. SPEI open access and participation requirements facilitate the
    broad subscription of the system by Mexican financial institutions (as long as
    regulated). Participation requirements are risk-based and justified in light of the
    systemically important nature of the system. However, these requirements are not
    publicly disclosed beyond a general requirement for prospective participants to certify,
    at Banxico’s discretion, their technical preparedness to operate in the system. Finally,
    although Banxico’s powers to suspend or terminate a participant are clear, there are no
    clearly defined and publicly disclosed procedures for facilitating the suspension and
    orderly exit of a participant that breaches, or no longer meet, SPEI participant
    requirements.

•   Principle 21 – Efficiency. Through SPEI, Banxico has been effective in
    accommodating the payment and settlement needs of Mexican financial institutions,
    and it proactively sought market development opportunity (e.g. through interoperability
    of mobile payments). All participants interviewed have confirmed that the system meets
    their needs and shared positive feedback. Non-bank financial institutions report to have
    benefited greatly from direct access to the payment system, particularly in terms of cost-
    efficiency. At the same time, it is perceived that stakeholder involvement is uneven. A
    structured feedback mechanism with broad participation would help ensure that
    multilateral discussions are held regularly and reflect the views and opinions of a
    significant share of SPEI participants.




                                            6
                              Table 1: Ratings Summary of the Principles

             Assessment category                                    Principle
            Observed                          Principles 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 13, 15, 16, 17, 22, 23
            Broadly observed                  Principles 2, 3, 5, 18, 21
            Partly observed
            Not observed
            Not applicable                    Principles 6, 10, 11, 12, 14, 19, 20, 24

                    Table 2: List of Prioritized Recommendations for the FMI
                   Issues of Concern
                                                                                     Relevant     Comments and
Principle         and Other Gaps or                 Recommended Action
                                                                                      Parties       Priority
                     Shortcomings
   2        Currently, participants’            In consideration of the wide        Banxico     In a defined timeline
            notification and consultation       subscription of SPEI services by                (< 1 year). It is
            rely on informal mechanisms.        a diverse set of financial                      understood that
                                                institutions, establish a Users’                Banxico is in the
                                                Group or similar mechanism to                   process of
                                                facilitate stakeholders’ access                 developing terms of
                                                and inputs to SPEI decision-                    reference (TORs)
                                                making on an equal footing (see                 for the participants’
                                                also Principle 21).                             forum.
   2        The PFMI emphasize the              In light of PFMI emphasis on        Banxico     In a defined timeline
            independence and access to          risk management governance,                     (< 1 year).
            the board of an FMI’s risk          and without prejudice to the
            management and audit                Board of Governors’ and the
            functions (P2, KC7). Unlike         Governor’s roles and
            the latter, risk management         responsibilities, SPEI’s risk
            does not report to the Board of     management policy including
            Governors. The Board has            risk-tolerance should be
            broad powers to decide upon         endorsed by the Board.
            internal policies as
            appropriate.
   3        Identification and evaluation       Financial risks to the extent       Banxico     In a definite timeline
            of risks (e.g. business impact      relevant should be embedded in                  (< 1 year).
            analysis, risk map), and the        SPEI’s risk management
            risk controls that have been        framework. For example, RSP
            devised under the                   limits, collateral valuation
            Comprehensive Risk                  practices, and haircut
            Management Framework                methodology are the relevant
            applicable to SPEI address          risk management measures of
            mostly risks of an operational      Banxico’s exposures to credit
            nature.                             risk as a result of providing
                                                intraday repos to SPEI’s
                                                participants. These measure
                                                should be integrated in /
                                                coordinated with the broader risk
                                                management framework.
   5        Haircuts do not incorporate         Incorporate assumptions about       Banxico     In a defined timeline
            hypothetical extreme price          collateral value during stressed                (< 1 year).
            moves.                              market conditions into the
                                                haircut methodology and
                                                undertake regular stress testing.




                                                           7
                   Issues of Concern
                                                                                      Relevant        Comments and
Principle         and Other Gaps or                 Recommended Action
                                                                                       Parties          Priority
                     Shortcomings
   5        An independent validation of       International standards               Banxico        In a defined timeline
            the haircut methodology is not     recommend that haircut                               (< 1 year).
            available.                         procedures should be
                                               independently validated at least
                                               annually.
   18       SPEI rules refer to a              Compile and disclose risk-based       Banxico        In a defined timeline
            certification of technical         participation requirements in                        (< 1 year).
            preparedness to participate in     SPEI
            the system, but do not
            elaborate on risk-based
            participant requirements.
   18       Banxico has powers to              Define and publicly disclose          Banxico        In a definite timeline
            suspend or terminate a             procedures for facilitating the                      (< 1 year)
            participant that in Banxico’s      suspension and orderly exit of a
            determination poses a risk to      participant that breaches, or no
            the system or does not comply      longer meet, SPEI participant
            with system’s requirements.        requirements.
            However, suspension and
            orderly exit procedures are
            missing.
   21       While Banxico has been             Implement a formal / structured       Banxico        In a definite timeline
            generally responsive to market     feedback mechanism through a                         (< 1 year).
            needs, it has not yet              Users’ Group/participants forum
            implemented a formal /             with representation from all
            structured feedback                categories of participant (see
            mechanism.                         also Principle 2).

   7        Banxico’s regulations require      Continue to monitor the               Banxico        In the normal course
            that repos between credit          conditions of the provision of                       of business.
            institutions and broker-dealers    repos to broker-dealers using
            with funds from repos with         funds from repos with Banxico,
            Banxico have the same              with a view to ensure that this
            characteristics as the latter      tool can be used efficiently when
            repos, and increase the            needed.
            intraday credit limits
            applicable to banks who
            provide this facility, the
            conditions including amount
            and pricing of intraday repos
            with broker-dealers depend on
            each bank’s policies.
   8        Unsettled (pending) payments       Alternatively, Banxico could          Banxico        In a definite timeline
            may be revoked until they are      consider requiring the consent of                    (< 1 year). Banxico
            settled with finality, including   the beneficiary institution for the                  will analyse the
            topology        T        payment   revocation of a payment                              convenience of
            instructions. The 2012 FSAP        instruction initiated with                           eliminating topology
            recommended that topology T        topology T (and of which the                         T.
            be reviewed since most             beneficiary institution has
            systems do not notify incoming     received notification).
            payments that have not yet
            settled with finality.
   16       A disclosure framework is not      DALI should be assessed at            Regulatory
            available for DALI.                frequent intervals and the            and
                                               disclosure of its rules, key          supervisory
                                               procedures, and market data           authorities,
                                               according to the CPMI-IOSCO           INDEVAL



                                                           8
                  Issues of Concern
                                                                                    Relevant     Comments and
Principle        and Other Gaps or                 Recommended Action
                                                                                     Parties       Priority
                    Shortcomings
                                               disclosure framework format
                                               enforced
   17       Service-level targets have         Formalize service-level targets     Banxico     In a definite timeline
            been established for CASP;         for SPEI main services (e.g.                    (< 1 year).
            SPEI’s availability and            processing speed)
            recovery time are tracked.
            However, service-level targets
            concerning SPEI’s core
            processes have not been
            formalized.
   17       The system runs on one             SPEI capacity planning should       Banxico     In the normal course
            server; in an extreme yet          aim to achieve a sufficient level               of business. It is
            plausible scenario, delays can     of confidence that service-level                understood that
            occur that can jeopardize          objectives (e.g. required                       Banxico is exploring
            (near) real-time settlement.       processing speed) will be                       options to move to
                                               maintained under a wide range                   multiple servers.
                                               of plausible stress scenarios.
   21       SPEI processes low-value           Consider establishing and           Banxico     In the normal course
            payments, of which most are        tracking indicators of usage and                of business.
            customer-to-customer               cost-efficiency of SPEI for users
            interbank transactions – in        as part of the formal mechanisms
            fact, these payments represent     for the regular review of its
            the second most important          efficiency and effectiveness
            payment type by volume.
            However, indicators of usage
            and cost-efficiency for final
            users are not embedded in the
            formal mechanisms for the
            regular review of the system’s
            efficiency and effectiveness.
   21       Banxico did not publish a          Banxico should complete and         Banxico     In a definite timeline
            disclosure framework for           publish de CPMI-IOSO                            (< 1 year). Banxico
            SIAC. There is a strong            Disclosure Framework for SIAC                   published the
            interdependence between            with the objective to enhance                   document “Policy
            SIAC and SPEI, e.g. for the        transparency on the services                    and functions of
            provision of intraday liquidity.   provided by Banxico through                     Banco de Mexico
                                               SIAC that have a direct bearing                 with respect to
                                               on SPEI’s operations.                           FMIs”
                                                                                               which addresses
                                                                                               these issues.
                                                                                               Besides, Banxico
                                                                                               has plans to update
                                                                                               the SIAC´s
                                                                                               assessment against
                                                                                               the PFMI in the
                                                                                               midterm (the
                                                                                               currently published
                                                                                               SIAC´s assessment
                                                                                               is against the core
                                                                                               Principles).
   22       Banxico does not use               Evaluate on a regular basis the     Banxico      Banxico has asked
            international communication        opportunity to migrate to                       SPEI participants
            standards, although it             internationally accepted                        several times
            accommodates SWIFT for             communication standards. This                   regarding the
            CLS payments and for               issue is a candidate topic for                  convenience of
            Mexican banks’ correspondent       discussion and consultation in                  using a standard
                                               the context of the envisaged /                  (e.g. Swift),



                                                          9
                   Issues of Concern
                                                                                     Relevant     Comments and
Principle         and Other Gaps or                 Recommended Action
                                                                                      Parties       Priority
                     Shortcomings
            banking services (for further      recommended participants’                        participants have
            credit transactions).              forum.                                           expressed
                                                                                                preference for the
                                                                                                current
                                                                                                communication
                                                                                                protocol. However,
                                                                                                Banxico will
                                                                                                continue to discuss
                                                                                                with participants,
                                                                                                through the
                                                                                                participants’ forum,
                                                                                                the convenience of
                                                                                                adopting an
                                                                                                international
                                                                                                standard.
   23       De facto, SPEI provides            Include in SPEI rules a clear        Banxico     In a definite timeline
            timely notice to participants of   obligation to notify participants                (< 1 year).
            material changes in SPEI rules     with respect to both changes in
            and procedures that may affect     rules and fees. Specify and
            participants’ operations.          formalize the process for
            However, SPEI rules and            consulting SPEI participants and
            procedures do not require          other relevant parties as
            notification of changes.           appropriate about the proposed
                                               changes (e.g. timeline of the
                                               consultation process and the
                                               tools that will be used for
                                               obtaining participants’
                                               feedback).
   23       Variable fees are attached to      Banxico could consider
            the SPEI Rules. Fixed fee are      increasing transparency on SPEI
            dependent upon Banxico’s           operating costs as a basis for the
            determination of its operating     calculation of the annual fixed
            costs and the volumes              fee.
            transacted (see SPEI Rules).




                                                          10
 V.    DETAILED ASSESSMENT REPORT

PRINCIPLE 1: LEGAL BASIS
An FMI should have a well-founded, clear, transparent, and enforceable legal basis for each
material aspect of its activities in all relevant jurisdictions.
Key consideration 1 The legal basis should provide a high degree of certainty for each
                          material aspect of an FMI’s activities in all relevant jurisdictions.
Description               Material aspects and relevant jurisdictions

                       The legal framework supporting SPEI activities is comprised of the Banco
                       de México’s Law, and the Payments System Law.

                       Material aspects for SPEI are: (i) finality and irrevocability of payments,
                       and, SPEI being a hybrid system, (ii) netting. In addition, although from
                       an operational standpoint intraday liquidity (collateralized repos and
                       current account overdrafts) through which Banxico supports financial
                       institutions’ liquidity management is not provided through SPEI, these
                       have a bearing on SPEI participants and its operations. Therefore,
                       enforceability of securities interests provided under repo agreements also
                       qualify as material aspects.

                       The only relevant jurisdiction for all aspects identified above is Mexico.

                       Legal basis for each material aspect

                       Art. 2 of the Banco de México’s Law confers to Banxico the powers to
                       regulate payment systems to fulfill its mission to ensure its smooth
                       functioning (see art. 2). The Law entrust Banxico with the regulation of
                       payment systems (art. 3). Banxico may also regulate fund transfer services
                       provided by credit institutions or other service providers (art. 31), and is
                       entitled to supervise financial intermediaries and the entities that it
                       regulates to ensure compliance including through inspections. Although
                       Banco de México’s Law does not explicitly address the role of Banxico as
                       payment system operator, Payments Systems Law, recognizes this
                       function, according to its finalities and functions. Art. 7, par. I and II
                       represent the basis for operations involving securities and for granting
                       credit to the Federal Government, the credit institutions, and the deposit
                       insurance institution (Instituto para la Protección al Ahorro Bancario,
                       IPAB).

                       The peso accounts (cuentas únicas) that credit institutions must maintain
                       at Banxico (to be used for the settlement of balances with Banxico or
                       authorized by Banxico) are regulated in Circular 3/2012, art.113. These
                       accounts do not generate interest. Art. 114-115 regulate collateralized and,
                       exceptionally, uncollateralized overdrafts. Art. 114 in particular authorizes
                       the use of the monetary regulation deposits to guarantee overdrafts, in
                       addition to deposits resulting from open market operations and from the
                       process of the calculation of the reference interest rate (TIIE), and deposits
                       in USD at Banxico. In the event of end-of-day negative balance on the
                       cuenta unica, art. 113 establishes that Banxico will apply a penalty fee


                                              11
equal to two times the market rate.

The Payments System Law provides the legal basis for each material
aspect of SPEI with a high degree of certainty.

First, being SPEI a central bank-operated system, it automatically falls
under the definition of payment system of the Payments System Law (art.
2 par. VIII). Art. 3 lists the criteria to be met for payment schemes and
arrangements to quality as payment systems under the definition of the
Law. The Law requires that Banxico publish the list of “recognized”
systems on an annual basis.

Chapter II of the Payments System Law defines the conditions to achieve
settlement finality and irrevocability, which occur once a payment has
been accepted by the system (art. 11). A transfer order is defined as
accepted once it has passed all risk controls established in the rules of the
system and, therefore, can be settled according to the same rules. This
same article also states that bankruptcy, insolvency, and other similar
events shall not affect settlement finality. It is worth noting that settlement
finality also covers securities transfers in light of art. 1 of the Law. Further,
Mexican laws do not contain provisions on the so-called “zero-hour rule”.

The provisions of the Payments System Law on settlement finality are
further articulated in the SPEI rules (Circular No. 17/2010). SPEI rules
define accepted payments as those that have been settled according to art.
5 of the regulations. Therefore, according to SPEI rules, a payment
instruction is not final until after the participants’ accounts have been
affected (debited or credited) and the notification of settlement has been
sent to the participants.

Art. 15 of the Payments System Law prevents the participants’ funds or
collateral provided in a payment system from being seized until the daily
participants’ obligations have been met. Credit institutions’ account at
Banxico – whether in local currency or US dollars – cannot be embargoed.

Netted positions are settled in SPEI, on average, every 1.9 seconds. The
Payments System Law defines clearing as the process whereby –
according to the rules of the system – the participants’ rights and
obligations deriving from the payment orders are replaced by one debit or
credit obligation, without the need for the participants’ explicit consent.
The enforceability, including against third parties, of netting arrangement
is ensured under Chapter II on irrevocability and validity of accepted
payment orders and the resulting obligations, including clearing.

Art. 259 of the Ley General de Títulos y Operaciones de Crédito (LGTOC)
states that a repurchase (repo) operation entails the transfer of ownership
of the underlying securities, and is perfected by the delivery of the same.
Art. 266 of the LGTOC provides that if the party that initially transferred
the securities (reportado) does not repurchase such securities – and the
repo has not been renewed – the operation is considered abandoned, and


                        12
                      the counterparty holding the securities (reportador) may require that any
                      difference in price be paid out. Repo operations between Banxico on the
                      one hand and credit institutions and broker-dealers on the other hand are
                      regulated in Circulars No. 3/2012 (Chapter III) and 115/2002. Art. 131 par.
                      IV of Circular No. 3/2012 (Chapter III) limits the eligible assets to Federal
                      Government bonds (BONDES), IPAB (Instituto para la Proteccion al
                      Ahorro Bancario) securities, Federal Treasury certificates (CETES, with
                      the exclusion of CETES ESPECIALES), Banxico Monetary Regulation
                      Bonds (BREMS), and segregated coupons that belong to the financial
                      institution. In case the counterpart does not repurchase the securities, art.
                      136 establishes that Banxico will (i) keep the securities if these mature on
                      the following operating day or, (iii) automatically renew the repo for the
                      next operating day up to a maximum number of days that Banxico will
                      establish and communicate to the counterpart through the collateral
                      management system, under the assumption that the reiterated renewal of
                      repos is not considered a sound practice. In case of renewal, the regulation
                      allows Banxico to charge a fee to be calculated according to the formula
                      of the art. 137. Moreover, the renewal implies re-calculating the price
                      based on the value of the collateral at close of business day, and will be
                      applied against the participant’s credit limits of the next operating day. As
                      laid out in Circular No. 115/2002, broker-dealers may celebrate repos with
                      credit institutions using the funds that credit institutions have in turn
                      obtained from repurchase operations with Banxico. The conditions of
                      these repos shall be agreed upon by the parties, although its characteristics
                      must be identical to those of the repo operations celebrated between
                      Banxico as the repurchasee and the credit institution as the repurchaser.

                      Banco de México’s Law, art. 14 establishes that the credit granted by
                      Banxico to credit institutions may only be aimed at monetary policy, while
                      art. 15 provides for an exception to this rule to avoid possible disruptions
                      in the payments system. Central bank credit must be collateralized against
                      the deposits that credit institutions hold at Banxico (art. 16). Art. 28
                      establishes that credit institution must constitute deposits at Banxico,
                      known as depósitos de regulación monetaria. Overdrafts of the “cuenta
                      única” are collateralized against these deposits, and also against other
                      MXN and US dollar deposits. Collateralized overdrafts are regulated in
                      art. 115 of Circular No. 3/2012.
Key consideration 2   An FMI should have rules, procedures, and contracts that are clear,
                      understandable, and consistent with relevant laws and regulations.
Description           Circular No. 17/2010 (SPEI Rules), the SPEI Operating Manual, and the
                      contingency manual for operations with CLS Bank International (CLS)
                      complete SPEI’s legal basis. The legal basis are clear and understandable.
                      Participants’ rights and obligations have been clearly elaborated upon in
                      three types of contracts with (i) banks, (ii) broker-dealers, and (iii) non-
                      bank financial institutions.

                      Regulations that have a bearing on SPEI operations are drafted in
                      collaboration with and reviewed by various departments within Banxico.
                      The legal department contributes to the design, adoption and subscription



                                             13
                      of new regulations, thus reducing legal risks and enhancing compliance
                      with the applicable federal laws.

                      In developing SPEI’s legal basis, Banxico did not avail itself of external
                      legal opinions (see KC 1.4).

                      Finally, as per the Banxico’s delegation of authority (Acuerdo de
                      Adscripción de las Unidades Administrativas del Banco de México),
                      payment system regulations are subscribed by the relevant administrative
                      units.

                      Throughout the process of issuing new regulations / amending existing
                      regulation, Banxico maintains an open channel of communication with the
                      participants. This process may also involve ad-hoc meetings with the
                      participants. Although informal consultations are contemplated as a
                      general practice, there is no explicit requirement that new regulations or
                      amendments that might materially impact the participants be placed in
                      public consultation before final approval and entry into force.
Key consideration 3   An FMI should be able to articulate the legal basis for its activities to
                      relevant authorities, participants, and, where relevant, participants’
                      customers, in a clear and understandable way.
Description           In practice, proposed changes to key internal rules, procedures and
                      requirements are consulted with participants. However, a requirement that
                      these consultations be made is not established in SPEI Rules, Operating
                      Manual or elsewhere.

                      Any actual changes to internal regulations are communicated to
                      participants and posted on the SPEI online collaboration site.

                      SPEI Rules are publicly available on the Banxico website; any
                      modifications to SPEI Rules are made available through the Official
                      Gazette of the Federation and through Banxico’s website. Manuals are
                      provided to participants upon joining the system and to other parties with
                      a legitimate interest.
Key consideration 4   An FMI should have rules, procedures, and contracts that are
                      enforceable in all relevant jurisdictions. There should be a high degree
                      of certainty that actions taken by the FMI under such rules and
                      procedures will not be voided, reversed, or subject to stays.
Description           Enforceability of rules, procedures and contracts

                      The only relevant jurisdiction for SPEI is Mexico. All Mexican financial
                      regulations, including those regulations having a bearing on SPEI
                      operations are federal in nature thus ensuring that all participants
                      regardless of their location abide by the same laws.

                      There is no precedence of a SPEI rule of procedure being subject to
                      judicial controversy and/or revoked by any other competent authority.

                      Banxico has the exclusive power to issue regulations applicable to the
                      SPEI.


                                            14
                      Degree of certainty for rules and procedures

                      SPEI rules and procedures are framed under the current legal framework
                      of the country, particularly the Banco de México’s Law, and the Payments
                      System Law – thus ensuring a high degree of certainty.
Key consideration 5   An FMI conducting business in multiple jurisdictions should identify
                      and mitigate the risks arising from any potential conflict of laws
                      across jurisdictions.
Description           The only relevant jurisdiction for SPEI is Mexico.
Key conclusions       SPEI legal basis are comprised of the Banco de México’s Law and the
                      Payments Systems Law, and provide a high degree of certainty for each
                      material aspects of SPEI operations, which include: (i) finality and
                      irrevocability of payments, (ii) netting (SPEI being a hybrid system), and
                      (iii) enforceability of securities interests provided under repo agreements.

                      Circular No. 17/2010 (SPEI Rules), the Operating Manual, and the
                      Contingency Manual for Operations with CLS Bank International (CLS)
                      complete SPEI’s legal basis. The legal basis are clear, understandable, and
                      consistent with the underlying legal framework. Participants’ rights and
                      obligations have been set in contracts.

                      The only relevant jurisdiction for the SPEI is Mexico. All Mexican
                      financial regulations, including those having a bearing on SPEI’s
                      operations are federal in nature.
Assessment of         Observed
Principle 1
Recommendations       Although informal consultations are contemplated as a general practice,
and                   there is no explicit requirement that new regulations or amendments that
Comments              might materially impact the participants be placed in public consultation
                      before final approval and entry into force. The creation of a Users’
                      Committee or similar mechanism (see Principles 2 and 21) should be used
                      as a platform for formal consultations.




                                            15
PRINCIPLE 2: GOVERNANCE
An FMI should have governance arrangements that are clear and transparent, promote the safety
and efficiency of the FMI, and support the stability of the broader financial system, other relevant
public interest considerations, and the objectives of relevant stakeholders.
Key consideration 1 An FMI should have objectives that place a high priority on the safety
                         and efficiency of the FMI and explicitly support financial stability and
                         other relevant public interest considerations
Description              The Banco de México’s Law, art. 2 establishes as Banxico’s priority the
                         stability of the purchasing power of the currency. For these purposes,
                         Banxico shall promote the healthy development of the financial system
                         and the smooth operation of the payments system. Art. 3 entrusts Banxico
                         with the regulation of payment systems.

                        The main objective of the Payments Systems Law is to facilitate the
                        smooth functioning of the payments system (art. 1) through finality and
                        irrevocability of funds and securities transfers.

                        SPEI Rules reiterate the objective of continuing to facilitate the smooth
                        functioning of the payments system; in addition, enhance transparency
                        through the inclusion of consumer protection measures.

                        Finally, Banxico’s draft policy document on FMIs (Politicas y funciones
                        del Banco de México respecto a las infraestructuras de los mercados
                        financieros) lays out Banxico’s objectives with regard to each of the FMIs;
                        in particular, SPEI’s overall objective is to settle participants’ transfer
                        orders in a timely, efficient, and safe manner, and at a low cost, taking into
                        account the needs of both financial markets and retail payments. To
                        achieve this overall objective SPEI (i) will process payments on a near-
                        real time basis; (ii) will not generate credit or liquidity risks; (iii) will
                        provide high service levels to its participants and users through business
                        continuity measures and adequate risk management; (iv) facilitate
                        participants’ provision of payment services and information to their
                        customers.

                        The draft policy emphasizes the public good aspect of payment services
                        which, in order to benefit society, must be convenient, fast, and cost-
                        efficient. Banxico makes an explicit commitment towards (i)
                        accountability – as a way to report on how it discharges its responsibility
                        for the smooth functioning of the payments system; (ii) public disclosure
                        to enhance customers’ confidence in the payment services and; (iii)
                        transparency to facilitate FMIs’ and their participants’ own risk
                        management and compliance.

                        At the institution’s level, medium-term objectives (objetivos
                        institucionales) over a five-year horizon are identified under a number of
                        guiding principles (ejes rectores). Out of nine such principles which
                        comprise 36 objectives, at least six and have some degree of relevance to
                        SPEI / payment systems. In particular, principle 5 seeks to “foster the use
                        of electronic payments, by promoting a regulatory framework that boosts


                                               16
                      efficiency and competition”, and principle 7 aims to “strengthen the
                      internal control system, risk management, and physical and information
                      security of the Bank”. Annual work plans are presented by the heads of the
                      administrative units to the Governor which are aligned with the
                      institution’s medium-term objectives and set out the goals, targets and the
                      necessary budgetary resources to carry them out. Progress is periodically
                      assessed by the senior management and reported to the Governor at least
                      once a year. The Board of Governors is informed of the system’s
                      performance against set targets.
Key consideration 2   An FMI should have documented governance arrangements that
                      provide clear and direct lines of responsibility and accountability.
                      These arrangements should be disclosed to owners, relevant
                      authorities, participants, and, at a more general level, the public.
Description           Governance arrangements

                      SPEI governance arrangements derive from Banxico’s Internal
                      Regulations supported by the Banco de México’s Law.

                      Central bank functions and its administration are entrusted to a Board of
                      Governors and a Governor (art. 38 of the Banco de México’s Law). The
                      Board is comprised of five members. The executive power nominates the
                      Governor who chairs the Board, whereas the remaining Board members
                      are Deputy Governors.

                      The Board of Governors and Governor may establish committees of
                      advisory or decision-making nature. The Audit Committee advises the
                      Board on auditing issues. Its responsibilities are detailed in art. 29 Bis 2 of
                      Banxico’s Internal Regulations. The Audit Committee is comprised of two
                      members of the Board (other than the Governor and the Deputy Governor
                      who chair the Comisión de Responsabilidades) and an independent
                      member designated by the Board.

                      The Governor (art. 47) is tasked with the administration of the Bank, its
                      legal representation, and the exercise of its functions. For the purposes of
                      discharging the responsibilities that the Law attributes to the Governor, the
                      latter counts with the General Directorates and Directorates (see art. 4 of
                      Banxico’s internal regulation). Art. 8 of Banxico’s Internal Regulations in
                      combination with the Administrative Units Ascription Agreement
                      determine the lines of responsibility within Banxico. The ascription of
                      powers to the Directorates General and Directorates implies subscribing
                      all acts that are directly linked to the exercise of these powers, concluding
                      agreements, requesting, providing and publishing information, and
                      collaborating with whomever the administrative units deem appropriate in
                      order to discharge their responsibilities.

                      In 2008, the Operational Continuity Committee was created with the
                      objective of supporting the Governor in coordinating Banxico’s efforts to
                      establish and maintain a culture of risk management and ensure business
                      continuity in situations of contingency. Its tasks include: (i) approving the
                      list of critical processes – being SPEI one of them – as well as the


                                             17
corresponding support processes; (ii) providing opinions on the criteria,
reports, and other issues as determined by the Payment Systems
Directorate (Dirección de Sistemas de Pagos, DSP) in relation to
operational continuity, and; (iii) act as an advisory body to Governor on
operational continuity. The Committee is chaired by the Governor and
comprises the Director General of Comptroller and Risk Management.
The Security Committee and the Committee on Information Technology
are also relevant to SPEI operations.

The attributions of the Directorate of Payment Systems are detailed in
Banxico’s Internal Regulation (art. 20). These include a number of tasks
that have a direct bearing on SPEI operations, e.g.:
  (i) In coordination with the Directorate General of Operations, design,
        prepare and implement the policies for the daily provision of
        liquidity to the payment systems and their participants
  (ii) Develop and maintain the systems administrated by Banxico, as
        well as other systems that are necessary for their proper functioning
  (iii) Manage and operate central bank systems and provide advisory and
        support services to the participants
  (iv) Implement and monitor the proper functioning of the payment
        systems administered by Banxico
  (v) Coordinate, implement, and monitor participants’ operations in the
        payment systems administered by Banxico
  (vi) Handle the charges for the use of central bank-administered
        systems
  (vii) Establish the business continuity policies

In turn, the Payment System Directorate is articulated in Divisions and
Subdivisions.

Disclosure of governance arrangements

The Banco de México’s Law
(http://www.banxico.org.mx/disposiciones/marco-juridico/ley-del-banco-
de-mexico/%7B74481036-5967-73EE-18B1-602D30C646E2%7D.pdf)
and its internal regulations are publicly available (in Spanish)
(
(http://www.banxico.org.mx/disposiciones/marco-juridico/reglamento-
interior/%7B09CEAF1B-897B-85B8-833F-959C4E620B5D%7D.pdf)
Also publicly available is the Administrative Unit Adscription Agreement
(http://www.banxico.org.mx/disposiciones/marco-juridico/acuerdo-de-
adscripcion/%7BEF690DCC-7264-9A22-B91A-
FE97454604D3%7D.pdf).
Banxico’s organizational structure is available on its website
(http://www.banxico.org.mx/acerca-del-banco-de-mexico/organizational-
structure.html)

The disclosure of Banxico’s legal framework, organizational structure,
responsibilities of each area, objectives and targets – among other aspects
of Banxico’s operations – is a requirement under art. 70 of the General


                       18
                      Law on Transparency and Access to Public Information.
                      (http://www.banxico.org.mx/ley-de-transparencia/informacion-que-
                      publica-el-banco-de-mexico-en-cump/informacion-que-publica-
                      banco.html)
Key consideration 3   The roles and responsibilities of an FMI’s board of directors (or
                      equivalent) should be clearly specified, and there should be
                      documented procedures for its functioning, including procedures to
                      identify, address, and manage member conflicts of interest. The board
                      should review both its overall performance and the performance of its
                      individual board members regularly.
Description           The roles and responsibilities of Banxico’s Board of Governors are set
                      forth in art. 46 of the Banco of Mexico’s Law and are further elaborated
                      in Banxico’s Internal Regulations. The Board is responsible for
                      determining the policies and criteria that inform Banxico’s operations, and
                      determines which policies based on their importance warrant prior
                      approval.

                      The Banco of Mexico’s Law specifies the incompatibilities of Board
                      members (arts 39, 42, 43, 60).

                      Review of performance

                      There is no review of Board’s performance as such. The removal of a
                      Board member is decided by simple majority voting of the Board upon
                      request of the President of the Republic or at least two Board members.

                      On the other hand, there exist certain accountability requirements. First,
                      the Governor shall appear each year before the Senate of the Republic to
                      report on the discharge of his/her mandate (art. 47). Second, any of the two
                      Chambers of the Congress of the Union may summon the Governor to
                      account for the Bank’s policies and activities (art. 52).

                      The Federal Law on the Responsibilities of Public Servants is deemed
                      applicable to the members of the Board of Governors.

Key consideration 4   The board should contain suitable members with the appropriate
                      skills and incentives to fulfill its multiple roles. This typically requires
                      the inclusion of non-executive board member(s).
Description           Board members are designated according to the Constitution (Constitución
                      Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, art. 28). The latter specifies
                      that Board members: (i) shall perform their duties over periods of time
                      whose duration and staggering ensure the independent discharge of their
                      responsibilities; (ii) can only be removed for serious cause, and; (iii) may
                      not have other occupations or responsibilities with the exception of those
                      in representation of the Bank or related to educational, scientific, cultural
                      and charitable associations as long as non-remunerated.

                      Board members must enjoy well-established reputation for monetary
                      matters and have occupied high-level positions in the Mexican financial
                      system for a minimum of five years. While for two out of five members it


                                             19
                      is not mandatory to comply with these requirements, all Board members
                      must be distinguished professionals in economic, financial or legal
                      matters.

                      The Governor’s and Deputy Governor’s offices have a duration of six and
                      eight years, respectively. Board members may be re-nominated.

                      The remuneration of the Governor and the Deputy Governors is
                      determined by a committee comprised of the President of the CNBV and
                      by two additional individuals nominated by the SHCP. In determining the
                      remunerations, the committee takes into consideration the existing
                      practices within Banxico and in the Mexican financial sector with the
                      objective to ensure that the Board includes adequate members and the
                      Bank is in a position to attract and retain qualified personnel.
Key consideration 5   The roles and responsibilities of management should be clearly
                      specified. An FMI’s management should have the appropriate
                      experience, a mix of skills, and the integrity necessary to discharge
                      their responsibilities for the operation and risk management of the
                      FMI.
Description           Roles and responsibilities of management

                      The roles and responsibilities of the senior managers are stated in the
                      Internal Regulations and in the profiles of the management positions. The
                      objectives, roles and responsibilities, and deliverables of the Director of
                      the Payment System Directorate are clearly defined. However, the
                      responsibilities as far as risk management in concerned are not clearly
                      documented.

                      Annual review of performance of Banxico’s personnel is carried on the
                      basis of internal regulations on performance management. Senior
                      managers’ annual evaluation on the other hand is carried out according to
                      the criteria set by the Governor.

                      Experience, skills and integrity

                      Banxico’s recruitment policies are rigorous in that candidates must meet a
                      set of pre-determined criteria established in the job profiles. This process
                      involves the assessment of technical and managerial abilities.

                      Banxico’s personnel is subject to regular assessment of their competencies
                      based on internal regulations on competence management. The application
                      of a standardized methodology allows determining the degree of alignment
                      of the personnel’s competences to their respective job profiles. These
                      evaluations support the administration of human resources.

                      To ensure that its employees have the necessary integrity to fulfill their
                      roles, Banxico has issued a number of internal regulations and manuals
                      and established certain enforcement mechanisms, e.g.:




                                            20
                      •      The Institutional Ethics Code establishes the ethical principles by
                             which Banxico’s employees must abide, and the obligations
                             regarding their conduct in the performance of their duties.
                      •      The General Labor Conditions of the Bank of Mexico defines the
                             rights and obligations of Banxico’s employees.
                      •      Banxico keeps a registry of public officers in accordance with the
                             Federal Law of Administrative Liabilities of Public Officers.
                      •      The Liabilities Committee is the organ of Banxico charged with
                             the application of the Federal Law of Administrative Liabilities of
                             Public Officers. It determines the administrative liabilities of the
                             public officers and, where appropriate, imposes penalties. On the
                             other hand, for senior management the Board itself determines the
                             penalties based on information provided by the Committee.
Key consideration 6   The board should establish a clear, documented risk-management
                      framework) that includes the FMI’s risk-tolerance policy, assigns
                      responsibilities and accountability for risk decisions, and addresses
                      decision making in crises and emergencies. Governance arrangements
                      should ensure that the risk-management and internal control
                      functions have sufficient authority, independence, resources, and
                      access to the board.
Description           Risk management framework

                      Art. 46, par. V of the Banco of Mexico’s Law entrusts the Board with the
                      definition of the policies and criteria under which the Bank undertakes its
                      operations. The Law provides that, certain policies are submitted to the
                      Board for approval depending on their importance as determined by the
                      Board itself.

                      Banxico has developed an Internal Control System based on international
                      best practices such as the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
                      Treadway Commission (COSO) guidance. The Internal Control System is
                      defined as the organization and set of activities, regulations, policies,
                      standards and procedures in order to provide a reasonable level of security
                      with respect to certain institutional objectives. It is comprised of five
                      components: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
                      information and communication, and supervision. Each of Banxico’s
                      administrative units is responsible for the implementation of these
                      activities within their area of competence. Process owners are tasked with
                      the identification and administration of the risks inherent to the processes
                      they manage, whereas the Directorate General of Comptroller and Risk
                      Management provides the overall criteria and methodologies. Operational
                      risk is defined as risk caused by human error, organizational or other
                      factors related to equipment and information. The Internal Control System
                      framework is documented in Banxico’s internal regulations.

                      As regards SPEI, the Payment System Directorate (Dirección de Sistemas
                      de Pagos, DSP) and the General Directorate of Information Technology
                      (Dirección General de Tecnologías de la Información, DGTI) are the areas
                      more directly involved in the operation of the system as established in the



                                            21
                      Banxico’s Internal Regulations. In this context, the DSP has established a
                      comprehensive risk management framework for SPEI.

                      The levels of risk tolerance are established based on risk evaluation by
                      impact and frequency of occurrence. The identified risks are mapped to
                      twelve quadrants in a risk map. Accepted risks belong to two categories:
                      (i) risks for which sufficient controls are in place such that the frequency
                      of occurrence is considered very low (note, a risk without preventive
                      controls cannot fall within this category). Risks mapped from low to
                      moderate impact and low to high frequency of occurrence will be
                      addressed subject to there being sufficient available resources. Finally,
                      risks that have a moderate to critical impact and low to high frequency are
                      marked as red in the risk map, which imply taking immediate action to
                      implement controls and obtaining the resources should these not be readily
                      available. It is understood that the risk map is updated annually or more
                      frequently in the context of the update of the SPEI risk management
                      framework.

                      Banxico Internal Regulations address risk management responsibilities. In
                      particular, the Risk Management Directorate is responsible for the
                      identification of relevant risks incurred by the Bank, and for proposing
                      criteria, parameters and methods for determining the amount of exposure
                      to such risks, as well as for risk monitoring. Within its responsibilities, the
                      DSP is tasked with the design, development and implementation of
                      policies for the overall development and smooth operation of payment
                      systems, and establishes the business continuity policies.

                      It is worth noting that risk management is one of the guiding principles
                      that comprise Banxico’s institutional plan, namely Guiding Principle 7 –
                      “Strengthen the internal control system, risk management, security, and
                      physical and information security of the Bank”. Enhancing the operational
                      reliability and business continuity of the payment system is an objective
                      within Guiding Principle 7. The plans and achievement in meeting this
                      objective are regularly reported to the Board.

                      Authority and independence of risk management and audit functions

                      Banxico has an Audit Committee that advises the Board on auditing issues.
                      It is responsible for clearing the annual program of audits proposed by
                      Director of Audit prior to Board’s approval, and follow up on the
                      implementation of the recommendations of internal and external audit.
                      The Director of Audit and the Director General of Risk Management are
                      permanent invitees to the Committee (with voice but no vote). The Audit
                      Committee cannot include the Governor and comprises an external
                      member.

                      In 2015, the DSP was subject to four internal audits (and two external
                      audits).
Key consideration 7   The board should ensure that the FMI’s design, rules, overall strategy,
                      and major decisions reflect appropriately the legitimate interests of its


                                             22
                  direct and indirect participants and other relevant stakeholders.
                  Major decisions should be clearly disclosed to relevant stakeholders
                  and, where there is a broad market impact, the public.
Description       Identification and consideration of stakeholder interests

                  In practice, new regulations or amendments to existing regulations that
                  have a bearing on SPEI operations are notified in advance to the interested
                  parties. It is understood that, depending on the class of participants that
                  would be affected by the changes, Banxico holds meeting / ad hoc
                  consultations with the relevant participants. However, there is no formal
                  mechanism or requirement that formal consultations with the participants
                  are held. In this regard, consultations are mostly held with the association
                  of banks.

                  The Governor and Board of Governors hold meetings with the financial
                  institutions in which issues relating to SPEI may also be raised.

                  Banxico has implemented a help desk (Centro de Atención de los Sistemas
                  de Pagos, CASP) for system users and undertakes surveys that provide
                  important inputs in the overall development strategy of the system.

                  Disclosure

                  There are multiple internal and external channels of communication of
                  major decisions, which include announcing and posting new
                  regulations/amendments in the internal collaboration site, and circular
                  letter, publication in the Official Gazette if appropriate (e.g. for
                  modifications to SPEI rules), and on the Banxico’s website.
Key conclusions   Banxico has an explicit commitment towards the safety and efficiency of
                  the payment system as a whole. This is laid down in article 2 of the Banco
                  de Mexico’s Law, and is supported in SPEI’s legal basis, as well as in
                  Banxico’s draft policy on FMIs. Furthermore, Banxico’s institutional
                  work plan emphasizes payment systems’ operational risk management
                  among other objectives. SPEI’s performance with regard to this objective
                  is measured through system availability and recovery time, and is reported
                  to the Board of Governors regularly.

                  SPEI’s governance derives from Banxico Internal Regulations and the
                  Administrative Units Ascription Agreement whereby the Directorate
                  General of Payment Systems and Corporate Services is entrusted with the
                  administration of SPEI through the DSP.

                  Banxico’s Board of Governors has broad powers to decide upon internal
                  policies as appropriate, including any material decisions related to SPEI
                  risk management. Banxico has established an internal control system
                  which is applied to DSP processes including SPEI under the oversight and
                  overall guidance of the Directorate General of Comptroller and Risk
                  Management. The latter has a reporting line to the Governor. The internal
                  audit department audits the operation of SPEI and reports directly to the



                                        23
                            Board of Governors. Furthermore, the Board has established an Audit
                            Committee.

                            When Banxico makes changes to SPEI that have an impact on participants,
                            it informs them prior to implementing the changes. However, there is no
                            obligation to collect participants’ opinions, nor did Banxico establish a
                            formal mechanism for consultations.

                            Depending on the nature of document, Banxico’s major decisions on SPEI
                            may be disseminated through a range of restricted access or publicly
                            available tools.
Assessment of               Broadly Observed
Principle 2
Recommendations             Currently, notification / consultation practices rely on informal
and comments                mechanisms. In consideration of the wide subscription of SPEI services by
                            a diverse set of financial institutions, it is recommended that Banxico
                            establish a Users’ Group or other formal mechanism to facilitate
                            stakeholders’ access and inputs to SPEI decision-making on an equal
                            footing (see also Principles 18 and 21). It is understood that Banxico is in
                            the process of developing terms of reference (TORs) for the participants’
                            forum.

                            While the audit function has a direct reporting line to the Board of
                            Governors, this is not the case for risk management. In light of the
                            emphasis that the PFMI place on risk management governance (KC 7),
                            and without prejudice to the Board’s and Governor’s roles and
                            responsibilities 3, it is recommended that SPEI risk management policy
                            including risk-tolerance be endorsed by the Board of Governors.




3
  See CPMI, “Application of the Principles for financial market infrastructures to central bank FMIs”, August
2015.


                                                      24
PRINCIPLE 3: FRAMEWORK FOR THE COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT OF RISKS
An FMI should have a sound risk-management framework for comprehensively managing
legal, credit, liquidity, operational, and other risks.
Key consideration 1 An FMI should have risk-management policies, procedures, and
                         systems that enable it to identify, measure, monitor, and manage the
                         range of risks that arise in or are borne by the FMI. Risk-management
                         frameworks should be subject to periodic review.
Description              Risks that arise in or are borne by the FMI

                      The SPEI risk management framework has identified the following risks
                      that arise in or are borne by SPEI:
                          (a) operational risk. It is indicated as the most relevant category of risk
                               applicable to SPEI, given that its materialization would cause the
                               greatest impact on the system. It is categorized into system-related
                               (software and hardware), process-related, human, and external.
                          (b) legal risk. It arises from the unexpected application of laws or
                               regulations, e.g. if SPEI regulations are not fully aligned with
                               federal laws and the provisions of other authorities, or in case of
                               disputes.
                          (c) business risk. Being SPEI a central bank-operated system, business
                               risk would only materialize if its operating costs were
                               underestimated, e.g. as a result of the omission of cost factors or due
                               to an unexpected increase in expenses.
                          (d) custody and investment risk. It arises only with regard to the
                               custody of participants’ securities in DALI which are used as
                               collateral in repo operations with Banxico. In this regard, custody
                               risk would only be applicable under a “broader” approach to risk
                               management in Banxico as opposed to SPEI strictly speaking (see
                               above).

                      In addition:
                          (a) SPEI is not considered exposed to credit risk to the extent that the
                              system as such does not provide credit to the participants, nor
                              participants face credit exposures vis-à-vis each other in SPEI.
                              However, it is recognized that Banxico is exposed to credit losses
                              as a result of intraday liquidity provisions in the form collateralized
                              repos for banks and broker-dealers through RSP. On the other hand,
                              collateralized overdrafts are not deemed as a source of credit risk.
                          (b) liquidy risk is not deemed applicable to SPEI given its design
                              similar to a RTGS system, and that participants’ payment order are
                              processed only if there are sufficient funds in their settlement
                              accounts. However, it is recognized that participants may be
                              exposed to liquidity pressures as a result of mutual payment
                              obligations they incur in the system. To mitigate liquidity risk,
                              Banxico provides intraday liquidity in the form of collateralized
                              overdrafts and repos.

                      Risk management policies, procedures and systems



                                                25
                          The DSP risk management policy is comprised of the following elements:

                          1.        Identification and evaluation of risks. It consists of: (i) mapping of
                                    the processes to identify critical processes and the control points;
                                    (ii) self-assessment of the risks and controls undertaken by the DSP;
                                    (iii) incident data collection and analysis, and; (iv) internal and
                                    external audit. Through the application of these tools, risks are
                                    identified and evaluated on the basis of the frequency of their
                                    occurrence (i.e. the frequency with which a risk may materialize in
                                    a given period) and the impact (i.e. how the risk would affect the
                                    system if it materialized). For the frequency, a period of two years
                                    prior to the measurement is considered, whereby 4 or more events
                                    in the last two years would lead to qualifying the risk as having a
                                    high frequency of occurrence. In order to evaluate the impact of the
                                    risks, the DSP conducts a business impact analysis (BIA). 4
                          2.        Risk control and mitigation. The DSP and the Dirección General de
                                    Tecnologías de la Información (DGTI) seek to reduce the frequency
                                    of occurrence through preventive controls including policies,
                                    procedures, and manuals, or the impact through corrective controls
                                    such as alerts. Once the controls have been applied, the risks are
                                    evaluated again. If controls are in place that prevent a certain risk
                                    from occurring, and there has been less than one incident in the past
                                    two years, the risk’s frequency of occurrence would be rated as
                                    “very low”.
                          3.        Risk tolerance policy. Based on the outcomes of the risk evaluation
                                    after applying the controls and mitigation measures, the identified
                                    risks are placed in a risk map. The risks with very low levels of
                                    frequency (which have preventive controls in place) and those with
                                    low to moderate impact combined with low to high frequency
                                    belong in the green zone of the risk map, i.e. are accepted. Risks
                                    with critical impact or moderate impact but high frequency are
                                    flagged for immediate action.
                          4.        Monitoring. The DSP carries out an annual evaluation of the
                                    controls to validate their consistency with the risk tolerance criteria.
                          5.        Frequency of application. Should a new risk be identified, this is
                                    qualified and registered in the risk map. The necessary controls are
                                    applied consistently with the risk tolerance policy.

                          Review of risk management policies, procedures and systems

                          In addition to points 4 and 5 above, the comprehensive risk management
                          policy is reviewed annually or when one of the following events occur: (i)
                          significant change in the system or the underlying infrastructure; (ii) a
                          change in the regulatory framework; (iii) a change in the organizational
                          structure.

4
  Impact evaluation is based on (i) DSP systems’ response time, i.e. the number of minutes it takes DSP to resume
critical services after a disruptive event, and (ii) the time of the day when the disruptive event might occur, under
the assumption that a disruption during peak times would have a more critical impact. The BIA also takes into
account a number of “non-quantifiable” risks, such as a system-wide lack of liquidity or a loss of confidence of
the systems’ users due to a delay in the crediting of the funds.


                                                         26
Key consideration 2 An FMI should provide incentives to participants and, where relevant,
                    their customers to manage and contain the risks they pose to the FMI.
Description         Each participant of the system has at its disposal comprehensive
                    information and a range of tools to manage the risks it poses to the system.

                       At any time during operating hours, participants are able to monitor their
                       real-time balances, credit and debit transactions performed throughout the
                       day and their queued payments. Participants can set priority payments, and
                       reserve balances for priority payments.

                       Participants must undergo a process of certification aimed to ensure that
                       financial institutions have the necessary operational requirements to
                       operate safely in the system. Once the certification has been obtained,
                       participants must keep Banxico informed of any changes incurred in their
                       infrastructure that may warrant a re-certification. Participants’ information
                       security and operational risk requirements are inspected by Banxico.

                    In addition, Banxico can suspend or revoke participants when they pose a
                    risk to the system or in case of breach of SPEI rules or contract (see SPEI
                    rules, art. 11.9). Participants who do not comply with the terms of the
                    contract also incur in penalty fees as specified in the contracts.
Key consideration 3 An FMI should regularly review the material risks it bears from and
                    poses to other entities (such as other FMIs, settlement banks, liquidity
                    providers, and service providers) as a result of interdependencies and
                    develop appropriate risk-management tools to address these risks.
Description         Material risks

                       Banxico through SPEI does not undertake any credit or liquidity risk as a
                       result of allowing other systems to settle in central bank money. DALI is
                       the only FMI that settles through SPEI. Nevertheless, if DALI were to face
                       problems to complete settlement, this could stress liquidity conditions in
                       SPEI. Intraday liquidity through the RSP system could also be reduced as
                       a result of a disruption in DALI.

                       The DSP has identified the interdependencies of its main services with
                       other entities (intermediaries, services, and applications/systems) as well as
                       their critical nature and the processes involved. In particular, with regard to
                       SPEI:
                          i.    SPEI’s inability to effect real-time transfers is considered to have a
                                high impact on both SPEI/DALI participants and SIAC. CLS
                                processes would also be impacted, although to a lesser extent.
                         ii.    Provision of intraday liquidity by means of collateralized overdrafts
                                from SIAC has a bearing on transfers from SIAC to SPEI and vice
                                versa, whereas a disruption in the RSP system for repo operations
                                is not deemed relevant to SPEI processes (although it is considered
                                very relevant to DALI operations)
                        iii.    .
                        iv.     Other DSP-managed systems, e.g. SPID, do not have a bearing on
                                SPEI processes.



                                                27
                       SPEI business continuity plan also contemplate external risk factors, i.e.
                       the risks that arise from participants, entities external to the DSP, and other
                       types of external events (e.g. natural disasters).

                       Risk management tools

                       From an operational risk perspective, the DSP has taken a DSP-wide
                       approach to risk evaluation (e.g. BIA) and risk management (through the
                       DSP operational continuity management system and business continuity
                       plan) that includes interdependencies between the various DSP-operated
                       systems.

                       To the extent that DALI is a direct participant in SPEI, the operational risks
                       posed and borne by this FMI are mitigated through the participants’
                       alternate operating procedure (Cliente de Operación Alterno del SPEI,
                       COAS) and through more stringent risk-based requirements.

                    At the level of critical third-party service providers, Banxico’s policy is to
                    have redundancy with different providers whenever possible. In all cases,
                    minimum service level agreements (SLAs) are established in contracts.
Key consideration 4 An FMI should identify scenarios that may potentially prevent it from
                    being able to provide its critical operations and services as a going
                    concern and assess the effectiveness of a full range of options for
                    recovery or orderly wind-down. An FMI should prepare appropriate
                    plans for its recovery or orderly wind-down based on the results of that
                    assessment. Where applicable, an FMI should also provide relevant
                    authorities with the information needed for purposes of resolution
                    planning.
Description         Scenarios that may prevent an FMI from providing critical operations and
                    services

                       Banxico does not foresee a scenario, other than the materialization of a
                       major operational risk, where it could be prevented from being able to
                       provide its critical operations and services as a going concern. However, it
                       periodically identifies and evaluates the risks that could materially affect
                       its ability to provide SPEI services as expected. In this context, it has put in
                       place the necessary preventive and corrective controls to minimize the
                       impact of these risks on the availability and service levels of SPEI.

                       Recovery or orderly wind-down plans

                       Not applicable
Key conclusions        The framework for management of risks in SPEI is stipulated in the
                       “Framework for the Comprehensive Management of Risks applicable to
                       SPEI”. This document enables the identification and periodic evaluation of
                       risks, and of the controls that have been put in place to manage these risks.
                       Risk management relies on preventive control measures including policies,
                       procedures, and manuals. Banxico carries out an annual evaluation of the
                       controls to validate their consistency with the risk tolerance policy. The



                                                 28
                  overall framework is scheduled to be reviewed once a year or more
                  frequently (the first revision is due by March 2017).

                  The scope of SPEI’s risk management framework includes the risks that
                  arise in the system, those that derive from interdependencies with other
                  systems, as well as those posed by the participants to the system. From an
                  operational perspective, the risks from interdependencies with SIAC and
                  DALI are managed through the DSP-wide operational continuity
                  management system and business continuity plan, and the participants’
                  certification and alternate operating procedures (Cliente de Operación
                  Alterno del SPEI, COAS), respectively.

                  SPEI provides its participants with the tools for them to manage
                  appropriately their risks. Negative incentives in the form of penalties to the
                  suspension and termination are provided in the SPEI Rules and contracts.
Assessment of     Broadly Observed
Principle 3
Recommendations   The risk management framework concludes that credit and liquidity risks
and comments      are not applicable. Although SPEI as such does not undertake credit or
                  liquidity risks, it is worth noting that:
                      - The PFMI acknowledge that credit risk in payment systems is
                          mainly driven by current exposures from extending intraday credit
                          to the participants (PFMI 3.4.2).
                      - Liquidity risk is defined as the risk that arises when the FMI, its
                          participants, or other entities cannot settlement their payment
                          obligations when due (PFMI 3.7.1).
                      - In light of the above, the assessor has considered intraday repos both
                          as a source of credit risk for Banxico within Principle 4 and as a tool
                          to help manage participants’ liquidity risk within the assessment of
                          Principle 7.

                  Financial risks to the extent relevant should be embedded in SPEI’s risk
                  management framework. For example, RSP limits, collateral valuation
                  practices, and haircut methodology are the relevant risk management
                  measures of Banxico’s exposures to credit risk as a result of providing
                  intraday repos to SPEI’s participants (see Principle 5). These measure
                  should be integrated in / coordinated with the broader risk management
                  framework.




                                           29
PRINCIPLE 4. CREDIT RISK
An FMI should effectively measure, monitor, and manage its credit exposure to participants and
those arising from its payment, clearing, and settlement processes. An FMI should maintain
sufficient financial resources to cover its credit exposure to each participant fully with a high degree
of confidence. In addition, a CCP that is involved in activities with a more-complex risk profile or
that is systemically important in multiple jurisdictions should maintain additional financial
resources sufficient to cover a wide range of potential stress scenarios that should include, but not
be limited to, the default of the two largest participants and their affiliates that would potentially
cause the largest aggregate credit exposures to the CCP in extreme but plausible market conditions.
All other CCPs should maintain, at a minimum, total financial resources sufficient to cover the
default of the one participant and its affiliates that would potentially cause the largest aggregate
credit exposures to the CCP in extreme but plausible market conditions.
Key consideration 1 An FMI should establish a robust framework to manage its credit
                          exposures to its participants and the credit risks arising from its
                          payment, clearing, and settlement processes. Credit exposure may
                          arise from current exposures, potential future exposures, or both.
Description               SPEI uses a multilateral offsetting algorithm running in quick successions
                          (every 1.9 seconds on average) to clear and settle transactions in a
                          topology chosen by the initiating participant. The algorithm selects those
                          transactions that can be settled based on available balances in the
                          participants’ settlement accounts and clears and settles in batch mode.
                          Although this process may overdraw some accounts for a fraction of a
                          second, the complete process does not generate overdrafts. The
                          transactions that cannot be settled remain in the queue. Transactions that
                          cannot be settled by close of business day are cancelled. As a result of this
                          process, participants do not incur in credit risk as such.

                         Moreover, SPEI accounts cannot be over-drafted. Participants fund their
                         operations in SPEI through incoming payments and by means of transfers
                         from the SIAC accounts. The system settles the payments upon verifying
                         that the originating participants have sufficient funds in their accounts.
                         Payments that cannot be settled due to insufficient funds are queued until
                         funds become available. Payments that cannot be settled by the end of the
                         operating day are cancelled. At system’s closures all SPEI balances (if
                         any) are returned to the SIAC accounts or to a concentration account that
                         does not accrue interest (in the case of non-bank participants that do not
                         have an account in SIAC).

                         Banxico does allow banks to overdraft their SIAC current accounts but it
                         does not bear any credit risk from this mechanism, being overdrafts fully
                         collateralized with cash at the central bank (depósitos de regulación
                         monetaria).

                         In addition to current account overdrafts, Banxico provides intraday
                         liquidity through repos to banks and to broker-dealers through banks. The
                         liquidity is credited directly to the cash accounts of the participants in
                         DALÍ, from where it can flow to SPEI as needed. In this context, Banxico
                         has a residual credit exposure which it mitigates by applying conservative
                         haircuts and by limiting the assets it accepts as collateral to those with low
                         credit, liquidity, and market risk. In addition, there are limits to repo


                                                  30
                      operations with Banxico, which are automatically enforced in the RSP
                      system.
Key consideration 2   An FMI should identify sources of credit risk, routinely measure and
                      monitor credit exposures, and use appropriate risk-management tools
                      to control these risks.
Description           Through the RSP system, Banxico monitors and measures the credit
                      exposures arising from repos in real time. Intraday credit limits are updated
                      on a monthly basis and enforced automatically in the RSP system. In
                      addition, banks must inform the maximum limits that they intend to apply
                      to each broker-dealer. The sum of the limits granted by banks to a broker-
                      dealer, and the total amount of repos that a broker-dealer is allowed to
                      negotiate is capped at five times the total capital of the broker-dealer.

                      Banxico requires that repos must be redeemed by close of business day of
                      DALI at 16:15, although it facilitates an additional window through SIAC
                      till 18:30.

                      Securities eligible for the repo transactions are strictly limited to Federal
                      Government bonds (BONDES), IPAB (Instituto para la Protección al
                      Ahorro Bancario) securities, Federal Treasury certificates (CEDES, with
                      the exclusion of CETES ESPECIALES), Banco de México’s Monetary
                      Regulation Bonds (BREMS), and segregated coupons that belong to the
                      financial institution.

                      In addition, Banxico has established stable and conservative haircuts
                      taking into consideration price fluctuations over a period of 10+ years (see
                      Principle 5).

                      Chapter III of Circular No. 3/2012 provides the details of intra-day repo
                      transactions. The details include: (i) types of eligible securities (art. 131);
                      (ii) method of availing intraday repo support through the RSP system (art.
                      133); (iii) limits to intraday repos (art. 134 based on the methodology of
                      Annex 9); (iv) cancellation or rollover of the repo in the event of non-
                      repurchase the securities (art. 136) and applicable penalties (art. 137); (v)
                      repos between banks and broker-dealers with funds from repos with
                      Banxico (Cap. III, Section II); (vi) limits for banks to engage in repos with
                      broker-dealers, (art. 139 based on the methodology of Annex 9), and for
                      broker-dealers (art. 141), and; (vi) cancellation of the repo in the event the
                      broker-dealer does not repurchase the securities from the bank (art. 144).
Key consideration 3   A payment system or SSS should cover its current and, where they
                      exist, potential future exposures to each participant fully with a high
                      degree of confidence using collateral and other equivalent financial
                      resources (see Principle 5 on collateral). In the case of a DNS payment
                      system or DNS SSS in which there is no settlement guarantee but
                      where its participants face credit exposures arising from its payment,
                      clearing, and settlement processes, such an FMI should maintain, at a
                      minimum, sufficient resources to cover the exposures of the two
                      participants and their affiliates that would create the largest
                      aggregate credit exposure in the system.



                                               31
Description           Since SPEI processes fund transfers based on a multilateral offsetting
                      algorithm running in quick successions (every 1.9 seconds on average), in
                      practice there is no credit risk involved.
Key consideration 4   A CCP should cover its current and potential future exposures to each
                      participant fully with a high degree of confidence using margin and
                      other prefunded financial resources (see Principle 5 on collateral and
                      Principle 6 on margin). In addition, a CCP that is involved in activities
                      with a more-complex risk profile or that is systemically important in
                      multiple jurisdictions should maintain additional financial resources
                      to cover a wide range of potential stress scenarios that should include,
                      but not be limited to, the default of the two participants and their
                      affiliates that would potentially cause the largest aggregate credit
                      exposure for the CCP in extreme but plausible market conditions. All
                      other CCPs should maintain additional financial resources sufficient
                      to cover a wide range of potential stress scenarios that should include,
                      but not be limited to, the default of the participant and its affiliates
                      that would potentially cause the largest aggregate credit exposure for
                      the CCP in extreme but plausible market conditions. In all cases, a
                      CCP should document its supporting rationale for, and should have
                      appropriate governance arrangements relating to, the amount of total
                      financial resources it maintains.
Description           Not applicable
Key consideration 5   A CCP should determine the amount and regularly test the sufficiency
                      of its total financial resources available in the event of a default or
                      multiple defaults in extreme but plausible market conditions through
                      rigorous stress testing. A CCP should have clear procedures to report
                      the results of its stress tests to appropriate decision makers at the CCP
                      and to use these results to evaluate the adequacy of and adjust its total
                      financial resources. Stress tests should be performed daily using
                      standard and predetermined parameters and assumptions. On at least
                      a monthly basis, a CCP should perform a comprehensive and
                      thorough analysis of stress testing scenarios, models, and underlying
                      parameters and assumptions used to ensure they are appropriate for
                      determining the CCP’s required level of default protection in light of
                      current and evolving market conditions. A CCP should perform this
                      analysis of stress testing more frequently when the products cleared
                      or markets served display high volatility, become less liquid, or when
                      the size or concentration of positions held by a CCP’s participants
                      increases significantly. A full validation of a CCP’s risk-management
                      model should be performed at least annually.
Description           Not applicable

Key consideration 6   In conducting stress testing, a CCP should consider the effect of a wide
                      range of relevant stress scenarios in terms of both defaulters’ positions
                      and possible price changes in liquidation periods. Scenarios should
                      include relevant peak historic price volatilities, shifts in other market
                      factors such as price determinants and yield curves, multiple defaults
                      over various time horizons, simultaneous pressures in funding and
                      asset markets, and a spectrum of forward-looking stress scenarios in
                      a variety of extreme but plausible market conditions.


                                             32
Description           Not applicable
Key consideration 7   An FMI should establish explicit rules and procedures that address
                      fully any credit losses it may face as a result of any individual or
                      combined default among its participants with respect to any of their
                      obligations to the FMI. These rules and procedures should address
                      how potentially uncovered credit losses would be allocated, including
                      the repayment of any funds an FMI may borrow from liquidity
                      providers. These rules and procedures should also indicate the FMI’s
                      process to replenish any financial resources that the FMI may employ
                      during a stress event, so that the FMI can continue to operate in a safe
                      and sound manner.
Description           Allocation of credit losses

                      If a participant ultimately fails to repurchase the securities under a repo
                      with Banxico, the latter may dispose of the collateral that the defaulting
                      participant has presented.

                      Replenishment of financial resources

                      There is no process to replenish financial resources. Banxico mitigates
                      potential losses arising from intraday repos through collateral with low
                      credit, liquidity and market risks, to which it applies conservative haircuts.
Key conclusions       SPEI as such does not undertake credit risk. Banxico’s exposure to credit
                      risk is limited to intra-day repos, whereas current account overdrafts carry
                      no credit risk being these collateralized with cash at the central bank.
                      Intraday repos with Banxico are collateralized with highly liquid assets
                      characterized by low credit and market risk. Moreover, Banxico applies
                      conservative haircuts. The collateral management system is operated
                      efficiently through a link with the CSD/SSS.
Assessment of         Observed
Principle 4
Recommendations       -
and
comments




                                               33
PRINCIPLE 5. COLLATERAL
An FMI that requires collateral to manage its or its participants’ credit exposure should
accept collateral with low credit, liquidity, and market risks. An FMI should also set and
enforce appropriately conservative haircuts and concentration limits.
Key consideration        An FMI should generally limit the assets it (routinely) accepts as
1                        collateral to those with low credit, liquidity, and market risks.
Description              Securities eligible for the repo transactions are strictly limited to
                         Federal Government bonds (BONDES), IPAB securities, Federal
                         Treasury certificates (CEDES, with the exclusion of CETES
                         ESPECIALES), Banco de México’s Monetary Regulation Bonds
                         (BREMS), and segregated coupons that belong to the financial
                         institution.
Key consideration        An FMI should establish prudent valuation practices and
2                        develop haircuts that are regularly tested and take into account
                         stressed market conditions.
Description              Valuation practices

                       Banxico marks-to-market collateral securities on a daily basis.
                       Banxico’s valuation methodology is provided in Annex 7 of Circular
                       No. 3/2012. Based on the prices provided by two price vendors, the
                       price of the collateral is calculated using a random sampling from a
                       uniform distribution.

                       Haircutting practices

                       Haircuts are defined according to the type of assets and on the basis
                       of historic price volatility, the maturity date, and the term of the
                       (repo, in this case) operation. In practice, Banxico calculates the
                       weighted average of “significantly adverse” percentage changes that
                       the price of the collateral securities may have experienced over a
                       period of time equal to the term of repo operation. Haircut ratios are
                       updated once every three months.
Key consideration      In order to reduce the need for pro-cyclical adjustments, an
3                      FMI should establish stable and conservative haircuts that are
                       calibrated to include periods of stressed market conditions, to
                       the extent practicable and prudent.
Description            The haircut methodology used by Banxico is conservative in that it
                       considers a 10+ year observation period which includes observed
                       extreme prices volatilities.
Key consideration      An FMI should avoid concentrated holdings of certain assets
4                      where this would significantly impair the ability to liquidate such
                       assets quickly without significant adverse price effects.
Description            Banxico does no limit concentrated holdings of certain assets. In fact,
                       the assets it accepts as collateral have low credit, liquidity, and
                       market risks and can therefore be liquidated quickly without any
                       adverse price effects.
Key consideration      An FMI that accepts cross-border collateral should mitigate the
5                      risks associated with its use and ensure that the collateral can be
                       used in a timely manner.


                                               34
Description         Not applicable. Banxico does not accept any cross-border collateral.

Key consideration   An FMI should use a collateral management system that is well-
6                   designed and operationally flexible.
Description         Collateral management system design

                    The collateral management system used is the Módulo Reportos para
                    Proporcionar Liquidez al Sistema de Pagos (RSP) operated by the
                    DSP. The RSP system enables Banxico to extend intraday repo
                    support to banks and broker-dealers in DALI, i.e. liquidity is credited
                    in the cash accounts financial institutions hold at DALI.
                    Alternatively, funds can be credited to SIAC accounts. Liquidity can
                    flow freely between accounts at DALI and SIAC, SIAC and SPEI,
                    DALI and SPEI as necessary during RSP operating hours. SPEI
                    membership does not overlap exactly with SIAC’s and DALI’s
                    though; in fact, while all banks have accounts at all three systems,
                    only a few broker-dealers maintain accounts at SPEI. From a RSP
                    perspective, it is irrelevant whether an institution has an account at
                    SPEI.
                    Through the RSP system, Banxico can dispose of the collateral when
                    applicable.

                    Operational flexibility

                    The RSP system is operationally sound and falls within the scope of
                    the DSP operational risk management framework. As of August
                    2015, RSP availability had reached 99.97 percent. RSP system
                    availability is tracked against a pre-established target, and is
                    regularly reported to senior management.
Key conclusions     Securities eligible as collateral are limited to bonds having low
                    credit, liquidity, and market risks.

                    Collateral securities are marked-to-market daily, and collateral
                    valuation practices are prudent. Haircuts are conservative and have
                    proved stable over time. The haircut ratios are updated once every
                    three months. However, the haircut methodology does not
                    incorporate, or is tested against, assumptions about collateral value
                    fluctuations in stressed market conditions. An independent validation
                    of the haircut methodology is not available.

                    The collateral management system is operated efficiently through a
                    linkage to the central securities depository and settlement system.
Assessment of       Broadly Observed
Principle 5
Recommendations     Banxico should incorporate assumptions about collateral value
and                 during stressed market conditions into the haircut methodology and
Comments            undertake regular stress testing.

                    International standards recommend that haircut procedures should be
                    independently validated at least annually.


                                           35
PRINCIPLE 7: LIQUIDITY RISK
An FMI should effectively measure, monitor, and manage its liquidity risk. An FMI should
maintain sufficient liquid resources in all relevant currencies to effect same-day and, where
appropriate, intraday and multiday settlement of payment obligations with a high degree of
confidence under a wide range of potential stress scenarios that should include, but not be
limited to, the default of the participant and its affiliates that would generate the largest
aggregate liquidity obligation for the FMI in extreme but plausible market conditions.
Key consideration An FMI should have a robust framework to manage its liquidity
1                       risks from its participants, settlement banks, nostro agents,
                        custodian banks, liquidity providers, and other entities.
Description             SPEI is not exposed to liquidity risks nor does it creates direct liquidity
                        exposures between participants. SPEI is a near real-time hybrid
                        settlement system. A multilateral offsetting algorithm selects those
                        payment orders that can be settled based on available balances in the
                        participants’ settlement accounts. On average, payments are settled
                        every 1.9 second. Payments that cannot be settled are queued until
                        sufficient funds become available. Pending payments by close of
                        business day are cancelled.

                             Banxico supports participants’ liquidity management in SPEI through
                             intraday current account overdrafts and repo operations. 5 Banxico
                             indicates that as a central bank, Banxico would be able to provide
                             unlimited liquidity support to systems’ participants – hence it does not
                             face liquidity risk. In practice, overdrafts are capped at the amount of
                             eligible deposits at the central banks, while repos can only be used
                             within the limits established by regulation and ultimately depend on the
                             participant holding sufficient collateral of the type accepted by
                             Banxico. Thereby, participants bear any remaining liquidity risk.

                             It is worth noting that (i) current account overdrafts are applicable only
                             to credit institutions, and; (ii) by law, Banxico can only provide credit
                             to the Federal Government, credit institutions, and IPAB (art. 7, par. II
                             of the Banco de Mexico’s Law). Therefore, non-bank participants
                             cannot avail themselves of Banxico’s intraday liquidity provisions,
                             with the exception of broker-dealers, who can undertake repo
                             operations with credit institutions with funds from repos between
                             Banxico and the credit institutions.
Key consideration            An FMI should have effective operational and analytical tools to
2                            identify, measure, and monitor its settlement and funding flows on
                             an ongoing and timely basis, including its use of intraday liquidity.
Description                  As compared to a purely real-time gross settlement mechanism, SPEI
                             design allows optimizing participants’ liquidity management through
                             extremely frequent batch settlement, thus reducing the amount of
                             resources needed to settle payments in SPEI. The multilateral offsetting
                             algorithm determines which payments can be settled based on the funds
                             available in the participants’ accounts at the time of settlement.

5
  Technically, intraday liquidity is not a SPEI feature. In fact, liquidity is credited to the cash accounts financial
institutions hold at DALI or alternatively to SIAC accounts. SPEI participants can transfer this liquidity from
DALI or SIAC to SPEI accounts as necessary. However, the great majority of these funds are exhausted in DALI.


                                                         36
                    Moreover, SPEI allows participants to (i) assign priorities to their
                    transfer orders (high or normal), and (ii) reserve part of their balances
                    for high-priority payments. The liquidity-saving algorithm tries to
                    settle high-priority transfer orders first, by drawing from reserved and
                    unreserved funds in the participant’s settlement account. Upon
                    settlement and regardless of the topology chosen by the sender, the
                    system notifies the sender and the recipient of which transfer orders
                    were settled and updates the settlement account balances.

                    SPEI has a central queuing mechanism although participants cannot
                    change the order of queued payments.

                    The effectiveness of these operational tools is monitored on an ongoing
                    and real-time basis by the DSP. Banxico publishes monthly statistics
                    on the use of intraday liquidity mechanisms. In April 2016, the average
                    daily maximum overdrafts reached MXN 212,927 million, whereas the
                    average daily maximum balance in the RSP system was MXN 180,217
                    million, presenting 32 percent and 27 percent of average daily volumes
                    settled in SPEI, respectively.

                    With the exception of the 19:00-20:00 window which corresponds to
                    scheduled payments (pagos programados) initiated by TESOFE (i.e.
                    government disbursements), the daily peak time is between 12:00 and
                    14:00, with 225,000 payments on average of which 218,000 are
                    customer payments.
Key consideration   A payment system or SSS, including one employing a DNS
3                   mechanism, should maintain sufficient liquid resources in all
                    relevant currencies to effect same-day settlement, and where
                    appropriate intraday or multiday settlement, of payment
                    obligations with a high degree of confidence under a wide range of
                    potential stress scenarios that should include, but not be limited to,
                    the default of the participant and its affiliates that would generate
                    the largest aggregate payment obligation in extreme but plausible
                    market conditions.
Description         SPEI is owned and operated by Banxico, which is the central bank and
                    the lender of last resort in Mexican peso, the settlement currency.
                    Further, Banxico provides intraday liquidity support to the participant
                    on a collateralized basis. These factors enable SPEI to continuously
                    settle transactions on a net, near-real time basis.
Key consideration   A CCP should maintain sufficient liquid resources in all relevant
4                   currencies to settle securities-related payments, make required
                    variation margin payments, and meet other payment obligations
                    on time with a high degree of confidence under a wide range of
                    potential stress scenarios that should include, but not be limited to,
                    the default of the participant and its affiliates that would generate
                    the largest aggregate payment obligation to the CCP in extreme
                    but plausible market conditions. In addition, a CCP that is
                    involved in activities with a more-complex risk profile or that is
                    systemically important in multiple jurisdictions should consider


                                           37
                    maintaining additional liquidity resources sufficient to cover a
                    wider range of potential stress scenarios that should include, but
                    not be limited to, the default of the two participants and their
                    affiliates that would generate the largest aggregate payment
                    obligation to the CCP in extreme but plausible market conditions.
Description         Sufficient liquid resources

                    Not applicable.

                    Risk profile and systemic importance in multiple jurisdictions

                    Not applicable.
Key consideration   For the purpose of meeting its minimum liquid resource
5                   requirement, an FMI’s qualifying liquid resources in each
                    currency include cash at the central bank of issue and at
                    creditworthy commercial banks, committed lines of credit,
                    committed foreign exchange swaps, and committed repos, as well
                    as highly marketable collateral held in custody and investments
                    that are readily available and convertible into cash with
                    prearranged and highly reliable funding arrangements, even in
                    extreme but plausible market conditions. If an FMI has access to
                    routine credit at the central bank of issue, the FMI may count such
                    access as part of the minimum requirement to the extent it has
                    collateral that is eligible for pledging to (or for conducting other
                    appropriate forms of transactions with) the relevant central bank.
                    All such resources should be available when needed.
Description         Size and composition of qualifying liquid resources

                    SPEI is an FMI owned and operated by Banxico, which is the issuer of
                    currency and the lender of last resort. Banxico is in a position to meet
                    the MXN requirements of all participants at any point in time for
                    settling their transactions.

                    Availability and coverage of qualifying liquid resources

                    SPEI is an FMI owned and operated by Banxico, which is the issuer of
                    currency and the lender of last resort. Banxico is in a position to meet
                    the MXN requirements of all participants at any point in time for
                    settling their transactions.
Key consideration   An FMI may supplement its qualifying liquid resources with other
6                   forms of liquid resources. If the FMI does so, then these liquid
                    resources should be in the form of assets that are likely to be
                    saleable or acceptable as collateral for lines of credit, swaps, or
                    repos on an ad hoc basis following a default, even if this cannot be
                    reliably prearranged or guaranteed in extreme market conditions.
                    Even if an FMI does not have access to routine central bank credit,
                    it should still take account of what collateral is typically accepted
                    by the relevant central bank, as such assets may be more likely to
                    be liquid in stressed circumstances. An FMI should not assume the



                                           38
                    availability of emergency central bank credit as a part of its
                    liquidity plan.
Description         Size and composition of supplemental liquid resources

                    SPEI is an FMI owned and operated by Banxico, which is the issuer of
                    currency and the lender of last resort. Banxico is in a position to meet
                    the MXN requirements of all participants at any point in time for
                    settling their transactions.
Key consideration   An FMI should obtain a high degree of confidence, through
7                   rigorous due diligence, that each provider of its minimum required
                    qualifying liquid resources, whether a participant of the FMI or an
                    external party, has sufficient information to understand and to
                    manage its associated liquidity risks, and that it has the capacity to
                    perform as required under its commitment. Where relevant to
                    assessing a liquidity provider’s performance reliability with
                    respect to a particular currency, a liquidity provider’s potential
                    access to credit from the central bank of issue may be taken into
                    account. An FMI should regularly test its procedures for accessing
                    its liquid resources at a liquidity provider.
Description         Use of liquidity providers

                    Not applicable. The liquidity provider for SPEI is Banxico itself.

                    Reliability of liquidity providers

                    Not applicable. The liquidity provider for SPEI is Banxico itself.
Key consideration   An FMI with access to central bank accounts, payment services, or
8                   securities services should use these services, where practical, to
                    enhance its management of liquidity risk.
Description         SPEI settles all transactions in central bank money, through the
                    settlement accounts that participants hold at Banxico.
Key consideration   An FMI should determine the amount and regularly test the
9                   sufficiency of its liquid resources through rigorous stress testing.
                    An FMI should have clear procedures to report the results of its
                    stress tests to appropriate decision makers at the FMI and to use
                    these results to evaluate the adequacy of and adjust its liquidity
                    risk-management framework. In conducting stress testing, an FMI
                    should consider a wide range of relevant scenarios. Scenarios
                    should include relevant peak historic price volatilities, shifts in
                    other market factors such as price determinants and yield curves,
                    multiple defaults over various time horizons, simultaneous
                    pressures in funding and asset markets, and a spectrum of
                    forward-looking stress scenarios in a variety of extreme but
                    plausible market conditions. Scenarios should also take into
                    account the design and operation of the FMI, include all entities
                    that might pose material liquidity risks to the FMI (such as
                    settlement banks, nostro agents, custodian banks, liquidity
                    providers, and linked FMIs), and where appropriate, cover a
                    multiday period. In all cases, an FMI should document its
                    supporting rationale for, and should have appropriate governance


                                           39
                    arrangements relating to, the amount and form of total liquid
                    resources it maintains.
Description         Stress test programme

                    There is no documented stress test programme for determining and
                    testing the sufficiency of liquid resources.

                    As the liquidity provider for SPEI is the central bank itself, in principle
                    the sufficiency and availability of funds to support participants’
                    operations are unlimited. Banxico has nevertheless limited its liquidity
                    support to SPEI participants by implementing all associated liquidity
                    injections through the use of collateralized overdrafts and repos.

                    Stress test scenarios

                    There is no documented stress test programme for determining and
                    testing the sufficiency of liquid resources.

                    Review and validation

                    There is no documented stress test programme for determining and
                    testing the sufficiency of liquid resources.
Key consideration   An FMI should establish explicit rules and procedures that enable
10                  the FMI to effect same-day and, where appropriate, intraday and
                    multiday settlement of payment obligations on time following any
                    individual or combined default among its participants. These rules
                    and procedures should address unforeseen and potentially
                    uncovered liquidity shortfalls and should aim to avoid unwinding,
                    revoking, or delaying the same-day settlement of payment
                    obligations. These rules and procedures should also indicate the
                    FMI’s process to replenish any liquidity resources it may employ
                    during a stress event, so that it can continue to operate in a safe
                    and sound manner.
Description         Same day settlement

                    SPEI is a central bank-owned and operated hybrid system which settles
                    transactions on a net, near real-time basis. SPEI operates on a 24/7
                    basis.

                    Any payment instructions that remain in the queue by end-of-day
                    closure (cierre de operaciones) at 17:59:59 of t+1 are cancelled from
                    the system.

                    Extensions of regular operating hours (i.e. extensions beyond the
                    scheduled closure of operations) to complete settlement are exceptional
                    in nature and not explicitly contemplated in the system’s Operating
                    Manual. In 2015, there were five cases of Banxico extending SPEI’s
                    operating hours owing to operational and technical issues. The longest
                    extension (70 minutes) was due to SIAC’s temporary inability to
                    process operations.


                                            40
                  Participants can cancel/revoke a payment instruction as long as this has
                  not been settled (par. 5.6 of the SPEI operating manual, see also
                  Principles 1 and 8). Cancellation/revocation does not require the
                  consent of recipient/beneficiary. If the payment to be cancelled had
                  been sent under topology T, the entire payment instruction is cancelled.

                  Replenishment of liquidity resources

                  Not applicable. SPEI is a same-day settlement system and the liquidity
                  provider is Banxico itself.
Key Conclusions   SPEI is not exposed to liquidity risks, which are borne entirely by
                  system participants.

                  SPEI nevertheless supports the sound and efficient management of
                  participants’ liquidity. First, extremely frequent batch settlement
                  reduces the amount of liquid resources needed to settle payments in
                  SPEI. Second, Banxico has devised a variety of tools to help
                  participants in allocating resources efficiently (e.g. priority setting,
                  reserved balance). Finally, Banxico provides collateralized intraday
                  liquidity support to banks and broker-dealers through banks.

                  In general, these tools have proved adequate and effective in
                  smoothening the settlement and funding flows, and are monitored on a
                  real-time and ongoing basis.
Assessment of     Observed
Principle 7
Recommendations   Banxico should continue to monitor the use of repos by broker-dealers
and comments      with a view to ensure that such tool can be efficiently used when
                  needed. While Banxico’s regulations require that repos between credit
                  institutions and broker-dealers with funds from repos with Banxico
                  have the same characteristics as the latter repos, and increase the
                  intraday credit limits applicable to banks who provide this facility, the
                  conditions including amount and pricing of intraday repos with broker-
                  dealers depend on each bank’s policies. To the extent that these
                  practices may be limiting the efficiency of repos and pose a concern
                  for SPEI’s liquidity, they should be monitored by Banxico.




                                         41
PRINCIPLE 8: SETTLEMENT FINALITY
An FMI should provide clear and certain final settlement, at a minimum by the end of the value
date. Where necessary or preferable, an FMI should provide final settlement intraday or in real
time
Key consideration 1       An FMI’s rules and procedures should clearly define the point
                          at which settlement is final.
Description               Point of settlement finality

                           According to SPEI rules (art. 5), once the settlement has completed
                           and the system has sent the sender and the recipient the respective
                           notifications of settlement, the payment instruction is to be
                           considered “accepted” for the purposes of the Payments System
                           Law, thus final, irrevocable, enforceable, and binding before third
                           parties (see art. 11 of the Payments System Law).

                           Consistently with SPEI rules, as per SPEI operating manual a
                           payment instruction is “accepted” once it has been settled and after
                           the system has notified the parties of the settlement. The notification
                           of the payment instruction to the recipient under typology T is not to
                           be interpreted as a proof of accepted payment, as its only purpose is
                           to inform the recipient about the sender’s intention to make the
                           payments as indicated in the message. As a corollary, a payment
                           instruction can be cancelled if and only if it has not been settled,
                           regardless of the topology chosen by the sender.

                           In practice, payment instructions are processed in two steps:
                              i.   the system receives the payment instruction and, after
                                   verifying the electronic signature, places it in a queue of
                                   pending instructions where it will remain until it can be
                                   settled, and sends a message of acknowledgment of receipt
                                   to the sender;
                             ii. the system determines – based on a mathematic formula that
                                   takes into account the participants’ balances and all the
                                   pending payment instructions, as well as the priorities set by
                                   the participants – which instructions can be cleared and
                                   settled. At this stage, the system marks the instructions as
                                   accepted, updates the participants’ balances and sends the
                                   notification of settlement to the participants.

                           While the Payments System Law defers to the internal rules of a
                           payment system to establish the requirements for the settlement, it
                           defines as “accepted” a payment instruction that has passed all risk
                           controls and is ready to be settled (art. 2, par VI).

                           Circular No. 17/2010 (SPEI Rules), as well as the system’s
                           operational manual and contracts, are available to the participants.
                           SPEI Rules are a public document and have been posted on
                           Banxico’s website.



                                              42
                      Finality in the case of links

                      Not applicable.
Key consideration 2   An FMI should complete final settlement no later than the end
                      of the value date, and preferably intraday or in real time, to
                      reduce settlement risk. An LVPS or SSS should consider
                      adopting RTGS or multiple-batch processing during the
                      settlement day.
Description           Final settlement on the value date

                      All payments through SPEI are settled on a near real time basis
                      (every 1.9 seconds on average), from 18:00 (t) to 17:59:59 (t+1).
                      Payment instructions stored in queues owing to insufficient balances
                      in participants’ settlement accounts are cancelled at the end of the
                      operating day. While SPEI rules provide that Banxico can extend
                      operating hours in case of contingency, SPEI Operating Manuals do
                      not contemplate / regulate such extensions. In 2015, there were five
                      episodes of extension of operating hours due to operational and
                      technical issues.

                      Intraday or real-time final settlement

                      SPEI is a hybrid system that provides intra-day settlement on a net
                      basis in near real time (every 1.9 seconds on average).
Key consideration 3   An FMI should clearly define the point after which unsettled
                      payments, transfer instructions, or other obligations may not be
                      revoked by a participant.
Description           SPEI rules establish that participants can send instructions to cancel
                      transfer orders, although the system will not cancel payments that
                      have been accepted. Since the rules defines as accepted those
                      payment instructions that have been settled and whose settlement has
                      been notified to the relevant participants by the system, it follows
                      that payment instructions pending settlement can still be
                      canceled/revoked.

                      Neither the SPEI Rules nor the Operating Manual require that the
                      consent of the recipient is obtained.
Key conclusions       Settlement of payment transfers in SPEI is achieved in near-real time
                      and payments once settled are final and irrevocable. The settlement
                      arrived at in the SPEI system is protected under article 11 of the
                      Payments System Law.

                      SPEI Rules clearly define the point of at which settlement is deemed
                      final: once settled, and after the system has notified the participants
                      that it has debited/credited their respective accounts, a payment
                      becomes “accepted” for the purposes of the Payments System Law,
                      thus is final and irrevocable.

                      As a corollary, the participants can cancel/revoke a payment
                      instruction which is placed in the queue of pending payments.


                                         43
                        Revocation and cancellation do not require the consent of the
                        beneficiary institution.
Assessment of Principle Observed
8
Recommendations and Unsettled (pending) payments may be revoked until they are settled
comments                with finality, including topology T payment instructions. The 2012
                        FSAP recommended that topology T be reviewed since most systems
                        do not notify incoming payments that have not yet settled with
                        finality. Alternatively, Banxico could consider requiring the consent
                        of the beneficiary institution for the revocation of a payment
                        instruction initiated with topology T (and of which the beneficiary
                        institution has received notification). Indeed, although SPEI Rules
                        warn participants that they should not consider a notification as a
                        proof of accepted payment, they do not explicitly prohibit that the
                        beneficiary institutions credit their customers prior to receiving the
                        funds in their SPEI account.




                                            44
PRINCIPLE 9: MONEY SETTLEMENTS
An FMI should conduct its money settlements in central bank money where practical and
available. If central bank money is not used, an FMI should minimize and strictly control the
credit and liquidity risk arising from the use of commercial bank money.
Key consideration 1        An FMI should conduct its money settlements in central bank
                           money, where practical and available, to avoid credit and
                           liquidity risks.
Description                SPEI settles all payment instructions in central bank money through
                           the settlement accounts that participants hold at Banxico. SPEI only
                           conducts money settlements in Mexican peso.
Key consideration 2        If central bank money is not used, an FMI should conduct its
                           money settlements using a settlement asset with little or no credit
                           or liquidity risk.
 Description               SPEI settles all payment instructions in central bank money through
                           the settlement accounts that participants hold at Banxico.
Key consideration 3        If an FMI settles in commercial bank money, it should monitor,
                           manage, and limit its credit and liquidity risks arising from the
                           commercial settlement banks. In particular, an FMI should
                           establish and monitor adherence to strict criteria for its
                           settlement banks that take account of, among other things, their
                           regulation and supervision, creditworthiness, capitalisation,
                           access to liquidity, and operational reliability. An FMI should
                           also monitor and manage the concentration of credit and
                           liquidity exposures to its commercial settlement banks.
Description                Not applicable.
Key consideration 4        If an FMI conducts money settlements on its own books, it
                           should minimize and strictly control its credit and liquidity risks.
Description                SPEI settles all payment instructions in central bank money through
                           the settlement accounts that participants hold at Banxico.
Key consideration 5        An FMI’s legal agreements with any settlement banks should
                           state clearly when transfers on the books of individual settlement
                           banks are expected to occur, that transfers are to be final when
                           effected, and that funds received should be transferable as soon
                           as possible, at a minimum by the end of the day and ideally
                           intraday, in order to enable the FMI and its participants to
                           manage credit and liquidity risks.
Description                Not applicable.
Key conclusions            SPEI settles all payment instructions in central bank money through
                           the settlement accounts that participants hold at Banxico.
Assessment of              Observed
Principle 9
Recommendations            -
and comments




                                              45
PRINCIPLE 13: PARTICIPANT-DEFAULT RULES AND PROCEDURES
An FMI should have effective and clearly defined rules and procedures to manage a
participant default. These rules and procedures should be designed to ensure that the FMI
can take timely action to contain losses and liquidity pressures and continue to meet its
obligations.
Key consideration 1 An FMI should have default rules and procedures that enable
                         the FMI to continue to meet its obligations in the event of a
                         participant default and that address the replenishment of
                         resources following a default.
Description              Participant default rules and procedures

                        SPEI settles payments similarly to a real-time gross settlement
                        system; therefore, participants do not suffer from default on each
                        other or against the system as a result of the settlement process.
                        Payment orders that have not been settled by the end of the
                        operational day (cierre de operaciones) are removed from the
                        central processing queue.

                        Moreover, legal protections apply that guarantee the settlement
                        finality in the event of bankruptcy and insolvency procedures.

                        However, Banxico may face exposure to participants as a result of
                        granting intraday liquidity through collateralized repos (see
                        Principles 4 and 5), in the event that a participant fails to repurchase
                        the securities. In these cases, Banxico can dispose of the collateral
                        that the defaulting participant has presented. Repos can be
                        automatically renewed at Banxico’s discretion (in practice, up to a
                        maximum of ten consecutive days) before being considered as
                        abandoned, although the reiterated renovation of repos is not
                        considered a good practice.

                        The failure to repurchase securities by a broker-dealer in the
                        context of a repo with a credit institution (second repo, according
                        to the order of registration in the RSP system) using funds from a
                        repo between the credit institution and Banxico (first repo) results
                        in the credit institution acquiring the collateral. The same rules as
                        described above would apply to the first repo between the credit
                        institution and Banxico.

                        Renewal of intraday liquidity is subject to a penalty rate equal to
                        twice the market rate if the participant does not have sufficient
                        balance in its SIAC’s account. Charges are made in the
                        participants’ accounts at SIAC.

                        It is worth noting that collateral pledged in a payment system is
                        protected against third-party claims under art. 15 of the Payments
                        Systems Law.

                        Use of financial resources



                                             46
                      Banxico (i) does not face the risk of lack of funds to meet its
                      payment obligations, (ii) does not depend on third parties for this
                      purpose, and (iii) does not contribute to participants meeting their
                      own payment obligations.

                      With regard to participants’ failure to repurchase the securities
                      under a repo agreement with Banxico for the provision of intraday
                      liquidity, Banxico may sell collateral securities in the financial
                      markets.
Key consideration 2   An FMI should be well prepared to implement its default rules
                      and procedures, including any appropriate discretionary
                      procedures provided for in its rules.
Description           In principle, when a credit institution fails to repurchase the
                      securities Banxico sells its collateral securities in the financial
                      market.

                      Circular No. 3/2012 that regulates the use of repo with Banxico for
                      the purposes of intraday liquidity provides the criteria for
                      abandoning or automatically renewing a repo transaction. Banxico
                      can unilaterally determine the maximum number of renewals that
                      can be granted to the defaulting credit institution.
Key consideration 3   An FMI should publicly disclose key aspects of its default
                      rules and procedures.
Description           Circular No. 3/2012 provides the rules governing the default of a
                      credit institution to repurchase the securities. It is a public
                      document and is available on Banxico’s website.
Key consideration 4   An FMI should involve its participants and other stakeholders
                      in the testing and review of the FMI’s default procedures,
                      including any close-out procedures. Such testing and review
                      should be conducted at least annually or following material
                      changes to the rules and procedures to ensure that they are
                      practical and effective.
Description           Any testing of default rules and procedures is not conducted within
                      the framework of SPEI. Strictly speaking, rules concerning intraday
                      repos fall outside of SPEI’s scope.

                      There are no mechanisms established to obtain feedback from SPEI
                      participants when enacting the rules and procedures concerning
                      defaults by financial institutions utilizing intraday repos.
Key conclusions       SPEI design does not allow for defaults between participants, or
                      between the participants and the system itself. However, a
                      participant can default on the repayment of intraday liquidity
                      (repos).

                      Banxico’s regulations provide for the use of intraday repos for
                      purposes of intraday liquidity, including the procedures applicable
                      in the event that a participant fails to repurchase securities by end
                      of day. In light of the Payments Systems Law, application of
                      collateral posted in the RPS system cannot be subject to prevention,
                      stay, or reversal.


                                          47
                  Any testing or review of default rules and procedures are not
                  conducted within the framework of SPEI. Strictly speaking, rules
                  concerning intraday repos fall outside of SPEI’s scope.
Assessment of     Observed
Principle 13
Recommendations   The assessor coincides with Banxico that default rules and
and               procedures for intraday repos fall outside of SPEI’s scope strictly
comments          speaking. Yet, for the same reasons outlined above (see Principle
                  3), it is suggested that participant default risk management (as far
                  as intraday repo are concerned) is considered in close coordination
                  with SPEI risk management framework.

                  Banxico should involve SPEI participants in the review of the rules
                  and procedures with regard to default of intraday repos.




                                      48
PRINCIPLE 15: GENERAL BUSINESS RISK
An FMI should identify, monitor, and manage its general business risk and hold sufficient
liquid net assets funded by equity to cover potential general business losses so that it can
continue operations and services as a going concern if those losses materialize. Further,
liquid net assets should at all times be sufficient to ensure a recovery or orderly wind-down
of critical operations and services.
Key consideration 1 An FMI should have robust management and control systems
                         to identify, monitor, and manage general business risks,
                         including losses from poor execution of business strategy,
                         negative cash flows, or unexpected and excessively large
                         operating expenses.
Description              SPEI is a central bank-operated system. It is one of the core
                         functionalities of Banxico, and a tool to fulfill its statutory mandate
                         to ensure the smooth functioning of payment systems (art. 2 of the
                         Banco de Mexico’s Law).

                         Moreover, Banxico charges SPEI participants a service fee aimed
                         to recover the system’s operational costs, having already recovered
                         the initial investment costs. Operational costs include infrastructure
                         (hardware, software) maintenance costs and other operational costs
                         (e.g. physical space), human resources, and system upgrades.
                         Therefore, SPEI’s exposure to business risk is limited to a potential
                         underestimation of its operational costs. For instance, business risk
                         could materialize if certain cost factors were omitted or as a result
                         of an unexpected increase in operational costs. For this purpose,
                         Banxico undertakes an annual analysis of costs and revises
                         participants’ fees accordingly.
Key consideration 2      An FMI should hold liquid net assets funded by equity (such as
                         common stock, disclosed reserves, or other retained earnings)
                         so that it can continue operations and services as a going
                         concern if it incurs general business losses. The amount of
                         liquid net assets funded by equity an FMI should hold should
                         be determined by its general business risk profile and the
                         length of time required to achieve a recovery or orderly wind-
                         down, as appropriate, of its critical operations and services if
                         such action is taken.
Description              Not applicable.
Key consideration 3      An FMI should maintain a viable recovery or orderly wind-
                         down plan and should hold sufficient liquid net assets funded
                         by equity to implement this plan. At a minimum, an FMI
                         should hold liquid net assets funded by equity equal to at least
                         six months of current operating expenses. These assets are in
                         addition to resources held to cover participant defaults or
                         other risks covered under the financial resources principles.
                         However, equity held under international risk-based capital
                         standards can be included where relevant and appropriate to
                         avoid duplicate capital requirements.
Description              Recovery or orderly wind-down plan



                                              49
                      Not applicable.

                      Resources

                      Not applicable. Yet, Banxico maintains a contingency fund that
                      covers up to 18 months of current operating expenses without
                      revenues aimed to face a situation where revenues from
                      participants’ fees are insufficient to meet SPEI’s obligations to its
                      suppliers.
Key consideration 4   Assets held to cover general business risk should be of high
                      quality and sufficiently liquid in order to allow the FMI to
                      meet its current and projected operating expenses under a
                      range of scenarios, including in adverse market conditions.
Description           Not applicable.
Key consideration 5   An FMI should maintain a viable plan for raising additional
                      equity should its equity fall close to or below the amount
                      needed. This plan should be approved by the board of
                      directors and updated regularly.
Description           Not applicable.
Key conclusions       SPEI is a central bank-owned and operated FMI. Given the central
                      bank’s inherent soundness, general business risk is not deemed as
                      relevant.
                      Banxico has a pricing policy for SPEI services which is reviewed
                      annually and allows covering operating costs in full.
Assessment of         Observed.
Principle 15
Recommendations       -
and comments




                                          50
PRINCIPLE 16. CUSTODY AND INVESTMENT RISKS
An FMI should safeguard its own and its participants’ assets and minimise the risk of loss on
and delay in access to these assets. An FMI’s investments should be in instruments with
minimal credit, market, and liquidity risks.
Key consideration 1      An FMI should hold its own and its participants’ assets at
                         supervised and regulated entities that have robust accounting
                         practices, safekeeping procedures, and internal controls that
                         fully protect these assets.
Description
                         The assets of Banxico as the owner and operator of SPEI, and SPEI
                         participants’ assets are safeguarded in accounts kept at and managed
                         by Banxico itself. Account management is based on sound
                         accounting practices that are well documented, and is subject to
                         auditing.

                         When repo operations are taken into account, Banxico holds its own
                         and SPEI participants’ financial assets received as collateral in S.D.
                         INDEVAL (hereinafter, INDEVAL) – the single central securities
                         depository (CSD) licensed in Mexico. The majority shareholder of
                         INDEVAL is the Bolsa Mexicana de Valores, S.A. de C.V. (97%),
                         while Banxico holds 2.5% of INDEVAL’s shares. As established in
                         the Securities Market Law (SML), art. 277, one-fourth of Board
                         members must be independent, including a representative of
                         Banxico. Currently, Banxico is represented in INDEVAL’s Board by
                         the Director General of Payment Systems and Corporate Services.
                         INDEVAL is licensed by the Ministry of Finance with the opinion
                         of Banxico and the CNBV (art. 272 of the SML) and is jointly
                         regulated and supervised by Banxico and the CNBV. INDEVAL’s
                         internal regulations and any amendments must be approved by
                         Banxico and the CNBV (SML, art. 294). Banxico and the CNBV
                         jointly undertake the assessment of INDEVAL against the PFMI and
                         oversee the principles’ implementation plan.
Key consideration 2      An FMI should have prompt access to its assets and the assets
                         provided by participants, when required.
Description              Banxico has real-time access to the collateral deposited in its account
                         at INDEVAL, and can dispose of collateralized securities through
                         the RSP system linked to DALI.
Key consideration 3      An FMI should evaluate and understand its exposures to its
                         custodian banks, taking into account the full scope of its
                         relationships with each.
Description              Not applicable. There are no separate individual custodian banks
                         with regard to the custody of the collateral.
Key consideration 4      An FMI’s investment strategy should be consistent with its
                         overall risk-management strategy and fully disclosed to its
                         participants, and investments should be secured by, or be claims
                         on, high-quality obligors. These investments should allow for
                         quick liquidation with little, if any, adverse price effect.
Description              Investment strategy



                                              51
                  Not applicable. Banxico as operator of SPEI does not make
                  investments with the assets pledged by other parties.

                  Risk characteristics of investments

                  Not applicable. Banxico as operator of SPEI does not make
                  investments with the assets pledged by other parties.
Key conclusions   INDEVAL is the sole CSD in Mexico established under the SML.
                  Consistently with the provisions of the SML, INDEVAL/DALI
                  provides a centralized depository for securities, and securities
                  clearing and settlement. Banxico owns 2.5% of INDEVAL’s shares
                  and is represented in the Board of Directors. Jointly with the CNBV,
                  Banxico regulates and supervises the FMI operations. Banxico’s
                  approval is required for any changes in the FMI internal regulations.
Assessment of     Observed
Principle 16
Recommendations   Given the critical nature of the services provided by INDEVAL,
and comments      Banxico in collaboration with the CNBV should assess
                  INDEVAL/DALI at frequent intervals as well as enforce the
                  disclosure of its rules, key procedures, and market data according to
                  the CPMI-IOSCO disclosure framework format.




                                      52
PRINCIPLE 17: OPERATIONAL RISK
An FMI should identify the plausible sources of operational risk, both internal and external,
and mitigate their impact through the use of appropriate systems, policies, procedures, and
controls. Systems should be designed to ensure a high degree of security and operational
reliability and should have adequate, scalable capacity. Business continuity management
should aim for timely recovery of operations and fulfillment of the FMI’s obligations,
including in the event of a wide-scale or major disruption.
Key consideration 1 An FMI should establish a robust operational risk-management
                        framework with appropriate systems, policies, procedures, and
                        controls to identify, monitor, and manage operational risks.
Description             Identification of operational risk

                       SPEI operational risk management is embedded in, and informed by,
                       Banxico’s Internal Control System – i.e., the organization and set of
                       activities, regulations, policies, standards and procedures established
                       to provide a reasonable level of security with respect to certain
                       institutional objectives. In this context, operational risk is defined as
                       risk caused by human error, organizational or other factors related to
                       equipment and information. Process owners are tasked with the
                       identification and management of the risks inherent to the processes
                       they administer, whereas the Directorate General of Comptroller and
                       Risk Management provides the overall criteria and methodologies.
                       The Internal Control System framework is documented in Banxico’s
                       internal regulations. Internal Control is comprised of five
                       components: control environment, risk assessment, control
                       activities, information and communication, and supervision. Each of
                       Banxico’s administrative unit is responsible for the implementation
                       of these activities within their area of competence.

                       In this context, the DSP has documented a comprehensive risk
                       management framework for SPEI. Within this framework, general
                       risk identification and evaluation consists of: (i) mapping of the
                       processes to identify critical processes and the control points; (ii)
                       self-assessment of the risks and controls undertaken by the DSP; (iii)
                       incident data collection and analysis, and; (iv) internal and external
                       audit. Through the application of these tools, risks are identified and
                       evaluated on the basis of the frequency of their occurrence (i.e. the
                       frequency with which a risk may materialize in a given period) and
                       the impact (i.e. how the risk would affect the system if it
                       materialized) (see Principle 3). The framework prioritizes
                       operational risk which it defines as comprising system-related,
                       infrastructure, process-related, human and external risk factors.
                       Management of operational risk
                       The DSP and DGTI have established the controls for the identified
                       risks. Controls are of two types: (i) preventive, i.e. to decrease the
                       frequency of the occurrence of the risk which include policies,
                       procedures, and manuals; (ii) corrective, i.e. to minimize the impact
                       of the materialization of the risks which include warning systems.



                                             53
The effectiveness of the controls in decreasing the frequency and
impact of the risks is monitored at a minimum of a yearly basis.

Banxico’s mandate to foster the smooth functioning of the payment
systems relies on the DSP. SPEI operational risk management is
complemented by Banxico’s risk management, audit, and
information technology functions. Banxico has an Internal Control
System in place that assigns risk management responsibilities to the
owner of the underlying process.

SPEI rules entrust Banxico as the system operator with the
management of situations of contingency (art.10). Banxico can (i)
extend SPEI operating hours; (ii) instruct the participants to suspend
payment instructions; (iii) instruct the participants to continue
operations through the use of business continuity procedures; (iv)
activate alternate operating procedures (POA), whereas if the
disruption happens in the application of a participant, the latter must
activate the client alternate operating procedures (COAS). Moreover,
Banxico can suspend or terminate a participant that could jeopardize
the safety of the system or does not comply with system’s
regulations.

SPEI operating manual details business continuity procedures
(5.17.1 – 5.17.4), including POA-SPEI, COAS, whereas
contingencies affecting operations with CLS are addressed in a
separate manual.

The DSP has taken a comprehensive approach to the management of
business continuity which includes all DSP-operated systems and the
critical assets for its service provision. The business continuity
management system is comprised of the (ii) organizational
arrangements (i.e. DSP activities, functions, services, and relevant
parties), (ii) risk factors, and (iii) objectives and scope of business
continuity.

It is worth mentioning in this context that systems’ availability and
recovery time targets are reported to the Board on an annual basis in
the context of the institutional implementation plan, guiding
principle 7 (see Principles 2 and 3).

Policies, processes and controls

DSP operational risk management framework is based on the
following commercial standards and best international practices: ISO
22301:2012 – Business Continuity Management Systems; ISO/IEC
27001 – Information Security Management; X.509 v3 (RFC 3280)
and PKCS #1 (RFC 2313). The Internal Control System is based on
COSO.




                      54
                     The DSP risk management activities benefit from external and
                     internal audit, whose findings and recommendations are embedded
                     in risk identification and evaluation processes. The Directorate
                     General of Comptroller and Risk Management provides the overall
                     methodology and oversees the implementation of the Internal
                     Control System. It has also undertaken an evaluation of the risks
                     inherent to the management and operation of Banxico-administered
                     payment systems.

                    Banxico’s personnel policy governs the human resource allocation
                    to the DSP/SPEI.
Key consideration 2 An FMI’s board of directors should clearly define the roles and
                    responsibilities for addressing operational risk and should
                    endorse the FMI’s operational risk-management framework.
                    Systems, operational policies, procedures, and controls should be
                    reviewed, audited, and tested periodically and after significant
                    changes.
Description         Roles, responsibilities and framework

                     Art. 46, par. V of the Banco de Mexico’s Law entrusts the Board
                     with the definition of the policies and criteria under which the Bank
                     undertakes its operations. The Law provides that, depending on their
                     importance, certain policies must be submitted to the Board for
                     approval.

                     Banxico has developed an Internal Control System whereby each of
                     Banxico’s administrative unit is responsible for the implementation
                     of internal controls within their respective areas of competence.
                     Process owners are tasked with the identification and administration
                     of the risks inherent to the processes they manage, whereas the
                     Directorate General of Comptroller and Risk Management provides
                     the overall criteria and methodologies. The Internal Control System
                     framework is documented in Banxico’s internal regulations. Its
                     implementation is overseen by the Internal Control System
                     Monitoring Committee, who reports to the Governor.

                     Banxico’s Internal Regulation (Reglamento Interior) assigns the
                     DSP clear responsibilities as far as (i) operating central bank-owned
                     systems and (ii) monitoring them so as to ensure their proper
                     functioning, and (iii) establishing business continuity policies.
                     Accordingly, the DSP has developed a comprehensive risk
                     management framework (see Principles 3) that identifies operational
                     risk as relevant to SPEI operations, and a DSP-wide business
                     continuity plan (see Principle 17, KC3). Within the DSP, the
                     Subdivision of Payment Systems Operational Continuity specializes
                     in risk assessment and operational continuity.

                     It is worth noting that risk management is one of the guiding
                     principles that comprise Banxico’s institutional plan, namely
                     Guiding Principle 7 – “Strengthen the internal control system, risk


                                          55
                      management, security, and physical and information security of the
                      Bank”. Enhancing the operational reliability and business continuity
                      of the payment systems is one of 7 objectives under Guiding
                      Principle 7. The relevant indicators are (i) the availability of the
                      systems, and (ii) the recovery time. The plans and achievements in
                      meeting this objective are reported to the Board on an annual basis.

                      Review, audit and testing

                      The comprehensive risk management framework was issued in
                      January 2016. It is established that the framework is updated at least
                      annually, or when relevant changes occur in the system
                      /infrastructure, the regulatory framework, or the organizational
                      structure.

                      The business continuity plan (BCP) was first elaborated in 2013.
                      Since then, it has been updated in 2013, 2014, and 2016. Revision
                      criteria include changes of various nature (technological,
                      organizational, etc.) new types of threats, as well as the outcomes of
                      the testing and auditors’ recommendations. The BCP is tested at least
                      annually.

                      The DSP is subject to internal and external audit. Internal audits
                      allow identifying situations of non-compliance with internal rules
                      and manuals, as well as risks related to SPEI that require
                      implementation of controls. The Directorate of Auditing reports to
                      the Board of Governors. SPEI external audits have focused on
                      information security. In 2015, the DSP has undergone six audits, of
                      which four were internal.

                    The Director General of Audit and the Audit Committee report to the
                    Board of Governors.
Key consideration 3 An FMI should have clearly defined operational reliability
                    objectives and should have policies in place that are designed to
                    achieve those objectives.
Description         Strengthening the internal control system, risk management and IT
                    and physical security is an institutional objective established in
                    Banxico’s work plan, As far as payment systems / SPEI are
                    concerned, it translates into the objective of ensuring payment
                    systems’ continuity. This objective is measured through (i) the
                    availability of the systems, and; (ii) the recovery time.

                      SPEI availability target for 2016 was set at 99.85 percent, up from
                      99.80 percent in 2015. Availability testing report higher availability.

                      Recovery time has been set to 30 minutes.

                      The overall risk management policy and operational continuity
                      arrangements are intended to ensure that these objectives are
                      achieved. Progress reports are sent to the Board of Governors on a


                                            56
                    quarterly basis, whereas the Operational Continuity Committee was
                    reports to the Governor. The Committee is chaired by the Governor
                    and comprises the Directors General and the Comptroller General of
                    Banxico.
Key consideration 4 An FMI should ensure that it has scalable capacity adequate to
                    handle increasing stress volumes and to achieve its service-level
                    objectives.
Description         SPEI can handle up to 4 million transactions per hour. System
                    capacity is determined based on tests with SPEI participants. On
                    average, the system currently process about 1.5 million daily
                    payments, with peaks of 4.8 million transactions which correspond
                    to TESOFE disbursements. This excess capacity corroborates the
                    conclusion that the system currently has a high degree of scalability.

                       Banxico regularly monitors system’s volume of operations to
                       identify trends. System program design is such that participants
                       could not send more payment instructions than SPEI can process.
                       This feature could delay the processing of a large payroll, for
                       example. For these purposes, participants can schedule payment
                       instructions beforehand (pagos programados) which would be
                       generated through an independent process and out of the SPEI
                       “alternate” SPEI account.

                       SPEI does not use any incentives to direct the flow of payments
                       throughout the operating day. Rather, it monitors capacity closely
                       with a view to increase capacity as demand grows. It is understood
                       that there are plans to increase capacity in the next few years using
                       parallel processing to enhance scalability of the system.

                    SPEI is not versatile as it uses one server for several important
                    processes. As a result, delays may occur as a result of other processes
                    that may jeopardize (quasi) real-time settlement.
Key consideration 5 An FMI should have comprehensive physical and information
                    security policies that address all potential vulnerabilities and
                    threats.
Description         Physical security

                       Banxico physical security is the responsibility of the Directorate of
                       Security, under the Directorate General of Currency Issuance.
                       Physical security measures are defined in Internal Administrative
                       Rules on entry and exit into/from Banxico’s buildings. This
                       document establishes the requirements for accessing high-security
                       facilities, the entry and exit of personnel, suppliers, and contractors
                       into/from these facilities. Likewise, there is restricted access to the
                       following areas: electrical room, emergency generators,
                       communication networks, and data center, among others.

                       Information security




                                              57
                      Banxico’s information security policies are aligned with ISO/IEC
                      27001.

                      IT security measures have been established in the Internal
                      Administrative Rules on Information Technologies. These rules
                      define general criteria for the design, implementation, and
                      management of central bank-provided IT services. In particular, it
                      defines the change management process for IT services as well as IT
                      security management, e.g. access control, incident management,
                      firewalls, etc.

                      SPEI files whose content is deemed sensitive are encrypted to protect
                      their content. Digital signatures are used that ensure the authenticity
                      of the information and that the sender cannot repudiate a payment
                      instruction once this has been sent. Participants are connected to the
                      system through a virtual private network (VPN) that uses encrypted
                      communications.

                      Participants are expected and instructed to provide evidence of
                      compliance with a number of IT and information security
                      requirements.

                    SPEI information security policies on authentication, signature, and
                    encryption are based on the following international standards: (i) X.
                    509v3 (RFC 3280) for certificates’ formats; PKCS #1 (RFC 2313)
                    for RSA-type private keys; PKCS #1 standard for the creation of
                    digital signatures and validations.
Key consideration 6 An FMI should have a business continuity plan that addresses
                    events posing a significant risk of disrupting operations,
                    including events that could cause a wide-scale or major
                    disruption. The plan should incorporate the use of a secondary
                    site and should be designed to ensure that critical information
                    technology (IT) systems can resume operations within two hours
                    following disruptive events. The plan should be designed to
                    enable the FMI to complete settlement by the end of the day of
                    the disruption, even in case of extreme circumstances. The FMI
                    should regularly test these arrangements.
Description         Objectives of business continuity plan

                      SPEI business continuity is supported in the Business Continuity
                      Management System (BCMS) whose overall objective is fulfill
                      Banxico’s responsibility to ensure the operational continuity of the
                      payment systems it operates. The BCMS is aligned with international
                      standards, namely ISO 22301:2012. The specific objectives of the
                      BCMS are to (i) ensure the operational continuity of, and mitigate
                      the negative impact on central bank-operated payment systems in
                      case of a disruptive event through the implementation of efficient
                      and effectives controls and procedures; (ii) validate the correct
                      functioning of, and improve as appropriate business continuity
                      procedures through capacity building, awareness raising, and testing,


                                            58
and; (iii) validate the correct functioning of, and improve as
appropriate the emergency response and recovery plans. The scope
of BCMS includes all DSP-operated payment systems and services.

In this context, Banxico has developed a business continuity plan
(BCP) for DSP-managed systems. Its main objective is to ensure
systems’ recovery in case of disruption or disaster that may affect the
provision of DSP critical services through the implementation of
business continuity procedures to maintain minimum acceptable
service levels. The BCP builds on the BIA and the comprehensive
risk management framework (see Principle 3).

Design of business continuity plan

The BCP aims to ensure continuous operation through the
identification of business continuity measures for each of the
identified contingency scenarios:
(i)    in case of unavailability of the primary facilities due to
       external factors, operations will be moved to the secondary site
       (operacion en sitio alterno, SOA);
(ii) in the event of the primary servers being compromised due to
       hardware, software, or communication malfunction, the
       procedure for switching operations to secondary servers will
       be initiated;
(iii) should the personnel in charge of the operation,
       administration, and support of the system(s) be unable to reach
       Banxico primary or secondary facilities, the system can be
       operated remotely, e.g. through portable equipment provided
       by Banaxico;
(iv) the impact of a virus or malware attack on Banxico’s primary
       work stations is mitigated through a protected network of work
       stations (estaciones de trabajo fortalecidas, ETFs), and;
(v) In the imminent threat of a prolonged interruption of any
       system applications that could not be resolved otherwise,
       Banxico will invoke the Alternate Operation Procedure
       (Procedimento de Operacion Alterno, POA), a semi-
       automated procedure that allows continuous processing of
       payment instructions in POA-SPEI format.

Finally, the protracted unavailability of the participants’ applications
could result in the activation of the Client Alternate Operation
Procedures (COAS) within 15 to 120 minutes from the disruptive
event, depending on the time of the day when the contingency
occurs.

SPEI recovery time has been set to 30 minutes. The overall recovery
time objective (RTO) is tested at least annually. The RTO is
prescribed in Banxico’s institutional work plan and reported
regularly to the Board of Governors.



                      59
                     Real-time data synchronization is available for the secondary site,
                     practically eliminating the potential of data losses. Data is also
                     replicated asynchronously to a third site (see below).

                     Other redundancies that secure continuous operations include main
                     site equipment, dual external power and communication suppliers,
                     dual operating systems, as well as participants’ redundant
                     infrastructures.

                     Banxico (DSP) has developed an incident and emergency response
                     procedure (Procedimiento de Atencion a Incidentes y Respuesta a
                     Emergencias) that, among other aspects, establishes the
                     communication tree whose effectiveness is ensured through testing.
                     Banxico’s Business Continuity Committee also has protocols in
                     place for crisis management that include the communication flow
                     between Banxico’s administrative units.

                     Secondary site

                     Banxico has established a hot secondary site. This is located at a
                     sufficient geographic distance (11 kilometers) from the primary site
                     such that it has a distinct (e.g., seismic) risk profile. There is also a
                     (warm) third site is located in Monterrey, in the northeastern state of
                     Nuevo León. The third site will migrate to hot by the third quarter of
                     2016.

                     The BCP considers a scenario in which the primary site becomes
                     unavailable (see above) and provides additional guidance on the
                     steps to be undertaken to access and use the secondary site’s
                     premises and facilities.

                     Review and testing

                     SPEI’s readiness to operate as expected in the event of a disruption
                     – e.g. unavailability of the primary facilities or computing
                     infrastructure failure – is tested according to an agreed schedule
                     between the operations and support personnel.

                     Change management guidelines establish that whenever a change in
                     SPEI’s production environment is required this is tested.

                    The BCP was revised three times since it was issued in 2013. The
                    BCP itself establishes the circumstances that warrant the plan’s
                    revision or update; otherwise, the plan is reviewed on an annual
                    basis.
Key consideration 7 An FMI should identify, monitor, and manage the risks that key
                    participants, other FMIs, and service and utility providers might
                    pose to its operations. In addition, an FMI should identify,
                    monitor, and manage the risks its operations might pose to other
                    FMIs.


                                           60
Description       Risks to the FMI’s own operations

                  Banxico regularly identifies and monitors the operational risks
                  arising from other FMIs and DSP-managed systems, particularly
                  SIAC. As far as SIAC is concerned, its unavailability would affect
                  start- and end-of-day operations as well as intraday liquidity
                  provision to banks by means of collateralized overdrafts. To manage
                  the risks inherent to this connection, Banxico has an alternate
                  procedure to manually transfer funds between the systems.

                  More broadly, through the BIA and in conjunction with the
                  Comprehensive Risk Management Framework, Banxico ensures that
                  the impact on SPEI of a possible disruption in an interconnected
                  FMI/system is measured and accounted for in the definition of DSP-
                  wide and SPEI-specific business continuity measures.

                  Banxico’s analysis of interdependencies does not explicitly cover the
                  risks that a disruption in DALI would pose to SPEI. Nonetheless, in
                  its role as participant of SPEI, DALI is subject to operational risk
                  requirements that include disaster preparedness and redundant
                  infrastructure. Further, COAS would be activated in the event of a
                  problem in DALI’s applications.

                  Finally, Banxico has developed a Contingency Manual for
                  Operations with CLS Bank International.

                  Through redundancy of communication and power infrastructure,
                  SPEI is prepared for possible service interruptions. Contracts with
                  SPEI telecommunication and software suppliers enforce certain
                  level-service agreements, particularly with regard to service
                  availability, recovery time after service interruption, and response
                  time.

                  Risks posed to other FMIs

                  Banxico regularly identifies the operational risks that it poses to
                  other FMIs and DSP-managed systems, namely SIAC, APLSPEI,
                  and CLS, as well as SPEI participants and DALI.

                  As far as DALI is concerned, similarly to what explained above, the
                  interconnected FMI is also a SPEI participant and as such business
                  continuity arrangements are highly integrated.
Key conclusions   Banxico has established best practices and standards for the
                  management of operational risks incurred in SPEI.

                  Banxico’s policies and procedures are comprehensive and
                  adequately documented, and specific plans have been developed to
                  address the identified risks.




                                       61
                  Banxico has clearly defined operational reliability objectives for the
                  services it provides through SPEI that are in line with broader
                  institutional objectives.

                  SPEI’s capacity is adequate to current volumes and sufficiently
                  scalable to cover increasing stress volumes. However, SPEI’s
                  infrastructure is not versatile as it uses one server for several
                  important processes, thus potentially compromising (near) real-time
                  settlement.

                  Banxico places a strong emphasis on continuity and information
                  security. The former is ensured through redundancy of
                  infrastructures, and relies on POA, SOA, as well as COAS
                  procedures. Moreover, at 30 minutes, SPEI’s recovery time is well
                  below the two-hour limit established by international standards. In
                  terms of information security, Banxico has aligned institutional
                  information security policies with ISO/IEC 27001. SPEI’s
                  transactions are digitally signed and communications are encrypted.

                  To the extent that interdependent FMIs are either operated by
                  Banxico (i.e. SIAC) or act as a participant in SPEI (e.g. DALI),
                  business continuity arrangements are highly integrated.
Assessment of     Observed
Principle 17
Recommendations   Banxico should consider establishing service-level targets for SPEI
and comments      main services (e.g. processing speed) as opposed to CASP only, and
                  in addition to system availability and recovery time targets.

                  SPEI capacity planning should aim to achieve a sufficient level of
                  confidence that service-level objectives (e.g. required processing
                  speed) will be maintained under a wide range of plausible stress
                  scenarios.




                                       62
PRINCIPLE 18. ACCESS AND PARTICIPATION REQUIREMENTS
An FMI should have objective, risk-based, and publicly disclosed criteria for participation,
which permit fair and open access.
Key consideration 1 An FMI should allow for fair and open access to its services,
                       including by direct and, where relevant, indirect participants and
                       other FMIs, based on reasonable risk-related participation
                       requirements.
Description            Participation criteria and requirements

                      SPEI regulations, art. 2 lists the types of entities that can participate in
                      the system. These include credit institutions, broker-dealers, exchange
                      bureaus, pension funds, insurance companies, savings and credit
                      cooperative associations, mutual fund distribution entities, mutual fund
                      management companies, and regulated finance companies, in addition
                      to central securities depositories and clearinghouses authorized by
                      Banxico according to the terms of the LTOSF.

                      Banxico reserves the right to grant access to the system to any other
                      entity provided that this is regulated and supervised by Banxico itself,
                      the CNBV, CONSAR (Comisión Nacional del Sistema de Ahorro para
                      el Retiro) or the CNFS (Comisión Nacional de Seguros y Fianzas).

                      The prospective participant must demonstrate that it complies with the
                      technical requirements to operate in SPEI. SPEI regulations establish
                      participants’ obligations to comply with operating hours, protocols,
                      formats, and processes established in the SPEI Manual. Participant must
                      enter in a contract with Banxico.

                      As far as information security and operational risk management are
                      concerned, Banxico has issued specific requirements. Participants must
                      provide the documental evidence of the risk management measured
                      required by Banxico.

                      Access to trade repositories

                    Not applicable.
Key consideration 2 An FMI’s participation requirements should be justified in terms of
                    the safety and efficiency of the FMI and the markets it serves, be
                    tailored to and commensurate with the FMI’s specific risks, and be
                    publicly disclosed. Subject to maintaining acceptable risk control
                    standards, an FMI should endeavour to set requirements that have
                    the least-restrictive impact on access that circumstances permit.
Description         Justification and rationale of participation criteria

                      Participation requirements are focused on (i) regulation/supervision as a
                      prerequisite, and (ii) Banxico’s determination that the participant has the
                      necessary technical requirements to operate safely in the SPEI. The
                      admissible categories of participants are listed in art. 2 of the SPEI Rules.
                      Banxico can admit new types of participants, provided that these are


                                           63
                       regulated and supervised. New types of participants must be vetted and
                       approved by the Board.

                       SPEI participants’ contract requires that participants meet technological
                       requirements (hardware/software) consistent with SPEI technical
                       specifications.

                       Least restrictive access

                       In terms of proportionality, it is worth noting that certain more stringent
                       requirements on service availability to the final customer are waived for
                       smaller participants. In particular:
                       •     participants that have less than 1,500 customer accounts and
                             provide mobile transfer services to their customers, are exempted
                             from the requirement to make available and process mobile
                             transfers 24 hours 7 days a week; on the other hand, they must
                             guarantee this service during business days, between the hours of
                             6:00 and 17:30.
                       •     similarly, between the hours of 17:31 to 05:59, participants that
                             have less than 1,500 customer accounts are exempted from the
                             requirement to credit the account of the beneficiary of a mobile
                             transfer within 5 seconds from being notified of the settlement of
                             the transaction.
                       •     the 10 second time limit established for refunds (devoluciones) is
                             also not applicable to participants that have less than 1,500
                             customer accounts outside of normal business hours as referenced
                             above.

                       SPEI annual fixed fee is determined according to the relative
                       participation in the system of each participant based on the number of
                       transactions initiated in the last five years. Banxico indicates that SPEI
                       fees have decreased over time and do not represent a barrier to entry.

                       Participants satisfying the participation criteria may access SPEI
                       services without any restrictions. When considering access to intraday
                       liquidity through SIAC, Banxico by law can only grant credit to banks
                       (in addition to the Federal Government and IPAB) (see Banco de
                       Mexico’s Law, art.7 II). Repos are extended to broker-dealers through
                       banks (see Circular No. 3/2012).

                       Disclosure of criteria

                    SPEI regulations are publicly disclosed on Banxico’s website. The
                    Operating Manual, contracts, and other documents that elaborate further
                    on the requirements set out in art. 2 of the SPEI Rules are confidential in
                    nature and disclosed only to system’s participants.
Key consideration 3 An FMI should monitor compliance with its participation
                    requirements on an ongoing basis and have clearly defined and
                    publicly disclosed procedures for facilitating the suspension and



                                            64
                  orderly exit of a participant that breaches, or no longer meets, the
                  participation requirements.
Description       Monitoring compliance

                  Prospective participants must undergo a process of certification. In light
                  of changes that may occur in the infrastructure participants use to operate
                  through SPEI, Banxico can require that a new certification is undertaken
                  to ensure that SPEI requirements continue to be met.

                  The process to monitor SPEI participants’ compliance is largely drawn
                  from Banxico’s supervision rules (Reglas de Supervisión, Programas de
                  Autocorrección y del Procedimiento Sancionador, 2015). Banxico
                  supervisory approach is focused on: (i) monitoring and analysis of
                  compliance based on the information supervised entities provide to
                  Banxico, and; (ii) on-site inspections to verify operations and review
                  records, systems, and facilities of supervised entities. When Banxico
                  identifies a situation of non-compliance as a result of an inspection, it
                  notifies the relevant parties and recommends corrective actions to be
                  implemented by a deadline established by Banxico. The supervised
                  entity submits a remediation plan. Banxico follows up on a remote basis
                  through documental evidence of progress in implementing the
                  remediation plan, or through on-site visits. On average, Banxico inspects
                  a representative sample of ten SPEI participants every year.

                  Participants’ compliance with information security and operational risk
                  requirements are monitored through documental evidence and in-site
                  inspections.

                  SPEI contract also specifies the sanctions that apply in case of non-
                  compliance with SPEI rules. Upon identifying a case of non-compliance,
                  Banxico issues a notification to the participant, including the applicable
                  fines. The participant has three working days to provide clarifications.
                  On the fifth day, the participant must pay the fine.

                  Suspension and orderly exit

                  SPEI regulations establish that Banxico may suspend or terminate, at any
                  time, SPEI operations with one or more participants when in the opinion
                  of Banxico itself the participant may generate risks to the operation of
                  the system, or when it breaches SPEI internal rules or contractual
                  obligations (see art. 11.9).

                  The Board of Governors is informed of participants’ (entry) and exit.
Key Conclusions   SPEI rules and the faculties of Banxico in terms of allowing new
                  categories of participants are broad enough to accommodate existing and
                  foreseeable new needs that may arise in the Mexican financial market.

                  Participation requirements are risk-based and justified in light of the
                  systemically important nature of the system. However, these
                  requirements are not publicly disclosed beyond a general requirement


                                       65
                  for prospective participants to certify, at Banxico’s discretion, their
                  technical preparedness to operate in the system.

                  Although Banxico’s powers to suspend or terminate a participant are
                  clear, there are no clearly defined and publicly disclosed procedures for
                  facilitating the suspension and orderly exit of a participant that breaches,
                  or no longer meet, SPEI participant requirements.
Assessment of     Broadly Observed
principle 18
Recommendations   Banxico should compile and disclose the risk-based participation
and comments      requirements in SPEI.

                  Additionally, Banxico should define and publicly disclose procedures
                  for facilitating the suspension and orderly exit of a participant that
                  breaches, or no longer meet, SPEI participant requirements.




                                       66
PRINCIPLE 19. TIERED PARTICIPATION ARRANGEMENTS
An FMI should identify, monitor, and manage the material risks to the FMI arising from tiered
participation arrangements.
Key consideration 1     An FMI should ensure that its rules, procedures, and agreements
                        allow it to gather basic information about indirect participation in
                        order to identify, monitor, and manage any material risks to the
                        FMI arising from such tiered participation arrangements.
Description             Tiered participation arrangements

                        Not applicable. SPEI only allows direct participation.

                        Risks to the FMI

                        Not applicable. SPEI only allows direct participation.
Key consideration 2     An FMI should identify material dependencies between direct and
                        indirect participants that might affect the FMI.
Description             Not applicable. SPEI only allows direct participation.
Key consideration 3     An FMI should identify indirect participants responsible for a
                        significant proportion of transactions processed by the FMI and
                        indirect participants whose transaction volumes or values are large
                        relative to the capacity of the direct participants through which they
                        access the FMI in order to manage the risks arising from these
                        transactions.
Description             Not applicable. SPEI only allows direct participation.
Key consideration 4     An FMI should regularly review risks arising from tiered
                        participation arrangements and should take mitigating action when
                        appropriate.
 Description            Not applicable. SPEI only allows direct participation.
Key conclusions         -
Assessment of           Not applicable
Principle 19
Recommendations         -
and comments




                                            67
PRINCIPLE 21: EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS
An FMI should be efficient and effective in meeting the requirements of its participants and
the markets it serves.
Key consideration 1       An FMI should be designed to meet the needs of its participants
                          and the markets it serves, in particular, with regard to choice
                          of a clearing and settlement arrangement; operating structure;
                          scope of products cleared, settled, or recorded; and use of
                          technology and procedures.
Description               SPEI design and operation are based on best practices and
                          international standards, including (near) real-time settlement, and
                          a multilateral netting mechanism that optimizes liquidity in
                          conjunction with other tools that facilitate participants’ liquidity
                          management.

                           SPEI supports straight-through-processing (STP). It operates
                           through an open communication protocol that allows participants
                           to connect to SPEI seamlessly regardless of the programming
                           language and operating system used.

                           Over time, Banxico has improved SPEI to meet the evolving needs
                           of its participants and the financial market, as well as the individual
                           beneficiaries / bank customers. For example: (i) it has added new
                           payment types (it currently supports 15 such types of payment); it
                           underpins the digitalization of government disbursements by
                           processing the equivalent of MXN 245 trillion or 335 million
                           operations initiated by TESOFE every year; (iii) it has
                           implemented a system of notification about the status of payments
                           to the final beneficiaries accessible through Banxico’s website –
                           Comprobante            Electronico        de        Pago,          CEP
                           (http://www.banxico.org.mx/cep/), and; (iv) it has increased
                           operating hours to achieve interoperability of mobile payments.

                           De facto participants are notified, and consulted about system’s
                           changes prior to their implementation, although through ad hoc
                           rather than formal, permanent mechanisms. Banxico maintains a
                           help desk (Centro de Atención de los Sistemas de Pagos, CASP)
                           for users’ (internal, i.e. Banxico personnel and external, i.e.
                           financial institutions staff) support comprised of eight staff.
Key consideration 2        An FMI should have clearly defined goals and objectives that
                           are measurable and achievable, such as in the areas of
                           minimum service levels, risk-management expectations, and
                           business priorities.
Description                Within the broader mandate of ensuring the smooth functioning of
                           the payment systems, Banxico has defined a clear objective to
                           strengthen the operational risk management of central bank-
                           operated system to ensure business continuity. As noted in
                           Principles 2 and 17, these objectives are measured through two
                           indicators on (i) payment system availability, and (ii) recovery
                           time.


                                              68
                                SPEI contributes to Banxico’s objective to promote the use of
                                electronic payment instruments (see Principle 2), as measured
                                through the number of electronic payments as a share of total
                                payments. 6

                                Banxico has established service-level agreements (SLAs) with
                                regard to the support services provided by the CASP. Among other
                                aspects, SLAs regulate response time, e.g. it is established that 90
                                percent of users’ queries must be attended within ten minutes,
                                whereas 70 percent of incidents must be resolved between 20
                                minutes and 1 hour depending on the level of priority assigned.
                                Banxico tracks participants’ satisfaction with CASP’s services
                                through surveys.

                                SPEI pricing policy is based on full recovery of operating costs.
                                Participant fees are re-calculated each year based on Banxico’s
                                estimation of SPEI operating costs.
Key consideration 3             An FMI should have established mechanisms for the regular
                                review of its efficiency and effectiveness.
Description                     The DSP prepares quarterly progress reports against the SPEI work
                                plan that are reviewed by the senior management. The outcomes
                                are reported to the Governor annually or more frequently as
                                appropriate.

                                Similarly, system availability and recovery time indicators are
                                monitored on a quarterly basis and reported annually to the
                                Governor and the Board of Governors.

                                SPEI undergoes internal and external audit on a number of aspects
                                of its operations multiple times a year.
Key conclusions                 SPEI was developed to replace the previous Banxico-operated
                                system, which resulted in enhanced risk management and greater
                                efficiency. Since its creation, Banxico has been effective in
                                accommodating the payment and settlement needs of Mexican
                                financial institutions, and it proactively sought market
                                development opportunity (e.g. through interoperability of mobile
                                payments).

                                There are a number of (mostly informal) mechanisms in place to
                                promote, together with market participants, the ongoing
                                improvement of SPEI.

                                All participants interviewed have confirmed that the system meets
                                their needs and shared positive feedback. Non-bank financial
                                institutions report to have benefited greatly from direct access to
66
   The number of electronic payments is calculated as the sum of the number of electronic funds transfers, SPEI
customer-to-customer transactions (tercero a tercero), direct debits, payment card transactions, and intra-bank
transactions. Total number of payments is calculated as the number of electronic payments plus cheques and cash
withdrawals.


                                                      69
                          the payment system, particularly in terms of cost-savings. At the
                          same time, it is perceived that access to consultation and decision-
                          making processes is skewed towards the majority participants.

                          SPEI’s pricing policy is to recover operational costs in full.
Assessment of Principle   Broadly Observed
21
Recommendations and       While Banxico has been generally responsive to market needs, the
comments                  project to establish a more formal and structured feedback
                          mechanism through a Users’ Group or similar mechanism with
                          broad participation (i.e. with representatives from all categories of
                          participant) is encouraged. Among other objectives, this would
                          help ensure that multilateral discussions are held regularly and that
                          these discussions reflect the views and opinions of a significant
                          share of its participants, that the initiatives are prioritized based on
                          consensus, and that there is adequate follow-up to the various
                          initiatives.

                          To the extent that SPEI processes low-value payments, of which
                          most are customer-to-customer interbank transactions – in fact,
                          these payments represent the second most important payment type
                          by volume with over 52 million transactions between January and
                          March 2016 – Banxico should consider establishing and tracking
                          indicators of usage and cost-efficiency of SPEI for customer of
                          banks as part of the formal mechanism for the regular review of the
                          system’s efficiency and effectiveness.

                          Banxico should complete and publish the CPMI-IOSO Disclosure
                          Framework for SIAC with the objective to enhance transparency
                          on the services provided by Banxico through SIAC that have a
                          direct bearing on SPEI’s operations.




                                             70
PRINCIPLE 22: COMMUNICATION PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS
An FMI should use, or at a minimum accommodate, relevant internationally accepted
communication procedures and standards in order to facilitate efficient payment, clearing,
settlement, and recording.
Key consideration 1      An FMI should use, or at a minimum accommodate,
                         internationally accepted communication procedures and
                         standards.
Description              Communication procedures

                        SPEI uses a proprietary communication network for the exchange of
                        data with its participants.

                        Communication standards

                        SPEI uses a proprietary message protocol for data communication
                        with its participants. SPEI protocol is not an international standard.
                        To communicate with CLS Bank, Banxico has a tool that translates
                        messages from SPEI format to SWIFT and vice-versa. SPEI protocol
                        is also capable of translating SPEI format to SWIFT and vice-versa
                        for processing banks’ For Further Credit transactions.
Key conclusions         Banxico does not use internationally accepted communication
                        procedures and standards. However, conversions from/to SWIFT is
                        made in a relatively straightforward manner.
Assessment of           Observed
Principle 22
Recommendations         It is recommended that Banxico evaluate on a regular basis the
and comments            opportunity to migrate to internationally accepted communication
                        standards. This issue is a candidate topic for discussion and
                        consultation in the context of the envisaged / recommended
                        participants’ forum.

                        It is understood that the cost-efficiency implications of migrating to
                        an international standards are not straightforward for a system such
                        a SPEI with a highly diversified participation and high volumes of
                        low-value transactions, e.g. customer-to-customer payments.
                        Moreover, SPEI protocol has been a factor in achieving broad
                        participation and in facilitating straight-through-processing.




                                            71
PRINCIPLE 23: DISCLOSURE OF RULES, KEY PROCEDURES, AND MARKET DATA
An FMI should have clear and comprehensive rules and procedures and should provide
sufficient information to enable participants to have an accurate understanding of the risks, fees,
and other material costs they incur by participating in the FMI. All relevant rules and key
procedures should be publicly disclosed.
Key consideration 1 An FMI should adopt clear and comprehensive rules and
                         procedures that are fully disclosed to participants. Relevant rules
                         and key procedures should also be publicly disclosed.
Description              Rules and procedures

                         The SPEI Rules (Circular No. 17/2010) and SPEI Operating Manual
                         represent SPEI’s key rules and procedures.

                         The clarity of SPEI rules is ensured through legal analysis prior to
                         amending existing regulations or issuing new regulations. Participants’
                         feedback and understanding of the rules is also gathered through ad-hoc
                         meetings, as well as in the context of participants’ supervision.

                         Disclosure

                         The SPEI Rules is a public document available through the Official
                         Gazette of the Federation and Banxico’s website. The Operating
                         Manual contains classified information; therefore it is made available
                         only to participants and to other interested parties through the
                         appropriate communication channels.

                         The Manual and other internal documents provide information on the
                         procedures that Banxico will follow, including discretionary actions, in
                         non-routine or critical events.

                         De facto, participants are notified of, and consulted about, material
                         changes in SPEI rules that would affect their operations. However, at
                         present there is no formal requirement for Banxico to engage in
                         consultations with its participants for this purpose.
Key consideration 2      An FMI should disclose clear descriptions of the system’s design
                         and operations, as well as the FMI’s and participants’ rights and
                         obligations, so that participants can assess the risks they would
                         incur by participating in the FMI.
Description              SPEI Operating Manual includes detailed information about the
                         system’s design and operations. The Manual is a confidential document
                         available to participants and other relevant parties only. Nonetheless,
                         Banxico has published information on its website about the main
                         features of SPEI as well as information directed to users.

                         Participants’ rights and obligations can be derived by SPEI Rules, in
                         conjunction with the Manual and the contracts. SPEI rules generally
                         refer to an obligation to certify at Banxico’s discretion their technical
                         preparedness to participate in the system.




                                              72
                      The SPEI Rules, the Manual and the contracts describe the cases and
                      areas in which Banxico may exercise discretion (e.g. contingencies) and
                      the approach it will follow in such circumstances. It is worth noting that
Key consideration 3   An FMI should provide all necessary and appropriate
                      documentation and training to facilitate participants’
                      understanding of the FMI’s rules and procedures and the risks they
                      face from participating in the FMI.
Description           Upon becoming a SPEI participant, financial institutions are provided
                      with the relevant rules and procedures, including the SPEI Operating
                      Manual. Prior to amending rules and procedures, Banxico notifies the
                      system participants. In addition, Banxico provides a support desk (see
                      Principle 21) and a window for participants/users to provide comments
                      and request clarifications. Banxico may engage in a one-off
                      meeting/training as necessary.

                      The means described above are generally sufficient to ensure a
                      participant’s good understanding of the rules, procedures and the risks
                      they face from participating in SPEI.
Key consideration 4   An FMI should publicly disclose its fees at the level of individual
                      services it offers as well as its policies on any available discounts.
                      The FMI should provide clear descriptions of priced services for
                      comparability purposes.
Description           SPEI pricing policy is disclosed in the SPEI Rules. Art. 11.4 lays out
                      the fee components, i.e. an annual fixed fee and a monthly variable fee.
                      The fixed fee is determined according to the criteria disclosed in the
                      Rules (art. 11.4 (a)), i.e. (i) Banxico’s determination of the overall
                      operating costs of the system, which include in addition to system
                      operation and maintenance, new product and project devolpment and
                      system upgrades, and; (ii) the relative participation in the system as
                      measured by the number of payment orders sent over a period of five
                      years as a proportion of total payments processed in the system in the
                      same period. The fixed fee thereby calculated has a one-year validity.
                      Variable fee components are listed in the Annex to the SPEI Rules, and
                      correspond to CLS payments, transfers between accounts, refund
                      orders, and retransmitted information. Each financial institution is
                      notified of its charges.
Key consideration 5   An FMI should complete regularly and disclose publicly responses
                      to the CPSS-IOSCO disclosure framework for financial market
                      infrastructures. An FMI also should, at a minimum, disclose basic
                      data on transaction volumes and values.
Description           The disclosure framework

                      The SPEI Disclosure Framework is dated March 2016. It is
                      established that this document should be updated every two years or in
                      case of significant changes to SPEI’s design and operations. This
                      document is available on Banxico’s website in Spanish.
                      (http://www.banxico.org.mx/sistemas-de-pago/material-
                      educativo/intermedio/evaluaciones-conforme-a-las-mejores-practicas-
                      inte/conforme-a-las-mejores-practicas-



                                           73
                  internacionales/%7BDE853D65-8859-1D34-76EE-
                  0ECF98065A59%7D.pdf)

                  Banxico publishes monthly statistics on the volumes and values of
                  transactions                 (http://www.banxico.org.mx/sistemas-de-
                  pago/index.html#E).
                  On a daily basis, it publishes statistics on participants’ connections
                  (http://www.banxico.org.mx/monspei/#todos).
Key conclusions   Banxico makes extensive disclosure of its rules, key procedures and fee
                  structure to SPEI participants. Disclosure to the public in general is
                  satisfied through the CPMI-IOSCO Disclosure Framework and the
                  Banxico’s website.

                  While Banxico engages in consultations with its participants on a need
                  basis, the consultation process is not formalized, for instance in the
                  Manual. Likewise, the Operating Manual does not describe the process
                  that Banxico shall follow in order to inform its participants of any
                  changes to services and fees.

                  Although there is no training program as such, the level of information
                  and participants’ understanding of the systems’ rules and procedures is
                  deemed adequate. Banxico has put in place a certification procedure,
                  and to some extent participants’ supervisory practices that allow
                  reinforcing participants’ understanding of the risks they incur.

                  Variable fees are attached to the SPEI Rules. Fixed fee are dependent
                  upon Banxico’s determination of its operating costs and the volumes
                  transacted.

                  Banxico recently prepared a disclosure framework based on the CPMI-
                  IOSCO format and made it available on its website in Spanish and
                  English.
Assessment of     Observed
Principle 23
Recommendations   Although in practice Banxico provides timely notice to participants of
and comments      material changes in SPEI rules and procedures that may affect
                  participants’ operations, it should include in its rules a clear obligation
                  to do so with respect to both changes in rules and fees.

                  Similarly, it should specify and formalize the process for consulting
                  SPEI participants and other relevant parties as appropriate about the
                  proposed changes. Among other aspects, it should establish the timeline
                  of the consultation process and the tools that will be used for obtaining
                  participants’ feedback.

                  Finally, Banxico could consider increasing transparency on SPEI
                  operating costs as a basis for the calculation of the annual fixed fee.

VI.   BANCO DE MEXICO’S RESPONSE TO THE ASSESSMENT



                                       74
