CONFIDENTIAL
FOR RESTRICTED USE ONLY (NOT FOR USE BY THIRD PARTIES)




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM

MEXICO
TECHNICAL NOTE

DEVELOPMENT BANKS
JULY 2016


This Technical Note was prepared in the context of a joint World Bank-IMF Financial Sector
Assessment Program mission in Mexico in June 2016 led by Alfonso Garcia Mora, World
Bank, and Ghiath Shabsigh, IMF, and overseen by Finance & Markets Global Practice, World
Bank, and the Monetary and Capital Markets Department, IMF. The note contains technical
analysis and detailed information underpinning the FSAP assessment’s findings and
recommendations. Further information on the FSAP program can be found at
www.worldbank.org/fsap.


                       THE WORLD BANK GROUP
                       FINANCE & MARKETS GLOBAL PRACTICE
                       LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN VICE PRESIDENCY
                                                             CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                    Page
I.        Development banks ............................................................................................................. 1
     A.      Overview of Mexican Development Banks ..................................................................... 1
     B.      Operating framework for development banks ................................................................. 4
     C.      Review of Selected Institutions Mandates and Programs................................................ 9
Annex: Tables and Figures ........................................................................................................... 15
                                       GLOSSARY

BANSEFI   Banco del Ahorro Nacional y Servicios Financieros
CEO       Chief Executive Officer
CNBV      Comisión Nacional Bancaria y de Valores—Banks and Securities Supervisor
DB        Development Bank
FND       Financiera Nacional de Desarrollo
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
IT        Information Technology
MSME      Micro, Medium and Small Enterprise
NAFIN     Nacional Financiera
NBFI      Non-Bank Financial Institution
NPL       Non-performing loans
ROE       Return on Equity
OCDE      Organización de Cooperacion y Desarrollo Economico
SHCP      Secretaria de Hacienda y Credito Público—Ministry of Finance
SHF       Sociedad Hipotecaria Federal
SFP       Secretaria de la Funcion Publica
SME       Small and Medium Size Enterprise
SOFI      State owned financial institution
OFI       Other Financial Institutions
SOFOM     Multiple Purpose Financial Companies (Sociedades Financieras de Objeto Múltiple)
                                       I. DEVELOPMENT BANKS1

                           A.     Overview of Mexican Development Banks

1.       Several state owned financial institutions operating under different licenses provide
credit as well as other financial services to virtually all market segments. State owned
financial institutions (SOFIs) that provide credit in Mexico operate under different licenses
including development banks, development agencies and development trusts (see Annex, Table
1). As in many other countries around the world, development banks (DBs) in Mexico focus on
funding for infrastructure, international trade, housing and micro, small and medium size
enterprises (MSMEs). Development agencies provide mortgage and consumer credit to workers
as well as credit to rural firms (in the case of FND). Finally, development trusts focus on the
provision of funding for underserved sectors with marked social component. Several of these
institutions provide technical assistance to individuals, MSMEs and financial intermediaries. DBs
are, after the development agencies the provide mortgage loans to workers, the largest SOFIs in
terms of size. Of the existing 6 development banks, only the smaller ones (Bansefi and Banjercito)
collect deposits from individuals given their focus on financial inclusion and provision of financial
services to the army2. In addition many of these institutions provide partial credit guarantees
(PCGs) that are mostly registered off-balance sheet. There are also a variety of development trust
created by states and municipalities that provide loans and guarantees but there is no
comprehensive record of them as no federal institution coordinates its activities.

2.      The 2013-2018 National Financing Plan (PRONAFIDE) stablishes ambitious lending
targets for SOFIs with a view to foster financial deepening, resulting in a pro-cyclical credit
behavior. Under the plan, credit supported by DBs3 has been targeted to grow from 6.2 in 2013
to 7.9 percent of GDP in 2018 to help meet the 40 percent credit depth objective (See Annex,
Figure 1). It is expected that DB share on private sector credit will stabilize afterwards. DBs are
well advanced on their target (7.8 percent at June 2016). To meet the targets, credit has been
growing briskly in the last 2 years, resulting in a pro-cyclical credit behavior which contrasts their
typically counter-cyclical behavior. Nevertheless, DB share in total banking sector portfolio (16.3
percent) remains below the levels of a decade ago. As development banks grew, they decreased
the share of public loans in their balance sheet to accommodate both an increase in credit to the
private sector as well as an improvement in liquidity positions4.

3.     The Financial Reform of early 2014 sought to facilitate risk taking by DBs and
improve their operation to support the achievement of the PRONAFIDE targets. To that
end, the reform eliminated the legal obligation of preserving the financial sustainability of the


1 This Technical Note has been prepared by Eva Gutierrez with contributions from Mateo Clavijo, both WB.
2 Banjercito operates similarly to a credit cooperative for army personnel and their families.
3 The DB supported credit includes direct lending, credit granted by private institutions guaranteed by DBs and

supported loan securitizations. The targets set in PROAFIDE apply to DBs as well as FIRA and FND.
4 In 2015, DB’s gross portfolio amounts to 51 percent of total assets, down from 67 percent in 2006. Credit to the

public sector amounts to 14.1 percent of assets, while in 2006 amounted to 40 percent. However, figures may not be
entirely comparable as the treatment of non-netting repos changed during the period.

                                                        1
institution and widen the range of guarantees that could be accepted by DBs5. The legal obligation
was strictly interpreted by DBs and the Ministry of Public Function (SFP), which at times sough
to seek patrimonial responsibilities for employees of DBs in case of loan defaults. Thus, DB tend
to maintain rather conservative credit policies. The reform also clarified that supervisory
responsibilities over DBs are the purview of financial regulatory authorities while the SFP should
only oversee their administrative functions. The financial reform gave greater autonomy to DBs
in the administration of its human resources and underscored the need to provide adequate
compensation to its workers to retain talent6.

4.      Currently, DBs support a third of all credit granted to the private sector, of which
about 12 percent is first tier lending. DBs provide 19 percent of credit to the private sector both
directly in first-tier (12 percent) and through intermediaries (7 percent). In addition, DBs
guarantee 12.6 percent of the credit provided by the banking system (see Annex, Figure 2). Given
ample market liquidity, DBs have mostly expanded their activities through first tier lending and
guarantees. Currently, first-tier loans amount to two thirds total DB portfolio, compared to 56
percent in 2008. About 40 percent of total first tier lending is given to the public sector. Part of
the first-tier lending is syndicated with private banks, particularly project financing loans.
Banobras and Bancomext have been the banks traditionally oriented to first-tier lending and thus
have also been the fastest growing DBs. However, NAFIN (primarily a second-tier SME bank)
has also increased its first-tier portfolio by incurring in project financing (particularly in renewable
energy). Bansefi has recently began to grant microloans to receivers of social programs and to
refinance loans to teachers. Credit supported by guarantees has been also growing quickly and
DBs have been able to increase the volume of credit mobilized through portfolio guarantees by
introducing first loss schemes7. Most guarantees are targeted to improve SME access to finance
and NAFIN provides about half of total DB PCGs.

5.     Despite rapid credit growth, DBs have consistently shown sound asset quality and
adequate levels of provisions. NPL ratio for all development banks has remained below 2 percent
since 2010. Only SHF, saddled with bath loans arising from the collapse of mortgage finance
companies during 2009, has a higher NPL ratio (5 percent). Provisions cover 262 percent of NPLs
in DBs, well above the 140 percent coverage ratio in private banks. There is no evidence either


5  While eliminating the requirement to preserve the capital, it was highlighted that DBs should have and efficient,
prudent and transparent allocation of resources. All DB governing boards include preservation of the capital of the
institution in their internal policies, which is understood with maintaining a ROE at least equal to inflation, to preserve
the real value of the capital.
6
  The reform excluded any Federal Public Administrative agency from signing off on the approval of the DB’s organic
structure or salary, promotion, recruitment, retirement and training policies. This power was left solely to the
governing board of each DB, subject to the proposals coming from its human resources and institutional development
committee. After 12 years of salary freeze in DBs, which had caused substantial rotation in qualified personnel, DB
employees will be able to get a productivity based bonus this year.
7 First loss-schemes provide 100 percent of coverage for portfolio losses up to 5 or 10 percent of portfolio. Pari-

passu gurantees typically covered 50 up to 100 percent of loan loss (the later only in disaster emergency situations).
Thus the introduction of first loss-schemes has allowed to reduced average public sector coverage over all guaranteed
loan portfolios to below 40 percent.

                                                            2
that banks have been relaxing credit
                                                                NPLs ratio
origination criteria or, except for specific and
relatively small sectorial programs, targeting            Development Banks        Nafin
                                                          Bancomext                Banobras
higher corporate credit risk segments.
                                                          Private Banks
However, there have increased lending in           4
infrastructure projects which have a longer
time horizon and are riskier by nature.            3

6.      Profitability has recently declined
                                             2
as DBs have lowered loan rates to meet
credit targets. Development banks have 1
historically shown modest ROE and ROA,
lower than private banks, given their social 0
function. However, DB bank boards have Dec-08                                    Dec-14
been reducing the minimum ROE threshold
for DBs to accommodate credit growth and      Source: CNBV
lower rates. Thus, the larger DBs (Banobras, NAFIN and Bancomext) have seen their ROE
reduced by 30-50 percent since Dec. 2013. At end-June, profitability for the system as a whole
stands at 4 percent, with all DBs having ratios above 4 percent except for SHF, which is
experiencing losses. However, most DBs have no further room to lower profitability.

7.      Recent growth portfolio and declined profitability has put pressures in capitalization
ratios in some of the largest DBs, however management of the capital with a group
perspective has resulted in capital reallocations among DBs to preserve ratios above 12
percent. In particular NAFIN and Bancomext have seen their capitalization ratios declined due
to credit growth and only Banobras, has been able to maintain its ratio thanks to the higher
profitability of its large infrastructure portfolio. Losses in SHF have taken a toll in capitalization.
Going forward, the modification in the calculation of capital charges for operational risk will
substantially affect the capital of Bansefi (4-5 percentage points). However, SHCP is
redistributing returns and surpluses towards the less capitalized institutions to ensure that can meet
their lending targets and maintain a one percentage point buffer above the regulatory requirement
as established by the DB boards (10.5-12).




                                                   3
Table 1. Capitalization of Development Banks
 Capitalization Ratio
                             2008    2009        2010     2011      2012     2013      2014     2015
 (%)
 Development Banks           14.8     14.5       15.5      14.6     14.9      14.2     14.0      14.2
 NAFIN                       12.5     12.6       14.2      15.1     16.4      15.3     14.6      13.6
 Bancomext                   14.0     14.4       15.2      12.4     14.5      13.7     13.1      12.7
 Banobras                    18.6     17.0       18.1      14.5     14.3      13.0     13.9      14.0
 SHF                         12.9     12.9       13.0      13.7     12.4      13.0     11.5      14.0
 Bansefi                     26.0     27.8       38.6      30.7     25.8      25.0     16.7      21.5
 Banjercito                  25.7     20.0       19.7      19.4     20.2      20.7     20.4      20.3
 Private Banks               15.3     16.5       16.9      15.7     16.0      15.5     15.8      15.0
Source: CNBV


8.      Currently, DB operations do not appear to pose mayor fiscal or financial stability
risks, but there are important concerns regarding the distortions and inefficiencies that the
current expansion of their operations could create. In addition to showing overall robust
financial sector indicators, stress test conducted on the three largest DBs (Banobras, NAFIN and
Bancomext) showed their resilience to a variety of shocks. Mexican DBs aim at crowding-in
private sector participation and thus they have substantial tier-II operations as well as guarantees.
However, rapid expansion of their first tier lending poses concerns about crowding out while the
introduction of several (albeit small in volume) programs with rate well below market levels raises
concerns about financial additionality of their operations as well as sustainability of its financial
inclusion efforts.

                        B.   Operating framework for development banks

9.      Increasingly, DBs seem to be considered as the primary solution for addressing
market failures in the provision of finance. The recently created Unit of Productivity in the
Ministry of Finance is identifying, jointly with the private sector, factors that impede productivity
enhancements in different economic sectors. Access to finance has been identified as one of such
factors in several of the sectorial dialogue groups. When this happens, the productivity unit
contacts a DB working with that sector to explore what type of products could be design to satisfy
the unmet financial needs of the sector. Increased dialogue with the private financial sector to
understand what factors impede intermediation to certain markets could help identify a map for
reforms (including regulatory and financial infrastructure reforms as well as technical assistance
to firms or financial providers) that would enhance provision of finance. If necessary, DBs could
participate supporting private providers but for the purpose of policy formulation should be
considered as a complementary policy tool not the primary and first solution.

10.     The definition of targets for DBs in terms of outstanding credit could create perverse
incentives in the institutions. DBs are expected to crowd-in the private sector in their activities
with a view to improve financial inclusion. However, credit placement targets provide incentives
to place credit by competing in rate with the private sector, particularly in larger loans. Thus DBs

                                                 4
seem to increasingly provide first-tier loans to larger corporates, and there have been also some
refinancing of private sector loans. Emphasis on credit placement also lowers incentives for DBs
to exit from operations when private banks are willing to take over and to assume large
participations under syndicated arrangements. Finally, target segments appear to be less well
defined as DBs are now pursuing project financing on first-tier basis; for example, the three largest
DBs now finance energy projects (sometimes in syndication others alone in case of smaller
projects) albeit not all DBs have the same expertise. SHCP through its presence in all DB major
credit committees can direct projects and different project segments towards the most capable
institution, ensure loans are given in accordance to public policy and avoid DB competing for the
same markets. However, decisions maybe also influenced by capital management considerations.

11.     While the financial reform prioritized DB interventions in sectors with limited access
to finance, the largest programs seem to focus on improve conditions of the financially
included. Under the financial reform, development banks were explicitly mandated to promote
financial inclusion, gender equality, and savings and investments in indigenous communities. It
was also established development banks could create specific programs and products to support
the development of MSMEs and rural producers. Several new programs have interest rates
significantly below market and have been created to foster financial inclusion (e.g. social subsidies
recipients, small rural producers, start-ups). Nevertheless, these programs are still relatively small
and growth potential heavily depends on subsidy availability. Under the most massive guarantee
programs, all SMEs are eligible even if they have long credit histories.

12.     Several newly created programs aimed at the financially excluded set loan rates at
levels that question the sustainability of the schemes over time. The Bansefi program for
social subsidy beneficiaries as well as the FND small rural producers provides first-tier loans at
interest rates below 10 percent. The rates appear to have been set up without proper pricing
analysis of operational and funding costs8. Budgetary resources provide guarantees to DBs for
credit losses arising from these programs. However tight fiscal situation and raising funding
reference rates resulting in margin compression, further straining DBs. In addition to the above
mentioned financial sustainability concerns, is unclear that individuals included in the system at
such low rates will remain included once they have to face market rates after exiting the
programs9.

13.     Furthermore, limits on rate on the new sectorial guarantee programs discourage
participation of NBFIs further limiting competition in the provision of financial services.
Limits on the rates to loans that receive a NAFIN guarantee favor larger commercial banks who
have access to cheaper funding, and thus can operate programs under larger margins. Precisely to
avoid further concentration in the financial system the traditional guarantee program of NAFIN
does not impose a maximum loan rate on credit originated by institutions other than the larger
banks. Thus, effects on competition in the market segments supported by the newly launched
sectorial guarantee programs should be carefully monitored and consideration should be given to
adopt a similar approach to the traditional guarantee program. This would help facilitate

8 See for example box on Small Agricultural producers program.
9 Also, all sectorial guarantee programs launched by NAFIN in recent years limit the rate at which banks can extend
loans.

                                                        5
incorporate to their programs small financial intermediaries that receive technical assistance from
NAFIN to access its financial products.

14.     The risk profile of DBs is changing drastically due to the new programs implemented.
While most institutions have solid risk management frameworks, there are areas of
opportunity. As DBs increase their share of first-tier lending the risk profile of the institutions is
fundamentally altered. In the case of Bansefi, it exposes the institution to substantial operational
and technological risks that can ultimately result in credit risk10. Also as DBs increase project
financing, credit, exchange rate and liquidity risks increase. For example, as NAFIN has ventured
in project financing its balance sheet increasingly looks like that of Bancomext; its share of first-
tier lending has increased to 23 percent (compared to 7 percent in 2007), asset dollarization has
raised from about zero to 16 percent, as well as its asset-liability duration gap. NAFIN counts with
a state-of-the-art risk management framework that provides confidence that this risks can be
managed properly. Also, DBs are subject to the same prudential requirements than commercial
banks. The only exception is that Basel III liquidity requirements will not apply to DBs as the
sovereign guarantee is thought to eliminate liquidity risk. Nonetheless all DBs monitor these ratios
for internal purposes and have begun to extend the profile of their liabilities to limit funding gaps.
DBs are standardizing risk management and credit policies under the coordination of SHCP.
However not all institutions have the same risk management capabilities and there are some areas
of opportunity.

15.     Mexican DB corporate governance practices seem to deviate from international best
practices in some key areas. The financial reform of 2014 introduced so positive changes in
corporate governance, principally in the area of human resource management as previously
discussed. But it appears that there are still several areas in which corporate governance practice
of Mexican DBs could be improved. For example, in areas related to composition of DB board
members (currently dominated by pubic officials with few independent directors), and
mechanisms for the election of CEOs (whom should be elected and removed by the board). In
addition all CEOs should have demonstrated financial sector expertise. Also according to best
practices, DBs should obtain a rate of return which is comparable to that of their competitors.
While there is no clear guideline of what that rate should be for institutions that aim to be viable
but non-for profit, it is considered good practice have a ROE sufficient to cover the cost of raising
capital11.

16.     Monitoring and evaluation frameworks in DBs focus on credit and client volumes as
well as financial performance indicators. Outcomes or impact are not comprehensively
monitored. Monitoring reports provided to management and SHCP typically report credit flows
and balances as well as number of clients and financial and operational performance indicators.
However, they do not monitor impact indicators such firms included in the financial system or
report comparisons on access conditions under DB programs versus private sector loans. Few
programs have undergone a rigorous impact evaluation to evaluate effectiveness. SHCP is

10  Bansefi loans to teachers and social subsidy recipients are collected through pay-roll and subsidy payment
automatic deductions which limits the credit risk. However, operational issues may prevent proper functioning of the
deductions.
11 See OECD guidelines on Corporate Governance of State-Owned enterprises.



                                                         6
working on an index to improve DB performance monitoring akin to that introduced in the
financial reform law to monitor commercial banks’ performance. In addition to including financial
ratios this index should include variables that effectively measure financial inclusion activities of
the banks.

Recommendations to improve SOFIs effectiveness

17.      Opportunities to consolidate SOFIs to increase efficiency could be explored.
Institutions that were created to address a market failure at a certain point in time appear to
continue operating after the failure is resolved. While few banks provided loans to low income
employees in the 70s when Infonacot was created, many banks provide nowadays consumer roll
to formal employees through pay-roll deductions. Consideration could be given to merge the
institution with Bansefi, which could use the expertise of Infonacot for the implementation of its
new first-tier products. In the past a merger between NAFIN and Bancomext was considered to
realize economies of scale and optimize use of back-office services and it could be re-evaluated.

18.     Complementing credit volumes with indicators that measure financial inclusion and
private sector crowding-in would better align DB incentives to ultimate policy objectives.
Address the Infrastructure gap as well SME and household financial inclusion are some of the key
issues and indicators that measure those outcomes would help prevent DBs to deviate from those
objectives. Indicators to consider could include for example accumulated stock of funding
provided for infrastructure projects in which the DBs participate, number of projects on which the
DB is the leading bank and share of institutional investors funding on DB participating projects.
These indicators would eliminate disincentives to private sector refinancing of DB participations.
They could also provide incentives to DBs to take a more active role on project generation as
opposed to pay structuring fees to private banks that contribute only small part of the project
financing12. It would also help development banks to orient their lending to underserved target
segments; for example it is unclear what is the market failure addressed by Banobras when lends
to AAA-A subnational governments or by Bancomext when provides working capital loans to
AAA corporates (see discussion on Bancomext). On the retail side, number of individuals and
firms accessing to credit and financial services for the first time would be indicators to consider.
These indicators could be included in the index currently under design by SHCP to monitor DB
performance.

19.     Refined indicators would also support rebalancing the focus from improving loan
terms towards bringing society into the formal financial system. While financial inclusion in
the intensive margin (i.e. improving loan conditions) may be necessary in some cases, a
rebalancing of resources toward financial inclusion in the extensive margin (including financially
excluded) appears appropriate as the main problem in Mexico is the low level of firms with access
to finance as opposed to high lending rates. Including indicators on inclusion on intensive margin
as the ones proposed above to complement credit balances would support instrumentation of such
rebalancing.



12   For example Banobras assumes up to 90-95 percent of project financing.

                                                         7
20.     Lending rates ceilings on programs to segments where market loan conditions are a
major issue should be carefully set to ensure sustainability of program outcomes. All DB
tier-1 programs should be priced to cover operational, funding and capital costs (including target
ROE) and include a credit risk premium based on expected loss. Given existing subsidies and
targeted volume then financially sustainable rate can be set. In addition, rates for all loans (both
direct or guaranteed) should be set not drastically lower than the true lending cost without subsides
to prevent agents becoming disenfranchised from financial sector once they exit the program.

21.     Supervisors and risk managers need to carefully monitor DB risks evolution in the
current context and place emphasis on addressing shortcomings in systems. While credit
origination seems to be subject to prudent practices across the board there are areas of opportunity
on improving market risk, liquidity risk, and technological and operational risk management. For
example, NAFIN should consider maintaining a structural net (long) open position to hedge
capital in the event of a depreciation or raise capital in dollars as recently done by Bancomext.
Supervisors could deduct the structural net open position from the current regulatory limit. They
could also ask DBs to include explicit limits on liquidity risks as part of their liquidity risk policy
in addition to monitor funding gaps. IT systems and operational risk are sources of concern in
Bansefi and FND because their more retail character. In addition these institutions should consider
hedging interest rate risk on their fixed rate loan programs. The institutions should continue
addressing these issues, most of which have been already identified –both institutions are for
example working on revamping their IT platforms-, in close coordination with supervisors.

22.     The authorities should undertake a thorough assessment of DBs corporate
governance practices and formulate a plan for adoption of best practices. In the roadmap
to incorporate best practices formalizing the role of the directorate of DBs in SHCP as
manager of a DB Holding could be a useful tool. Under this view, the minister or Government
will formulate policy and vision for the institutions, the DB Directorate as holding manager would
focus on setting objectives, exploiting synergies and measure outcomes13. DB boards would
formulate corporate plans and focus on attaining missions while CEO and management will be
responsible for execution and reporting. Under these scheme the minister and Directorate could
hold DB boards accountable and remove members if necessary.

23.     Virtually all DBs could substantially improve their monitoring and evaluation
frameworks exploiting already existing administrative information with the support of
Banxico and/or SHCP. In addition to monitor indicators more related to policies as the one
proposed to be included as formal DB targets, several other indicators could be monitored
including for example data of firms and individuals exiting the program and continuing accessing
credit or DB loans refinanced by the private sector14. Administrative loan level data provided to
CNBV for supervisory purposes contains a wealth of information that could be exploited to

13  Efforts have been taking towards improving synergies and measuring outcomes and increased coordination is
being contemplated through a DB committee but formally adopting the holding approach would help further separate
shareholder (government) and management roles.
14 The productivity unit of SHCP is expected to evaluate 10 DB programs next year though a system of indicators

that would be defined jointly with DBS. This exercise could provide a good opportunity to improve the M&E
framework of DBs.

                                                       8
construct time series of those indicators. Banxico, whom also receives that data, or SHCP could
regularly produce those indicators for all DBs. In addition, DBs should formulate a plan to over
time rigorously evaluate all their major programs and to conduct as well evaluation pilot initiatives
before escalating the programs.15

24.     State and municipal development funds should report activities to a registry of state
development institutions and report to credit bureaus. Many estates, and even municipalities
provide credit (both first and second tier) and guarantees through trust funds. There is no
comprehensive registry of these funds or the size of their operations. Several of these funds obtain
federal government resources from the Ministry of Economy. Previously, the program provided
the resources to chambers of commerce who through SOFOMEs and other financial
intermediaries provided credit to the private sector. Now the funds are directly provided to the
state development trusts albeit the provision of funds is not tied to operational performance of the
fund. Many of the funds operating in first tier experience large delinquency rates, and they do not
report to credit bureaus. The private sector has a negative perception of these funds which are
considered to provide credit to politically connected borrowers. Consideration should be given to
establishing a directory of state development funds and improve the link between federal support
and State development fund performance.

                 C.      Review of Selected Institutions Mandates and Programs16

NAFIN

25.     In a welcoming development NAFIN has in the last decade substantially changed its
orientation towards financing the private sector, including through project financing
particularly in renewable energy. The current mandate of NAFINs has a clear private sector
focus and the evolution of NAFIN’s balance sheet reflects this new orientation17. From end 2006
to end 2015 the outstanding volume of NAFIN’s credit to the public sector declined by 86 percent,
accounting now for only 6 percent of the total loan portfolio (compared to 71 percent in 2007).
During 2008-09 NAFIN created a new unit to focus on project financing on first tier basis, with
particular emphasis on renewable energy sector.



15  FIRA, for example, has created a Performance Evaluation Unit and is currently in the process of undertaking a
rigorous impact evaluation of its lending facility.
16 Discussion of SHF and Banobras and their programs is included in the long-term finance note, while discussion

of DBs MSME programs is included in the SME access to finance note.
17
   NAFIN’s mandate has evolved during its history from focus on supporting industrialization to rehabilitation of
large firms in the mining, metallurgic and transport sector during the 80’s crisis to the current mandate more focused
in MSEMEs. The current mandate is “To contribute to economic development by facilitating access to finance and
business development services to MSMEs , entrepreneurs and priority investment projects; contribute to the
formation of financial markets and serve as trustee and financial agent of the Federal Government , to foster
innovation , improve productivity , competitiveness, job creation and regional growth”.




                                                          9
26.      Project financing activities have permitted brisk growth of the balance sheet
portfolio of NAFIN, but has increased overlapping with mandates of other DBs. Since the
PRONAFIDE targets were introduced this segment appears to have been particularly dynamic, as
first tier lending has increased by 55 percent compared to a 40 percent increase in total lending.
Currently, NAFIN, Banobras and Bancomext provide project financing for energy projects. SHCP
with its presence in the credit committees of the DBs acts as a coordination mechanism but capital
or lending targets considerations may prevent operations being originated by the institution most
suitable in terms of expertise.

27.      NAFIN could further enhance the range of financial advisory services that offers to
MSMEs and improve the coordination between its second tier activities and technical
assistance services to SMEs. NAFIN offers loans to providers of SME finance as well as
guarantees to support MSME loans. In addition, NAFIN Offers several online tools for firms to
evaluate their financial health, including one that allows the firm to assess the likelihood of
obtaining credit guaranteed by NAFIN. NAFIN could consider developing a program that allows
the firm to submit a credit application to be sent simultaneously to the participant financial
institutions in the NAFIN network to provide a quote, which would introduce competition in the
system. NAFIN also offers courses to MSMEs to improve the firm financial management, energy
efficiency and corporate governance and has experts that provide advice online to entrepreneurs
(ejecutivo PYME). However, some financial institutions that are being recently incorporated to
the NAFIN programs are not aware of this services NAFIN could offer to their borrowers and that
could further expand the bankable firm set.

Bancomext

28.    Sustainable growth and appropriate targeting are the major challenges for
Bancomext going forward. In the last two years, Bancomext credit portfolio grew 80 percent,
more than doubling the credit growth rate of combined DBs. Bancomext operates on first-tier for
loans above USD 3 mill, with firms with a credit risk rating normally between R1-R3 (out of
possible 9 ratings with R1 being the lowest risk rating

29.      It also provides project financing. Currently, and around 90 percent of its portfolio is first
tier (compared to about 40 percent in 2006), of which about a third is syndicated (project loans).
Bancomext sees a comparative advantage in the provision of long-term credit in USD as banks do
not go beyond 10 years, and in the assumption of construction risks funding the initial project
states. To ensure avoiding crowding out it could cease to provide working capital loans in first
tier (current strategy envisions a reduction of such loans). It could also focus on higher credit risks
firms, charging above market rates that appropriately reflect the risk of the operation. In the
context of their current revision of tier II operations, Bancomext could allow banks to request both
guarantee and funding for its portfolio of loans to exporters as done by NAFIN and FIRA. To
minimize overlaps with Banobras and NAFIN, careful revision should be undertaken of the merits
of financing infrastructure and energy projects.

30.    Continuing developing Bancomext EXIM products is a key priority in order to
increase its financial additionatility. Albeit Bancomext is the DB focused foreign trade
financing it still has to fully develop the range of EXIM products that provides. It provides letters

                                                  10
of credit, international factoring (launched 2 years ago) and export-import guarantees. However,
large part of its operations is still concentrated on the provision of credit to companies engaging
in foreign trade as opposed to finance the transaction. As exporters are typically best credit risks,
the product mix limits the financial additionality provided by Bancomext. In addition to develop
products than benefit from guarantees provided by foreign EXIM agencies could develop
performance guarantees for international contracts obtained by Mexican firms as well as insurance
products that manage the risks associated with international trade (through a subsidiary or special
fund) as well as interest rates swaps in export loans under OCDE conditions that ensure Mexican
firms can access finance at the same costs as their competitors18.

Bansefi

31.     Bansefi’s role in improving access of households to financial services needs to be
rethought. Currently, Bansefi only operates in 76 municipalities not serviced by commercial
banks, while other deposit taking financial institutions (OFIs) operate in 232 municipalities
without commercial bank access (about 10 percent of total municipalities) so its network provides
limited additionality to that of other providers19. Bansefi innovation capacity has been limited; it
is neither a leader in the use of bank correspondents or mobile bank accounts20. In recent years
several niche banks began providing financial services to low income populations but there are
no estimates on what is the market share on that segment compared to other operators. Bansefi
was also envisioned to provide support to OFIs operating with underserved segments by providing
technical assistance, IT and other back office services and financial services. It indeed provided
assistance to OFIs and played an important role on supporting their certification as part of
becoming regulated institutions, but Bansefi’s technology platform showed areas of opportunity
to improve the quality of services provided to OFIs and to a more efficient operation of the bank21.
As Bansefi begins first-tier lending operations, OFIs increasingly perceive it as a competitor as
opposed to a service provider.

32.     The current business model of Bansefi’s is also problematic as financial sustainability
relies on fees collected from the government on the payment of social programs. So far
Bansefi has offered the more competitive bid on the payment of such programs but if in the future
private financial institutions may displace Bansefi as the most efficient provider of such services.
Without the fee income generated by the payment of this services Bansefi would incur in
operational loses. Beyond the income generated from the new loan program to beneficiaries of
social programs is unclear what would be the additional revenue sources. However, the program

18 See for example http://www.cesce.es/riesgos-extraordinarios, and https://www.ico.es/web/ico/contrato-de-ajuste-
reciproco-de-intereses.
19 In addition, Bansefi established an alliance with other providers (L@Red de la Gente) that operates in almost 40

percent of the municipalities offering transfers among the network, remittances services and distribution of
microinsurance.
20 The correspondent bank model adopted proved problematic and is now being revamped. Digital banking will be

launched this year but only allowing customers to check balances and conduct transfers among Bansefi accounts.
21 Poor connectivity in several municipalities as well as network problems have resulted in severe operational

problems; it is reported that opening an account takes 50 minutes. This large processing times is limiting the ability
of enter in to agreements with financial providers that would like to use the Bansefi network. Bansefi is currently
revising is IT platform with a view to address these problems and sustain its new first-tier operations.

                                                         11
had to be interrupted due to operational failures and has yet to resume. Bansefi could also increase
return of its portfolio investments by moving into longer maturity assets. Currently, most
investments are in short term to minimize capital consumption for market risks.

33.     The original vision for Bansefi of supporting the OFI sector and fostering financial
inclusion on the savings and transactional side could still offers seems viable for the medium
term. Regulatory changes that allow the use of banking correspondents to credit cooperatives and
mobile banking solutions could allow Bansefi to extend its reach with a minimum own network
while focusing on developing financial solutions and provide back office services. The change in
model via reduction of its own network via leveraging the use of certified partners would
drastically reduce operational costs. Alternatively could lease the use of its office to a variety of
financial to providers to which would provide back office support, to support competition while
ensuring coverage of administrative costs. Aligning the provision of technical assistance with
accreditation requirements to be part of the network and to qualify for Bansefi second tier credit
would help improving the income generation capacity under this model 22. A light and revamped
highly innovative Bansefi could focus on developing new products (network debit cards, life-
event savings products, mobile banking solutions) operating a reduced network that caters mostly
to the certified NBFIs that provide those services to customers. While it could pilot programs
directly if maintains its network, the focus would be on ensuring other providers offer those
financial solutions.

34.     To unleash the potential of Bansefi is essential to improve human capacity, IT
systems, administrative procedures and corporate governance of the institution. As in other
DBs, salaries have been frozen for 12 years which hampers attraction of IT and product
development specialists as well as risk managers. Administrative process for acquisitions appear
cumbersome to the staff. It is also important to ensure that management has appropriate banking
expertise and that the Board, including independent directors, are involved in the formulation of
the strategy and supervision of the performance of the institution.

Financiera Nacional de Desarrollo Agropecuario

35.     FND strategy to expanding access to finance in rural areas increasingly through
NBFIs seems promising. FND finances agriculture, fisheries, forestry and rural commerce with
the goal of improving productivity and improving the quality of life of the rural population. While
Bansefi focus is financial inclusion of the poorer - which has a fundamental savings and
transactional component-, FND focuses on the provision of credit for productive purposes in rural
areas. FND’s balance sheet projections envision portfolio growth of 62 percent by 2018 relative
to end-2014, with an important part of this growth being second-tier lending activities23. FND



22  Currently technical assistance activities of Bansefi to NBFIs focus on strengthening the sector and improve their
efficiency unlike FND assistance that focus on ensure that NBFIs interested in receiving credit achieve compliance
with FND requirements. Several SOFIPOs, microfinance institutions and SOFOMEs could be potential borrowers
of Bansefi given funding needs.
23
   FND inherited the network and performing assets of Banrural, a public agricultural bank but was created as a
development agency focus on providing credit funded with its own resources. Recently, has been authorize to receive

                                                         12
works with a wide range of rural financial providers, many of them unsupervised, which are
typically small and rely on FND financing. FND, does not impose caps on the rates their
intermediaries can lend to final borrowers, with very few exceptions such as the program
described below.

                                Small Agricultural Producers Financing Program

 The program, launched in August 2014, provides funding to small rural producers (up to about USD 13,000) at
 subsidized rates. Loans can be used for working capital, investment or for unspecified purposes (including simple
 credits or revolving credit lines) with a maximum maturity of 5 years. For working capital and investment loans
 only future crops are required as guarantee. For other loans, real guarantees would be required (125 percent of the
 value of the loan). Credits can be granted in first or second-tier, and in the second case the subsidized rate has to
 be translated to the final borrower.

 The amount of the subsidy is said to depend on fiscal resources. Currently rates were set at 6.5 percent for women
 and 7 percent for men. Subsidy resources are used to provide guarantees for the expected loss as well as for
 allowing below market interest. FND estimates that is funding costs (assumed to be equal to inflation) and
 operative costs would require a rate of about 10 percent to break even in first-tier lending. When loans are granted
 in second-tier FND provides a rate to the intermediaries that allows them to have 300b.p. spread (i.e. 3.5 for
 women and 4 percent for men).

 To reach a large number of producers administrative procedures have been made more flexible. For example
 additional identification proofs to the electoral card are accepted (including military card) and credits are pre-
 authorized when finance the adoption of technological package certified by the Ministry of Agriculture. Profile
 repayments are flexible and adapted to the nature of the project. Only 4 percent of the credits originated have
 monthly amortization of capital, with most of them having bullet repayments.

 When a loan is non-performing is taken out of the balance and put in order accounts with the credit being
 substituted by resources from the guarantee funds. The institution follow recovery procedures and if successful
 resources are reintegrated to the guarantee funds. Otherwise the loans are written off.

 Since the program was launched, credit generated amounted to about 16,000 mill. pesos (about USD 900 mill.).
 About one third of loans was granted to women. Also about a third of loans was granted in second-tier basis
 through 500 institutions. As the portfolio is still young and credits do not have monthly capital amortization is
 difficult to assess the portfolio performance. It is reported that about 4.3 percent of loans granted in first tier and
 0.2 percent of those granted in second tier are delinquent. In addition, 1 percent of the loans have been written off.



36.     The current design of the Financing for small agricultural producers program could
be further improved to ensure sustainability. Current rates require heavy cross-subsidization
from other FND products as they are insufficient to cover costs. As budgetary resources for
subsidies become scarcer maintaining current rates would be unsustainable. Given rates are well
below market rates, they could be revised to eliminate cross-subsidies and ensure financial
sustainability. Expected loss used to estimate guarantee resources requirements would need to
need to be updated according to portfolio behavior. It would be essential to design a proper impact
evaluation of the program measuring not only economic but financial additionality, in particular


loans for multilateral institutions as well. Thus, at inception FND portfolio was first-tier. Currently second-tier
operations account for about a third of the loan portfolio but is expected to grow up to two thirds.




                                                           13
what is the proportion of producers accessing formal credit for the first time. Also beneficiaries
should be made aware of the subsidy provided (for example with a letter informed them of the
repayment with and without subsidy) so they become aware of the true cost of the product. A
schedule for progressive reduction of subsidy should be introduced as good credit history would
reduce the credit risk premium. Also it is essential to devote resources to generate additional
intermediaries on estates where average rates charged to producers are higher due to limited
competition.




                                               14
                                         Annex: Tables and Figures
Table 1. State Owned Financial Institutions
                     Name                             Market Segments          Assets24     Funding Sources

                                                Development Banks
 Banobras                                         Infrastructure and Public    642.1      Securities issued and
                                                  services                                loans

 NAFIN                                            MSMEs, entrepreneurs and     384.8      Securities issued,
                                                  priority investment                     non-retail deposits,
                                                  projects                                loans

 Bancomext                                        Exporters and their          321.1      Securities issued,
                                                  suppliers and FX earners                non-retail deposits,
                                                                                          loans

 Sociedad Hipotecaria Federal (SHF)               Housing (construction and    109.3      Securities issued and
                                                  acquisition)                            loans

 Bansefi                                          Savings and credit for       31.0       Deposits and loans
                                                  poorer population

 Banjercito                                       Savings and credit for       58.5       Deposits
                                                  army personnel

                                               Development Agencies
 Financiera Nacional de Desarrollo                Credit to rural population   48.6       Loans and own
 Agropecuario, Rural, Forestal y Pesquero                                                 capital
 FND

 Fondo Nacional dela Vivienda para los            Mortgage loans to private    1067.1     Payroll contributions
 Trabajadores INFONAVIT                           sector workers
 Fondo de la Vivienda del Instituto de la         Mortgage loans to public     159.2      Payroll contributions
 Seguridad y Servicios Sociales de los            sector workers                          and security issuance
 Trabajadores del Estado FOVISSSTE
 Instituto del Fondo Nacional para el Consumo     Consumer credit              15.1       Securities issued and
 de los Trabajadores INFONACOT                                                            loans

                                                Development Trusts
 Fondo de Operación y Financiamiento              Social Housing               16.7       Own capital and loans
 Bancario de la Vivienda (FOVI)                   (construction and
                                                  acquisition)

 Fideicomisos instituidos en relación con la      Agricultural producers       121.9      Securities issued and
 Agricultura (FIRA)                                                                       loans
 Fideicomiso de Fomento Minero FIFOMI             Mining companies             5.2        Own capital and loans




24   Billions of MXN, December 2015.

                                                        15
                              Figure 1. Financial Deepening targets and DB balance sheet growth

                       DB supported credit                                        Credit to the Private Sector
             10                                                              50
                                                                                                                     40.0
                                      7.4                                                                     37.5
                   8            7.0                                          40                        35.1
                                                                                                32.8




                                                                 Percent of GDP
  Percent of GDP




                        6.2
                                                        7.9                           28.8 30.8
                   6                        7.2   7.5                        30
                                6.5   6.8                                                       32.3
                        6.2                                                           28.8 30.5
                   4                                                         20                                 Actual
                                              Actual
                   2                                                         10                                 Target
                                              Target path                                                       path
                   0                                                              0
                       2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018                                  2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018




Source: National Funding Plan and CNBV.




                                                            16
            Figure 2. Financial Deepening targets and DB balance sheet growth




Source: World Bank staff calculations based on CNBV, FR data and estimates from Banxico




                                                             17
