CONFIDENTIAL
FOR RESTRICTED USE ONLY (NOT FOR USE BY THIRD PARTIES)




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM

MEXICO

TECHNICAL NOTE
INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE AND
CAPITAL MARKETS: ACHIEVEMENTS
AND CHALLENGES
JULY 2016
This Technical Note was prepared in the context of a joint World Bank-IMF Financial Sector
Assessment Program mission in Mexico during June, 2016 led by Alfonso Garcia Mora,
World Bank and Ghiath Shabisigh, IMF, and overseen by Finance & Markets Global
Practice, World Bank and the Monetary and Capital Markets Department, IMF. The note
contains technical analysis and detailed information underpinning the FSAP assessment’s
findings and recommendations. Further information on the FSAP program can be found at
www.worldbank.org/fsap.


                      THE WORLD BANK GROUP
                      FINANCE & MARKETS GLOBAL PRACTICE
                      LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN VICE PRESIDENCY
                                                     CONTENTS

                                                                                                                              Page

A.   Introduction ................................................................................................................ 1
B.   Capital markets development in Mexico ................................................................... 2
     Instruments ................................................................................................................. 2
     Investors ..................................................................................................................... 4
C.   Infrastructure financing: developing a financing ecosystem...................................... 5
     PPP framework .......................................................................................................... 5
     Infrastructure financing instruments .......................................................................... 6
D.   The role of development institutions........................................................................ 12
E.   Conclusions and recommendations .......................................................................... 14




                                                             i
                                 GLOSSARY



ADR       American Depositary Receipt
AE        Advanced Economy
AUM       Assets Under Management
CDPQ      Caisse de Dépôt et Placement du Québec
CKD       Certificado de Capital de Desarrollo (publicly listed private equity fund
          specific to Mexico)
CerPI     Certificados de Proyectos de Inversión (publicly listed private equity fund
          specific to Mexico)
CIEN      Certificado de Infraestructura en Escolar Nacional
CNBV      Comisión Nacional Bancaria y de Valores—Banks and Securities
          Supervisor
CONSAR    Comisión Nacional del Sistema de Ahorro para el Retiro
EME       Emerging Market Economy
EPC       Engineering, Procurement, Construction
Fibra E   (Fideicomiso de Bienes Raices para el Sector Energetico (publicly listed
          REIT type fund for equity investments in mature infrastructure assets
          specific to Mexico)
FONADIN   Fondo Nacional de Infraestructura
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
GP        General Partner
IPO       Initial Public Offering
LAC       Latin America and the Caribbean
LP        Limited Partner
MILA      Mercado Integrado Latinoamericano
NYSE      New York Stock Exchange
PE        Private Equity
PNI       Programa Nacional de Infraestructura 2014-2018
PPP       Public Private Partnership
NAFIN     Nacional Financiera SNC, Institución de Banca de Desarrollo.
          (Development Bank)
SHCP      Secretaria de Hacienda y Credito Público—Ministry of Finance
SME       Small and Medium Size Enterprise
UDI       Unidades De Inversión
UK        United Kingdom




                                      ii
                                      A.     Introduction 1

1.     Mexico’s challenges in infrastructure finance can be framed along similar
lines as other Advanced Economies (AEs) and large Emerging Market Economies
(EMEs). It is broadly acknowledged that traditional financing sources from governments
and banks will not suffice to cover the infrastructure financing gap. This is the result of a
combination of factors. The size of infrastructure needs already exceeded funds available
before the 2008 financial crisis. But this was worsened by post-crisis fiscal constraints,
and higher risk aversion and regulatory constraints faced by banks. In order to fill in this
financing gap, governments are targeting long-term investors such as pension funds,
insurance companies and sovereign wealth funds, as part of the solution.

2.       Capital markets could play an important role in mobilizing institutional
investors to finance infrastructure in the most advanced EMEs, including Mexico.
However, they cannot be thought as the silver bullet for infrastructure finance, but a very
important complement to government and bank financing. Capital markets can play a role
in financing infrastructure by providing additional funds in long tenors and lowering
costs of financing through increased competition. In this regard, number of challenges are
still being addressed by both AEs and EMEs starting from developing an acceptable risk
allocation model for institutional investors, to making available the right investment
vehicles and instruments.

3.      A number of capital markets financing solutions are being tested in AEs and
EMEs with some trends taking more relevance that apply to Mexico. Instruments
being developed globally with greater success are showing three common elements that
will be assessed for Mexico in this Technical Note:

    i)     Liquidity is not a major concern for long term institutional investors, such as
           pension funds, while higher yields are. The consequence is that there is greater
           appetite for instruments with lower transaction costs where there are less degrees
           of separation from the real assets, such as infrastructure funds or unlisted
           products. As long as asset allocation to infrastructure is relatively small, as it is
           expected to remain in most countries, it does not impact liquidity needs of
           institutional investors.

    ii)    Financing structures are increasingly following hybrid models where banks and
           institutional investors participate jointly in the debt tranche of projects with
           several types of listed and unlisted instruments. So capital markets solutions need
           to be designed in coordination with bank financing.

    iii)   Listed instruments, including project bonds, are facing a number of practical
           difficulties (e.g. standardization, disclosure regimes) preventing them from
           becoming the dominant instrument. Project bonds are increasingly seen as one

1  This Technical Note was prepared by Catiana Garcia-Kilroy, World Bank, with invaluable research
assistance support from Gonzalo Martinez Torres, World Bank.
                                                  1
        more financing instrument among others, and mostly suitable for brownfield
        projects.

4.      Mexico is particularly well placed to make capital markets a reliable
financing source complementing bank financing. Its capital markets are relatively
mature, there is sufficient critical mass of long-term domestic institutional investors, and
there is a relevant track record of innovative solutions for infrastructure financing from
which to build. Section B of this Technical Note will assess the degree of maturity of the
Mexican capital markets in those aspects that are most relevant for infrastructure
financing. Section C will discuss the different elements of the infrastructure financing
ecosystem taking stock of the PPP framework and financial innovations that have been
developed, with emphasis on impact, expected developments and potential
improvements. Section D, will discuss the role of development financial institutions in
mobilizing private sector financing with emphasis on Banobras and Fonadin. Finally,
section E will conclude and provide a set of recommendations.

                       B.       Capital markets development in Mexico

Instruments

5.       Government bond markets in Mexico are competitive, present a diversified
range of instruments and maturities, are well regulated and innovative. Government
bonds are the main market with an outstanding size of 23 percent of GDP as of end-2016.
Government bonds are well-structured both in the primary and secondary market. The
latter includes efficient market making arrangements providing liquidity across the yield
curve. Issued maturities go up to 30 years in fixed coupon. Most instruments are issued at
fixed rates while about 25 percent of the outstanding stock are indexed-linked bond
which use the UDI as a reference tracking inflation. Foreigners hold around 36 percent of
outstanding debt and have been instrumental in lengthening the yield curve and
increasing secondary market liquidity. All these instruments provide a reliable long-term
risk-free yield curve to be used as price reference by other financial assets in the
economy, including infrastructure assets.

6.      Non-government bond markets are not a substantial source of long term
financing representing only 9 percent of GDP as of December 2015. Non-financial
sector issues dominate with 65 percent of outstanding bonds, if commercial paper is not
included (see Figure 1). The market is only accessible and efficient to issuers with AA
domestic rating or above. This is partly due to some restrictions affecting operation of
lower rated bonds, such as restrictions for banks and broker dealers to enter into repos
with counterparties other than banks and broker dealers as well as to previous restrictions
affecting pension funds to invest below AA although these no longer apply. In bank
centric markets, such as Mexico, raising capital is proportionately more costly for lower
rated issues that tend to be smaller and bear the same reporting and legal costs as the
larger ones. Hybrid issuance regimes 2 with lower financial reporting costs, as recently

2 Hybrid issuance regimes refer to issuance modalities between a public offering and a private placement.
They generally imply lower cost of issuance and shorter time-to-market as their reporting and disclosure
requirements are lighter than those of public offerings. These regimes target only institutional investors
                                                    2
adopted in Mexico, may be part of the solution. Secondary market liquidity is scarce, so
the role of specialized price vendors providing “third party” valuations is critical. These
are based in extrapolating prices from the sporadic secondary market trading of bonds
and/or estimated spreads over the government yield curve. Other advanced EMEs face a
similar situation in all these aspects.

7.       However, Mexico is showing recent and important developments in
infrastructure project bonds as a sub-segment of non-government bonds. Growth in
infrastructure related bonds for mature projects has accelerated since their launch in 2009
representing, as of end-2015, 10 percent of outstanding non-government bonds or 1
percent of GDP (see Figure 1 and section 3 below). Underlying assets are relatively low
risk in projects in their operational phase and with stable revenues. These project bonds
are filling a financing gap where banks would not be a financing alternative, given the
large size, lower returns and longer tenors typical of mature infrastructure assets.

        Figure 1. Outstanding stock of non-government fixed income securities




  Source: Staff elaboration with data from Secretaria de Hacienda y Credito Publico de Mexico (SHCP)

8.      Equity markets are relatively small at 38 percent of GDP as of end 2015.
They are smaller than peer countries with only 141 companies compared to 311 in Chile
and 359 in Brazil. Companies have few incentives to raise capital in the stock market as
relatively cheap financing is available from other sources, including banks and
international and domestic bond markets, given the low interest rate scenario, as well as
suppliers offering discounts and short term financing for their inputs. The lack of
dynamism is also in part related to the existence of large public sector conglomerates that
are not listed, along with family-owned corporations reluctant to transparency

requiring a lower level of protection than retail investors. They are equivalent to the 144 A issuance regime
in the USA.
                                                       3
requirements of being listed. Other factors include the lack of a developed securities
lending market and regulatory restrictions on operations with shares of medium and small
companies. Though the latter is being addressed as part of the changes to the equity
market structure. Relevant efforts have been made in terms on international connectivity
through ADRs in the NYSE and the incorporation in the Regional initiative Mercado
Integrado Latinoamericano (MILA) agreement with Colombia, Peru and Chile.
However, these efforts have so far had a small impact on attracting new listings.

9.      A number of innovative equity instruments for infrastructure financing have
been developed since 2009. These include listed infrastructure equity funds (CKDs) 3
showing promising results. Additionally, the Government is creating new products after
structural changes improving the enabling environment for infrastructure finance from
the private sector, such as the Energy Reform in 2014 and the PPP Law in 2012. New
financial products include mostly listed equity funds with different formats to the CKD
such as the CerPI and the FIBRAs. Section 2 will discuss in more detail these products.

Investors

10.     There is a diverse investor base comprising mutual funds, insurance
companies, pension funds and non-residents. Mutual funds are large at 11 percent of
GDP as of end-2015, but operate mostly as money market funds investing only in
medium and short tenors. Insurance companies are small at 6 percent of GDP and have
very conservative investment rules with 47 percent of their portfolio in government
bonds. Pension funds represent 14 percent of GDP and are the main source of long-term
financing in Mexico. Foreign investors are a very relevant source of long-term finance,
but so far only in government bonds holding 30 percent of total debt and 60 percent of
fixed coupon bonds. However, they could have a potential catalytic role in long term
finance for infrastructure (see below).

11.     Mutual funds invest short-term but have the potential of becoming a source
of longer term finance after recent Government reforms. So far, mutual funds have
been promoted and distributed by banking conglomerates as a flexible substitute for high
yielding savings accounts to their existing clients, and avoiding reserve requirements.
This structure does not promote the existence of mutual funds with different business
models and investment objectives. The financial reform approved in January 2014 allows
for “open architecture” mutual funds separating fund management from distribution. The
new model is being implemented and is expected to help develop independent mutual
funds with broader investment profiles. This is expected to drive mutual funds to operate
not only as money market funds but also to develop business models targeting more
sophisticated and long- term investments.

12.    Pension funds dominate long-term finance generally, including
infrastructure with both positive and negative consequences. They are the main
investors in infrastructure, though limited by regulations to listed instruments, including

3 CKDs are not limited to infrastructure. There are several CKDs dedicated to real estate, private equity
and financing.

                                                   4
project bonds and listed private equity funds (CKDs). The industry is very concentrated
which makes them very influential in any pricing process in the long tenors and limits
market liquidity, given their buy-and-hold investment profile. Regulations allow for a
relatively large bucket for infrastructure exposure, in average around 18 percent of AUM,
depending on the type of fund. However, they have only invested around 4.5 percent of
AUM in infrastructure. This is the result of three factors: lack of investable assets;
restrictions to invest in unlisted instruments; the small size of investment teams that
cannot cope with the increasing pipeline of CKDs and similar instruments, and limited
skills to invest in riskier and more complex assets. The challenge is to create a larger
pipeline of investable projects, stronger and larger investment teams within institutional
investors, as well as the conditions for a greater variety of long term investors, including
foreigners, in the infrastructure finance market, for which there is growing appetite. The
latter is already taking place in the Mexican REITs (Fibras) where foreigners are very
active.


          C.    Infrastructure financing: developing a financing ecosystem

13.    The sheer size and scope of commitments under the National Infrastructure
Program (PNI) for 2014-2018 is a clear indicator of the pressing need for long-term
private capital. The program aims at USD 596 billion of investments of which 37
percent would come from the private sector. The recent breakthrough sectorial legal
reforms would support a stronger engagement of the private sector including: the Energy
Sector Reforms and Financial Sector Reform, both enacted in 2014, as well the new PPP
Law enacted in 2012. These legal reforms would need to be accompanied by a
comprehensive ecosystem of innovative set of policies, regulations and instruments
supporting long-term finance for infrastructure. The government has already taken
important steps in the implementation of the PPP law and by developing several new
financing instruments (see below).

PPP framework

14.      Mexico is one of the most mature PPP markets in LAC. PPPs have been
implemented in Mexico since the 90s under different legal formats under the public
works concession law. A major step was the enactment of a comprehensive PPP Law in
2012, which was amended in 2015 and 2016 to address some shortcomings that showed
as it was implemented. This Law applies to all PPP projects carried out by agencies and
entities of the Federal Public Administration (Art.4 fraction IV of the PPP Law).
However, the agency or entity that seeks to participate with federal public resources in
PPP projects must meet the requirements of the Second Chapter of the PPP Law. In the
case of sub-national government, the PPP Law is optional to develop PPP projects and
it´s mandotory for local projects when the financial scheme comes mostly from federal
resourcesonly 11 projects have been approved under the new PPP law, until last year, in
the health, communications and roads sectors. .

15.    The PPP institutional framework can still be reinforced to increase the
Government’s effectiveness in program implementation and would provide
certainty to financiers. Two important issues remain to be addressed. First, the PPP law
                                             5
does not cover all projects, as some projects that contractually and financially operate as
PPPs can still be structured under the sectorial concession laws. This reduces the degree
of standardization PPPs should have (e.g. degree of project preparation, contractual
arrangements, risk allocation matrix, tendering, etc.). Second, there is not a formal PPP
unit in charge of overseeing, providing guidance and standards in the project preparation
cycle that would develop a structured and sizeable PPP program. This is a critical
function that generally resides in the Ministry of Finance. The Investment Unit at SHCP
has a PPP area which is currently partially conducting the role of PPP unit but it does not
cover the whole spectrum of PPPs and its resources are limited. An option is to
strengthen it so it becomes a full-fledged PPP unit. The existence of a structured and
sizeable PPP program has proved to be critical in mobilizing private capital efficiently in
AEs, with the UK and Canada being the most representative examples.

Infrastructure financing instruments

16.      Mexico’s financial sector has strong potential for increased private sector
financing of infrastructure, with the support of capital markets. There is ample
liquidity in the domestic bank and non-bank financial sector, as well as strong appetite
from foreign banks and institutional investors. While very positive progress has been
made in developing equity and debt instruments for infrastructure finance, further efforts
are needed for a broader long term investor base; refined infrastructure financing
instruments articulating bank and capital markets financing; and improved infrastructure
financing ecosystem through a stronger APP framework and a greater catalytic role of
development banks shifting from direct lending into induced credit.

Equity instruments for infrastructure

17.     The innovative strategy to develop hybrid capital markets instruments,
between private and public offerings regimes – CKDs - has produced promising
results. Listed private equity funds (CKDs) had a slow start when launched in 2009.
They were designed as a solution to address the prohibition of pensions fund to invest
into typical unlisted products (real estate, PE, infrastructure). After several regulatory and
governance adjustments they doubled their size since 2011 and reached around US$ 6.2
billion as of end-2015 (see figure 2). Around 30 percent of listed CKDs are related to
infrastructure funds investing in both greenfield and brownfield projects. CKDs are
having two important positive results: (1) they have opened up the opportunity for
pension funds to invest in infrastructure equity assets with higher yields than project
bonds, and(2) they are increasing the leverage capacity of project developers allowing
them to invest in a greater number of projects. The SHCP and CNBV have been flexible
and creative in refining governance, reporting and concentration limits in CKDs.




                                              6
     Figure 2. CKDs: Total issued amount                    Figure 3. CKD Issuances by sector
                  (mill. of Pesos)                                       (units)
    90,000                                             20
    80,000                                                         Infrastructure     Energy      Rest
    70,000
                                                       15
    60,000
    50,000
                                                       10
    40,000
    30,000
    20,000                                             5
    10,000
         0                                             0
             2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015             2009   2010   2011      2012   2013    2014   2015

         Source: SHCP


18.     CKDs have the flexibility to operate under several types of models depending
on the investors and partners involved. The most relevant models include: (1) a
traditional PE model with a General Partner (GP) and pension funds as Limited Partners
(LPs), though with direct participation in the investment committee, provided that a 10%
holding is kept; (2) a co-investment with a project developer such as a construction
company that may take part or all of the construction risk of the project through an EPC
contract; (3) a co-investment with an unlisted SPV in a joint venture scheme with the
CKD. Under the latter the unlisted SPV can be owned by a foreign or a local investor that
is generally more experienced than pension funds in the CKD.

19.    There are several regulatory and governance issues being raised in the CKDs
that are important to address.

•            Listed versus unlisted. As mentioned above, CKDs are very specific to the
             Mexican context, as they were created to overcome the fact that pension funds by
             law cannot invest in unlisted products. Two potential obstacles for future growth
             of the the CKDs are: (1) the higher transactional cost of listed instruments; (2) the
             disclosure regime of CKDs’ investments typical of public offerings. The latter
             may keep them outside certain important infrastructure investments that sponsors
             consider have commercially sensitive information. Internationally, pension funds
             can invest at least a small part of their portfolio in unlisted products, as long as
             there are objective valuation methodologies established. Therefore, consideration
             should be given to opening up the option of pension funds investing a small part
             of their investment portfolio in private placement vehicles with operational costs
             and disclosure regimes aligned with infrastructure projects. If such a regime was
             implemented CONSAR should develop a framework to ensure prudency in
             investment decisions and minimum qualifications of investment teams within
             pension funds.

•            Potential misalignment of interests under the PE model. The traditional PE
             model has raised issues among pension funds on potential lack of alignment
             between the GP and the LPs (pension funds) on the tenor of investments and on
             administration fees. This conflict has also been raised in other jurisdictions in AEs
                                                   7
      and EMEs. PE’s average life of 10 years is too short for most infrastructure
      projects and for pension funds investment needs. Additionally, the typical PE
      remuneration model of 2 percent of assets and 20 percent of profits can be too
      onerous in certain infrastructure investments with relatively low but stable cash
      flows, unlike the higher yields of riskier traditional PE investments. Similar
      concerns have been raised by pension funds in AEs leading to the development of
      collective investment platforms where pension funds have more flexibility on the
      tenors, and the remuneration of the internal technical team. Co-investment models
      with developers and foreign investors in Mexico seem to lead in this direction
      (see Box 1 on Infrastructure Mexico). This is a desired development not only in
      joint ventures with foreign investors but also among domestic pension funds only.
      However, policy support may be needed in this process so that overtime the
      adequate technical expertise is developed among pension funds and project fund
      managers to manage such vehicles.

Box 1. CKD Infrastructure Mexico: a partnership with a long-term foreign institutional
investor in local currency

CKD Infraestructura México, SA de CV is a recent and innovative example of how CKDs can be
used for investing in infrastructure. This investment platform was launched in late 2015. Caisse
de Dépôt et Placement du Québec (CDPQ), and a consortium of five Mexican investors including
FONADIN, Pensionisste and the three largest Afores are investing in the platform. CDPQ holds a
51% interest in the co-investment vehicle and is the controlling manager. CKD IM, whose
certificates are listed on the Mexican Stock Exchange, holds the remaining 49%.

CDPQ is a Canadian long-term asset manager for Canadian pension funds and insurance
companies with around CAD 250 billion AUM invested globally. A specific investment team has
been appointed to manage the Mexican investment platform but it will also, draw form the
expertise of infrastructure investment teams from CDPQ. This platform will allow the Mexican
investors to benefit and learn from CDPQ's infrastructure investing expertise. It will give CDPQ
local intelligence and deal access and probably some political risk protection.

The platform plans to invest up to MXN 35.1 billion (USD 2 billion) in Mexican energy,
telecommunications and transportation projects and has an investment horizon of 50 years. Planned
investments will be in equity in brownfield projects with stable cash flows in local currency. This
reflects CDPQ’s willingness to assume exchange rate risks and manage these on a portfolio basis,
which is facilitated by three factors: i) the indexation to inflation of the projects revenues; ii) the
long term horizon of investments; iii) the diversification of the portfolio at a global level.

Investments are planned as joint ventures with an infrastructure operator that has “skin-in-the-
game” and is responsible for managing the infrastructure assets. The first investment has already
taken place in an SPV managing four mature toll roads, in partnership with the Mexican
construction company ICA (see diagram below).

While this is a single operation at an initial stage, it shows a possible option to address several
obstacles long-term institutional investors in Mexico are facing: i) knowledge transfer from highly
specialized international assets manager; and ii) a vehicle with a partner with aligned interests
regarding fees and investment horizon.



                                                8
•          Pension funds in CKDs’ investment committee. A distinct feature of CKDs in
           Mexico, in relation to PE funds, is the direct responsibility of pension funds on
           every investment through voting rights in the investment committee, provided that
           a 10% holding is kept, along with the PE General Partner. This may create two
           types of problems: on the one hand pension funds may not have the required
           expertise to take technical decisions on every investment; on the other hand, it
           reduces the monitoring role of investors on the performance of the General
           Partner (GP) as is the case in traditional PEs. The SHCP and the CNBV have
           recently created a new type of listed PE fund, the CerPi addressing these issues
           (see below). However, some interviewed pension funds have expressed their
           preference to participating in investment committees to reduce potential principal
           agent problems. The co-investment models mentioned in the above paragraph
           could be part of the solution.




    Source: Staff elaboration with inputs from press releases and interviews with representatives from CDPQ,
    SURA, Banorte, Banamex and Fonadin

20.     Two new equity investment vehicles were created in 2015 that are expected to
attract a greater range of investors: CerPI and FIBRA E. The CerPI is an evolution
of the CKD, closer to PE Funds that, when a pension fund participates, requires another
entity (different from Mexican pension funds) to co-invest a minimum of 30 percent.
This rule seeks to attract sophisticated foreign and domestic investors along pension
funds participating in CerPI’s. It is also expected to be a more agile vehicle as pension
funds may not be required to participate in the investment committee, however this
committee will no longer be involved in day to day investment decisions, and will instead
                                                      9
oversee managers performance and approve investments with related parties and
counterparts in conflict of interest. CerPI is to be a friendly vehicle in attracting foreign
investors into co-investment arrangements. The FIBRA E is a fiscally favorable equity
like vehicle targeting mature projects, specifically in the energy and infrastructure
sectors, producing stable cash flows and targeting retail investors. It can provide an exit
strategy for projects initially financed through CKDs or CerPI’s during the construction
and rump up phases. Both products are very specific to the Mexican regulatory context.
Considering the success of precursor products, FIBRA for real estate and CKDs, there are
high expectations on the capital that they can mobilize.

Debt instruments for infrastructure

21.     While domestic project bonds for infrastructure are still small - one percent
of GDP- they are the largest among EMEs and are an ideal alternative for large
mature infrastructure projects. Main holders are pension funds with around 63 percent
of outstanding volume, and insurance companies holding around 7 percent. Project bonds
present the same features as ordinary corporate bonds with ratings above AA and very
low liquidity (see table 1). But in this case, competition from banks as alternative
financing does not apply. Contrary to the case of corporate bonds, banks cannot afford
the large size, lower returns and longer tenors typical of mature infrastructure assets
under project bonds. All these are features acceptable to pension funds investment
profile, including their low liquidity, given their buy-and- hold investor profile. A
relevant aspect is that they generally trade at a spread over corporate bonds of equivalent
ratings. This may be a sign of greater risk aversion to the fiduciary structures they are
based on, or the higher perceived risk of the underlying asset. Around 26 percent of these
bonds have partial credit guarantees provided by either Banobras or FONADIN. Further
analysis on how to align the spread with bonds with similar ratings and tenor is
recommended.

                       Table 1. Infrastructure project bonds, by type 4 (2009-2015)

                                          Type of rate          Quantity
                                             Nominal              45
                                             Indexed              24
                                          Credit rank           Quantity
                                              Senior              63
                                          Subordinated             6
                                          Credit rating         Quantity
                                               AA                 28
                                            AA/AAA                 7
                                              AAA                 34
                                      Credit enhancement        Quantity
                                              Surety               7
                                    On-time payment guarantee     11
                                       Pledge on securities        2
                                      Source: SHCP


4   Credit rating refers to the national scale.
                                                     10
    22.     Existing debt instruments could be broadened to include infrastructure debt
    funds to appeal to a broader range of private sector investors. Commercial banks are
    rarely able to provide loans on a recurrent basis beyond 10-12 years. The long tenor gap
    is generally provided by Banobras at 20 years and beyond in syndicated loans with other
    banks. A possible solution is to explore developing Debt Infrastructure Funds (maybe
    under private placements, CKDs or CerPIs format) through which pension funds and
    other institutional investors could provide long-term loans along banks providing shorter
    tenors, as is already happening in other markets. If necessary, Banobras could credit-
    enhance loans offered by the Debt Infrastructure Funds through partial credit risk
    guarantees (e.g. for construction, liquidity and political risk). This would enable
    Banobras to be more efficient from a balance sheet perspective instead of providing
    direct long tenor loans. It will also offer pension funds and other investors a new
    instrument with a risk-return profile between an equity CKD and a project bond.

Box 23.        securitization
            A Bonds:
    2. Project                  challenges was recently created to finance education
                              instrument
                     trends and
    infrastructure (CIEN). The bond is backed by the securitization of future flows to be
     new generation
The transferred    by of
                      theproject  bonds,
                            federal        after the demise
                                      government            of monolines
                                                      to sub-national      in 2008, iswith
                                                                        authorities    still in  the process of being
                                                                                              infrastructure
developed   both  in AEs   and   EMEs,   though   with  promising results. Project bonds
     projects in education. So from the investor perspective the bonds are exposed only     as  a      to the of total
                                                                                                   proportion
infrastructure lending is still small at around 9 percent of global project finance debt as of end 2015. But their
     risk ofsuch transfers. While these instruments differ from project bonds, they can still be
growth has been steady for the past four years.
    relevant instruments to mobilize private financingHowever, potential fiscal impact on
After the 2008
    future     crisis, initiatives
            committed              to develop
                         funds would          new
                                        need to betypes of project bonds have taken place mostly in the United
                                                   monitored.
States and the European Union. In both cases, they rely on risk sharing arrangements where the Government
or a specialized agency (e.g. TFIA in the case of the USA for transport and the Project Bond Credit
Enhancement Initiative in the EU)
Latin America is the region, among EMEs, with the largest volume of project bonds. Prior to the crisis, during
the late 1990s and early 2000s, Chile successfully used project bonds to finance roads. The bonds were issued
in the domestic markets; they were indexed and had the full wrap guarantee of monolines. Post crisis the most
important experiences include Brazil, Mexico and Peru. With the exception of Mexico, in all these cases,
issuances have been placed in the offshore markets and mainly in hard currency.
These experiences tend to show three important characteristics in project bonds:
    •   They are more suitable for brownfield projects, though greenfield projects may be also be viable,
        provided a bank is co-investing.
    •   They require relatively large size thresholds.
    •   They, generally, require some type of credit enhancement to align the appetite of institutional
        investors, even in brownfield projects.
Additionally, project bonds, when listed, present three important challenges that are not yet fully solved:
    •   The disclosure regime of listed bonds may be misaligned with commercially sensitive information the
        sponsor may not want to disclose.
    •   Complexity of obtaining approval of multiple bond-holders when requiring amendnments or changes
        in covenants. This was a very important role monolines took on behalf of bondholders, known as
        “controlling creditor”.
    •   The cost of carry in greenfield projects when all funds are disbursed at the beginning of the
        construction phase.
Some solutions have been developed to address these challenges, however, optimum solutions have not been
developed yet.

                                                       11
 Box 3. Infrastructure debt funds

 Infrastructure debt funds are increasingly becoming more popular internationally as a result of
 the low yield environment. A quantitative shift took place in 2015 with USD 11.5 billion raised
 compared to USD 4.5 billion raised in 2014 (Prequin).

 Institutional investors are shifting from investing only in equity funds into adding debt funds to
 their portfolios, mostly in mezzanine debt with higher returns. Two factors are playing for a
 greater use of debt funds by institutional investors. On the borrowers side, developers are
 prepared to accept the more restrictive covenants that institutional investors require, in relation
 to bank debt (e.g. make whole payments), as they can lock in historically low rates in very long
 tenors. On the lenders side, institutional investors are receiving higher yields, comparable to
 what banks can obtain, and benefit from outsourcing risk management to a knwolegeable third
 party. Infrastructure debt funds are generally part of hybrid finacing structures that include
 shorter-term bank loans.

 While project bonds can still be an important instrument to mobilize institutional investors,
 infrastructure debt funds are more flexible instruments, are easier to engage in greenfield
 projects, bear lower transactions costs and offer higher yields.

 In LAC, Colombia and Peru have launched several infrastructure debt funds with promising
 results though they are still in their initial stages. In both countries infrastructure debt funds
 target to provide long term debt to greenfield projects complementing bank financing in shorter
 tenors. They are considered by pension funds as a instrument that allows them to bridge their
 infrastructure skill gap while obtaining higher yields than in project bonds.



                        D.     The role of development institutions

24.     Several development entities support infrastructure finance in Mexico from
different angles and segments. The most important ones are FONADIN, a fund created
by a Presidential Decree in 2008 allocated within Banobras, the largest development
bank. Two other development banks, NAFIN and Bancomext, provide financing and
guarantees to projects in renewable energy, though their core focus is SMEs and the
export sector respectively. The division of labor between the three institutions and the
fund is not formally defined or coordinated, which may lead to potential overlaps and
unnecessary competition. Recently the SHCP took the initiative to address these potential
issues by creating a working group to define the division of labor between the different
development institutions and to coordinate their engagements in systematic way so as to
maximize impact.

25.     FONADIN is a fund created by a Presidential Decree in 2008 as a vehicle to
address market gaps in the highest risk segments of socially relevant projects. Part of
its assets include 4,031 kilometers of revenue generating toll roads that were restructured
after being liquidated by the Government in the late 90s. FONADIN is a very flexible
vehicle offering non-reimbursable and reimbursable products across the whole project
cycle in economic infrastructure and through a broad range of products. Non-
reimbursable products include grants, viability gap funds and financing feasibility studies
                                                12
to government authorities. Reimbursable products aim mostly at reducing credit risk in
financially viable projects through subordinated debt, partial credit and performance
guarantees. It also seeks to support medium size Mexican concessionaires in the energy
and construction sector through equity investments in projects so they can compete with
international or larger sponsors. Additionally, it supports mobilization of capital from
institutional investors by participating in the capital of CKDs. As of end-2016,
FONADIN had supported on a cumulative basis 117 projects with almost USD 8 billion5
of which 44 percent was non-refundable, mobilizing a total of USD 25 billion mostly in
highways (51 percent).

26.     Banobras is a dominant player in infrastructure finance providing 47
percent of total bank credit as of end-2016. It is specialized in infrastructure finance
directed to only financially viable projects. Most of its portfolio includes projects
supported by sub-national governments (54 percent) or self-sustained projects (33
percent). It provides two types of products: direct long-term loans and instruments for
“induced lending” 6 . The latter include second tier long-term loans to banks participating
in infrastructure projects, partial guarantees for bank loans and capital markets
instruments. The share of direct lending is in the process of shifting into induced lending
from 16 percent as of end-2012 to 26 percent as of end-2016. Banobras has played an
important role in lengthening financing tenors in infrastructure by participating in bank
syndicates or co-financing along domestic and foreign banks. Under these arrangements
Banobras, offers loans at around 20-25 year tenors while banks lend at around 10-12
years. Two other products that are being offered include staple loans in health projects at
very low interest rates and local currency funding to foreign banks.

27.      The challenge for Banobras is to reduce its share in infrastructure financing
and crowd in financing from commercial banks and institutional investors. These are
already stated objectives for Banobras (see table 2). However, this strategy would need to
be carefully planned and implemented with sufficient resources to ensure its success for
two reasons. First, the already stated objective of increasing Banobras’ direct credit may
be potentially in conflict with crowding in private sector investments when faced with a
choice in particular projects. Second, the organizational structure and skill set required to
provide guarantees for “induced credit” are very different to that required for direct
credits. In this case, Banobras would need to make an additional effort to face the
institutional inertia from previous practices and build a different set of skills among its
staff. It is important to note that the institutional investor mobilization target is not very
ambitious in absolute numbers targeting only 20,000 million pesos in 2018. While this
may be explained by the low base, scenario and challenges faced by project bonds (see
above), it may be worthwhile to assess new types of products to mobilize debt financing
such as the proposed infrastructure debt funds.




5 Exchange rate used: 18 MXP/USD.
6
 “Induced lending” is the term used in Mexico for additional lending triggered by products offered by
development institutions.
                                                13
Table 2. Banobras strategic targets in infrastructure finance

Objectives                                       March 2016      Target 2018     Change in
                                                                                 percentage

1.   Increase direct and “induced” credit        438,925 mill.   583,400 mill.     47 %
                                                    MXP             MXP

2.   Promote commercial banks financing for          63 %           60 %            8%
     infrastructure as percentage of total
     infrastructure credit

3.   Mobilize institutional investors into       10,500 mill.    20,000 mill.      90 %
     infrastructure                                 MXP             MxP

Source: staff elaboration with inputs from Banobras.

28.     Banobras and FONADIN have played an important role to mobilize private
financing into infrastructure though their role should be refocused to avoid market
distortions. This would be particularly important for mobilizing long-term financing
through capital markets instruments. New initiatives and products to be encouraged,
some of which are being planned include: a more systematic use of guarantees, adding to
the current menu political risk guarantees for sub-national governments risk; guarantees
and/or co-investments to support the launch of new products such as the proposed
infrastructure debt funds (see Box 3). Regarding FONADIN, its flexibility could support
a greater role in promoting capital markets solutions to mobilize long-term institutional
investors. For example, it could play an important role in creating confidence for the
proposed infrastructure debt funds. Along these lines, consideration could be given to off-
loading through project bonds mature and profitable projects currently on the balance
sheet of development banks or FONADIN. A greater critical mass of capital markets
instruments financing infrastructure would create a strong precedent for new projects, as
well as opportunities to test new instruments and develop standards for capital markets
instruments as it is already taking place in AEs (e.g. legal documentation, disclosure
regimes, pricing). This direction is already being followed in part by the GoM through
the creation of new instruments (e.g. CerPI, FIBRA E) but could be reinforced by a more
proactive role of FONADIN and Banobras.

                             E.     Conclusions and recommendations

29.     Mexico is very well placed to develop efficient capital markets solutions to
complement bank financing for infrastructure, though a number of important
adjustments are needed. The SHCP and the CNBV have been very dynamic and
successful when compared to peer countries in developing new financing instruments.
However, there is wide gap between the capacity and readiness of the financial sector to
channel domestic and foreing savings to infrastructure, and the lack of bankable projects.
The latter is in part due to the need to reinforce the implementation of the PPP law and
establish a stronger institutionality to implement it. This aspect is critical to develop a
bankable pipeline of projects. The second aspect is a more focused and coordinated
approach from development banks and FONADIN to crowd in private sector investment,
gradually reducing direct lending. The third aspect is to continue following the flexible
                                                14
and dynamic approach to develop financial innovations for infrastructure finance. Ideally,
this should consider overtime a greater role for unlisted financial products. Finally, the
greater participation of other investors beyond pension funds, as well as larger and more
sophisticated investment teams within institutional investors would be important. A recap
of the main recommendations in this note follows.

30.      Create a PPP unit in the SHCP that would allow the systematic
implementation of the PPP law and the development of a standardized PPP
program Good practices and standards created by this PPP unit would overtime,
facilitate establishing a single and compulsory PPP legal and practical framework
applying to all PPP projects. This would be critical to develop a credible pipeline of
bankable projects and, as experienced in other countries, can significantly lower the cost
of financing and improve the pipeline of PPP projects and contracting conditions for the
Mexican Goverment. Similar PPP units could also be created in the larger subnational
governments.

31.     Develop a systematic and coordinated financial guarantee program for
Banobras, Nafin, Bancomext and FONADIN. These guarantees would bridge the risk
gap in capital markets instruments including: infrastructure debt funds in the
construction phase providing long term debt along with banks shorter maturities; project
bonds to reduce undue spread. FONADIN, could additionally support the reinforced PPP
unit in project preparation in a more systematic way (see below).

32.     Develop debt infrastructure funds preferably under unlisted funds, with
potential guarantees from FONADIN or Banobras. As a second option they could be
under the regimes of CKDs or CERPIs. The objective would be to complement bank
loans with longer tenors, more efficiently than having Banobras providing long term
loans, while developing a new investment option for pension funds.

33.     Continue with the flexible process of adjusting hybrid listed private
instruments so they are better aligned with more traditional private placement
vehicles. Given the market acceptance of the existing instruments and the complexity of
changing the pension fund law, it seems that listing instruments, with flexible
arrangements, would still be able to mobilize a significant share of long term finance.
However, internationally, these instruments are generally unlisted. Consideration should
be given to allowing pension funds invest, even if a small part of their investment
portfolio in private placement vehicles. If such a regime would need to be accompanied
by a frameworks ensuring prudency in investment decisions and minimum qualifications
of investment teams within pension funds.

34.     Promote collective investment platforms to break away from PE misaligned
incentives for long term finance in infrastructure. Support to the Infrastructure
Mexico CKD is a step in the right direction as well as the recently created CERPIs and
FIBRA E regulations. Further analysis is recommended to create incentives for joint
structures with project developers. Additionally, it would be relevant to explore
incentives that would reinforce building stronger investment teams within the pensions
funds.

                                           15
