Making Schools
Resilient at Scale:
the Case of Japan

2016
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development / International Development Association or


The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with
external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily
reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive
Directors, or the governments they represent.


The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denomi-
nations, and other information shown on any map in this
work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World
Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright.
Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of
its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole
or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given. Any queries on rights and
licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
the Disaster Risk Management Hub, Tokyo, Fukoku Seimei
Building 10th Floor, Uchisaiwaicho 2-2-2, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo,
JAPAN 100-0011; e-mail: drmhubtokyo@worldbank.org


Photo Credits
Used photos are credit and attribution free.


Design
Astral Studio
info@astral-studio.com
                                                                                        Contents




Contents
Acknowledgements										5

Abbreviations											6

Executive Summary										7

Chapter 1 	Context									20

	      1.1	   Roles and Responsibilities for School Infastructure				             20

	      1.2	   Regulatory Environment for Earthquake Resistant Construction		      23

Chapter 2	    The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings			            29	

	      2.1	Overview									29

	2.2	The Start of the Program							31

	2.3	Priorities									34

	2.4	Achievements									34

	2.5	Drivers of Success								36

Chapter 3	    Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government		     40

	3.1	Prioritization									40

	3.2	Technical Support to Local Governments					47

	3.3	Financial Support to Local Governments					49

	3.4	Monitoring of Progress								55

	3.5	Challenges									55

Chapter 4	    Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments		   57

	4.1	Planning									57

	4.2	Implementation								62

	4.3	Drivers of Success								69

Chapter 5	Remaining Challenges 								72

Chapter 6	Lesson Learned 								74

Annex 2A	     Technical Meetings and Evolution of Program Priorities			           77

Annex 2B	     School Basic Survey and Public School Facilities Survey			          83

Annex 3A	     Seismic Index of Structure (Is)						                               84

Annex 3B 	Prioritization Survey								84

References											90



                                                                                                   3
                                                                                        Acknowledgements




Acknowledgements

The development of this report was led by Vica Rosario Bogaerts and Keiko Sakoda Kaneda, Disaster Risk
Management Specialists at the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), the World Bank,
with support of GFDRR’s Global Program for Safer Schools (GPSS) and Disaster Risk Management Hub, Tokyo.

The background work and documentation was done by a team of PADECO Co., Ltd, with a generous support
of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), Japan. The team particularly
thanks Ken Noguchi and Naoto Fukabori, Head of Office for Disaster Prevention, Facility Planning Division,
Department of Facility Planning and Administration, Minister's Secretariat; Akira Umezaki, Deputy Director;
Mariko Tsumura, Unit Chief. Takayuki Nakamura, former Director, Office for Disaster Prevention of MEXT,
currently President of the National Institute of Technology, Fukushima College, shared his actual experience
during the program implementation. The report was edited by Anne Himmelfarb.

Valuable discussions and feedbacks were provided by Yasuyuki Kamemura, Director for International
Building Analysis, Building Guidance Division, Housing Bureau, Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport
and Tourism (MLIT), Japan; Tatsuro Narafu, Senior Advisor, Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA);
Aiko Sakurai, Associate Professor, International Research Institution of Disaster Science (IRIDeS), Tohoku
University.
The team is grateful for Japanese local governments who kindly shared their experience. This includes
Hiroshima Prefecture; Shizuoka Prefecture; Kushiro City, Hokkaido Prefecture; Sanyo Onoda City,
Yamaguchi Prefecture; Shizuoka City, Shizuoka Prefecture; Takaishi City, Osaka Prefecture; Hyuga City,
Miyazaki Prefecture; and Minato City, Tokyo.

Lastly, the team appreciates guidance and review provided by the GPSS team led by Niels B. Holm-Nielsen,
Fernando Ramirez Cortes and Carina Fonseca Ferreira.




                                                                                                               5
    Abbreviations




    Abbreviations
        AIJ         Architectural Institute of Japan
        BOE         board of education
        CDMC        Central Disaster Management Council
        FDMA        Fire and Disaster Management Agency
        Is          seismic index of structure
        JBDPA       Japan Building Disaster Prevention Association
        MEXT        Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology
        MLIT        Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism
        PFI         private finance initiative
        RC          reinforced concrete




6
                                                                                           Executive Summary




Executive Summary
Japan’s Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings has increased the seismic safety of Japanese
schools, and hence increased the safety of Japanese schoolchildren, teachers, and communities. Since 2003,
when the program accelerated, the share of earthquake-resistant public elementary and junior high schools
has increased, from under half of schools in 2002 to over 95 percent in April 2015.

Japan is sharing knowledge from this program with developing countries through its relationship with
the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), whose Global Program for Safer Schools
has been supported by the Japan–World Bank Program for Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Management in
Developing Countries and its implementing arm, the Disaster Risk Management Hub, Tokyo.

Although it is known for its technology- and engineering-driven solutions to disaster risk management, Japan
has also had significant experience devising nontechnical solutions that meet institutional, legal, and financial
challenges. Japan’s ongoing efforts to mitigate earthquake risk and improve the seismic safety of schools
involve learning from the experience of earthquakes, advancing engineering knowledge and technology, ac-
cumulating data, and exercising the political will to pass relevant legislation and secure funding. Lessons from
Japan should prove useful to countries that are considering embarking on their own retrofitting programs.

Context for the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings
Located in the circum-Pacific mobile belt, where seismic and volcanic activity occurs constantly, Japan is highly
exposed to earthquake hazard. To address this exposure, Japan began to include seismic design in its building
regulations close to a century ago. The first Japanese building standards to include seismic design were issued
in 1924, after the Great Kanto Earthquake of 1923. Since then, building standards have been revised after every
major earthquake. The latest major revision of building standards took place in 1981 and incorporated a new
seismic design method. Accordingly, buildings that are built after 1981 are deemed earthquake-resistant, but
those built before 1981 need to be evaluated for their seismic capacity based on the 1981 standards.
In addition to building regulations that include seismic standards, Japan has developed standards for seismic
evaluation and guidelines for seismic retrofit of existing buildings. Guidelines for existing reinforced concrete
(RC) buildings were issued in 1977, followed by guidelines and standards for steel structures (1979), wood
structures (1979), and steel-reinforced concrete structures (1986). They are periodically revised to accommodate
revisions of building standards.

Program overview
In Japan, making schools earthquake-resistant has been a long-time effort of both the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) and local governments. Municipal governments have
managerial and financial responsibility for making school facilities safe; but they rely on standardized
guidance and financial subsidies from MEXT and prefectural governments.

Under the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings, MEXT sets policies, arranges financial schemes,
and provides technical guidance in the design phase, while municipalities develop plans for implementing
school retrofitting and realize them with the support of prefectural governments and the national government
(see figure ES.1). The program seeks to ensure that existing school buildings are earthquake-resistant. RC school


                                                                                                                    7
    Executive Summary



    buildings constructed under the 1981 building standards are considered earthquake-resistant, while those
    built before 1981 must be evaluated and then retrofitted if the seismic capacity does not meet the standards.


                                                       Steps of the Program                        Responsible Level

                                                 •	   Provision of Technical Guideline

         PROGRAM                                 •	   Technical Support                            National Government
          DESIGN                                                                                         (MEXT)
                                                 •	   Financial Support

                                                 •	   Monitoring


                                                Step 1: Establishment of Investigative
                                                       Organization

                                                Step 2: Implementation of Basic Survey
                               PLANNING
      PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION




                                                Step 3: Prioritization of Vulnerable Buildings
                                                       for Seismic Retrofitting

                                                Step 4: Vulnerability Assessment                    Local Governments
                                                                                                     (Municipalities)
                                                Step 5: Implementation of Seismic Diagnosis

                                                Step 6: Determination on Urgency of the Projects
                               IMPLEMENTATION




                                                Step 7: Formulation of Annual Plan

                                                Step 8: Formulation of Reinforcement Plan

                                                Step 9: Preparation of Design Drawings

                                                Step 10: Implementation of Construction Works




     figure ES.1
     Steps of the program
     and responsible
     government level




8
                                                                                           Executive Summary



The national government’s initiative for making schools earthquake-resistant was introduced in 1978. Its
focus was reconstruction and seismic retrofitting of public elementary and junior high schools in the Tokai
and southern Kanto regions, where earthquake risk was considered high. But the 1995 Great Hanshin-
Awaji Earthquake affected a different part of the country, one with comparatively low levels of earthquake
preparedness. In response to this event, which damaged over 3,800 schools, MEXT commissioned the
Architectural Institute of Japan to survey the seismic capacity of education infrastructure. The results showed
that damage was concentrated in buildings built before 1981, and that the intensity of damage depended on
the seismic capacity of individual buildings. In 1995, subsidies for seismic retrofitting, which had been limited
to the Tokai area, were extended to the entire nation, and in 1996 MEXT urged local governments to enhance
schools’ earthquake resistance through seismic diagnosis and retrofitting.

Two surveys conducted in 2002 showed that local governments were responding very slowly. A Fire and
Disaster Management Agency survey found that only 31 percent of school buildings constructed with pre-1981
standards had completed the seismic diagnosis, and only 46 percent of all school buildings that have a function
of evacuation centers had satisfied the required seismic capacity as of April 2002 (FDMA 2002). Alarmed, MEXT
surveyed all public elementary and junior high schools in the nation and got a similar result: 31 percent of
the 88,000 school buildings built before 1981 had completed the seismic diagnosis, and only 44.5 percent of all
existing school buildings and facilities had been confirmed as earthquake-resistant.

MEXT then convened an expert group to study earthquake resistance in school facilities and develop concrete
measures for local governments. Based on the group’s findings, MEXT issued the “Guidelines for Promotion of
Earthquake-Resistance School Building” (MEXT 2003). The guidelines, which marked the acceleration of the
Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings, called on local governments to (1) prioritize schools with
the worst seismic capacity, (2) diagnose schools promptly and accurately, (3) publicize findings, (4) inspect and
where necessary improve nonstructural elements, (5) carry out general and earthquake-resistance improve-
ments simultaneously, and (6) promptly formulate a plan to promote earthquake resistance.

As a result of the program, the share of earthquake-resistant public elementary and junior high schools has
significantly increased. In 2002, earthquake-resistant schools accounted for 44.5 percent of the total; in April
2015 they accounted for 95.6 percent (figure ES.2). By March 2016, the target date for completion of the work,
the share is expected to have reached about 98 percent. (For the remaining 2 percent of buildings, seismic ret-
rofitting or reconstruction has had to be postponed due to the planned consolidation or closure of the schools.)
Since 2003, approximately 52,000 buildings have been confirmed earthquake-resistant by seismic diagnosis or
seismically improved by seismic retrofitting or reconstruction.




                                                                                                                    9
         Executive Summary
Number of
School Buidlings

80,000                                                                                                                                                       100%
                                                                                                                                                 95.6%

          73,166
70,000
                    70,167                                                                                                                   92.5%
                               67,068
                                                                                                                                  88.9%
                                        63,101
60,000
                                                  59,295                                                               84.8%

                                                                                                                                                             80%
                                                             53,636                                         80.3%
50,000
                                                                           47,949
                                                                                                    73.3%
40,000                                                                              41,206
                                                                                         67.0%

                                                                                             33,134
30,000
                                                                                62.3%
                                                                                                                                                             60%
                                                                        58.6%
20,000                                                                                                 22,911
                                                         54.7%
                                                                                                                18,508
                                            51.8%
                                    49.1%                                                                                  13,412
10,000
                            46.6%                                                                                                     8,956
                44.5%
                                                                                                                                                     5,212
0                                                                                                                                                            40%
             2002    2003       2004    2005        2006         2007       2008    2009     2010       2011        2012       2013       2014       2015



           figure ES.2
           Share of public
           elementary and junior
                                                             Remaining number                                                  Share of quake-
           high schools whose                                of buildings                                                      resistant buildings
           main structures are
           earthquake-resistant


         Source: MEXT 2015b.
         Note: The data are as of April for each year.


         MEXT has also made progress in ensuring the safety of nonstructural elements, which can cause potentially
         fatal injuries. As early as 2002 it developed a relevant guideline, and in 2008 it began preparing the national
         subsidy. Since the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake, when MEXT prioritized suspended ceilings in gymnasiums
         (non structural) , there has been significant progress in this area. As of April 2015, 85.5 percent of school ceilings
         were considered safe (including gymnasiums without a suspended ceiling), and 93 percent of schools had
         conducted the inspection for major nonstructural elements.

         To fully understand the program’s evolution and achievements, it is important to recognize certain key factors
         that drove or facilitated its development and promotion:


10
                                                                                           Executive Summary



The experience of earthquakes. The 1995 Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake revealed the poor earthquake
resistance of pre-1981 buildings, and helped to trigger the development of MEXT’s comprehensive guidelines.
The 2004 Chuetsu Earthquake increased the nascent program’s momentum. The May 2008 Sichuan (China)
Earthquake, which caused the collapse of 6,898 school buildings (Minemura 2008) and the deaths of 19,065
schoolchildren, drove Japanese politicians and MEXT officials to pass the revised Act on Special Measures for
Earthquake Disaster Countermeasures, which provided more money for school retrofitting and reconstruc-
tion and increased the role of local governments. Finally, the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake induced the
program to give higher priority to nonstructural elements and highlighted the need for tsunami countermea-
sures and functional improvement of schools as evacuation centers.

The accumulation of engineering research and practices. Relevant engineering research and practices include
a prototype RC school building developed in 1949, whose wide adoption has made retrofitting of schools fairly
standardized and hence efficient. They also include the development of standards for seismic evaluation and
guidelines for seismic retrofit of existing buildings. These grew out of a pilot program in Shizuoka Prefecture,
where large scale earthquake risks have long-recognized, and have been used throughout Japan to promote
seismic retrofitting efforts under the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings.

The availability of data, specifically data on schools, on damages caused by past earthquakes, and on hazard
risks. The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings was begun because survey data showed schools’
poor seismic capacity and government’s slow efforts to address it. Ongoing annual school surveys conducted
by MEXT—the School Basic Survey, Public School Facilities Survey, and the Status of Seismic Resistance of
Public School Facilities—provide the basic school infrastructure inventory and make it possible to monitor
program progress. Data on damage to building, which are collected by the earthquake damage investigation,
are used to direct policy. Finally, data on earthquake risk are used by the national government to prioritize
necessary actions, and have been incorporated in laws to promote risk mitigation.

The political will to carry out the program. Promoting schools’ seismic safety has been popular among
politicians, i.e., members of the Diet, for both humanitarian and economic reasons. In a culture that prioritizes
human life, a policy for making schools earthquake-resistant has the noble aim of saving the lives of schoolchil-
dren. The policy also is considered an effective investment that contributes to local economies and produces
tangible results that are well-received by the public. Thus the major political parties have supported accelera-
tion of school retrofit and helped to secure the budget for the purpose.

Program design and the role of the national government
Through MEXT, the national government is responsible for directing and supporting local governments’ im-
plementation of school retrofitting projects. MEXT provides technical support, prepares financial measures,
and monitors projects’ progress.

MEXT lays out the basic principles of school retrofitting, including how to use the results of seismic diagnosis
to prioritize vulnerable buildings and judge the urgency of retrofitting, in the “Guidelines for Promotion of
Earthquake-resistance School Building” (MEXT 2003). The guidelines include seven planning steps for priori-
tizing the most hazardous buildings:
     •	   Step 1: Establish an investigative organization. This group serves as a steering committee to
          lead activities.
     •	   Step 2: Implement the basic survey to get information about schools.

                                                                                                                    11
     Executive Summary



          •	   Step 3: Conduct a survey to prioritize vulnerable building for seismic retrofitting. The survey
               is carried out for RC buildings and structural steel–framed gymnasiums. For the former, the
               survey uses engineering principles that account for year of construction and number of floors
               as well as corrections such as concrete strength, degree of aging, floor plan, wall alignment, and
               assumed seismic intensity. For the latter, it accounts for items earthquake resistance of steel
               bracings, corrosion rate of steel members, existence of buckling, weld quality, structural safety,
               nonstructural safety regarding fall prevention, and assumed seismic intensity.
          •	   Steps 4 and 5: Conduct vulnerability assessment (Step 4) and seismic diagnosis (Step 5).
               Depending on the results of the prioritization survey, either a vulnerability assessment or
               seismic diagnosis is conducted. Vulnerability assessment determines the degree of buildings’
               deterioration based on structural strength, the deterioration of strength due to aging, and
               impacts of locational conditions. Seismic diagnosis judges the degree to which a building can
               withstand an earthquake from the perspective of structural dynamics. When the strength
               of concrete is low or reinforcing steel and structural steel are widely corroded, and when the
               likelihood of reconstruction is high, a vulnerability assessment is conducted. When a building
               is in average or above average condition, seismic diagnosis is conducted without vulnerability
               assessment.
          •	   Step 6: Determine urgency. The priority of projects is determined by the investigative organiza-
               tion and its subgroup of experts based on schools’ earthquake resistance. The urgency levels
               for RC school buildings, structural steel–framed gymnasiums, and gymnasiums with light
               precast concrete roofs are determined separately. To decide which school facilities among each
               type should be prioritized, the investigative committee reviews results of the seismic diagnosis
               for each facility and considers each facility’s specific needs.
          •	   Step 7: Formulate annual plan. Using the list of school facilities to be reconstructed or
               retrofitted, local governments formulate an annual plan for implementing construction.
     Local governments make the decision about whether to reconstruct or retrofit schools. Reconstruction is
     recommended when the seismic diagnosis finds low earthquake resistance capacity, when the building receives
     a low score on the vulnerability assessment, when significant reinforcement is needed, or when the retrofit
     construction would be extremely difficult. Local governments also make decisions about which method to use
     for seismic retrofitting (steel-frame bracing, RC shear wall, etc.) based on the type of structure, condition of the
     building, duration of the construction, costs, etc.

     MEXT supports this work by producing retrofitting manuals and by collecting examples of work on different
     types of structures to serve as references for local governments. It also organizes workshops and meetings
     to disseminate information to governors, holds technical trainings by academics, and operates a consultation
     desk to respond to inquiries about promoting earthquake-resistant school facilities.




12
                                                                                              Executive Summary



In addition to offering technical support, MEXT has also arranged several financing measures for school
retrofitting and reconstruction:
    •	   National subsidies for seismic retrofitting and reconstruction cover the national governments’
         share of the projects. This share has been raised to two-thirds for retrofitting and one-half for
         reconstruction. (This is a time-limited measure, but the period has been extended repeatedly
         and currently expires in 2021). The subsidies prepared for the program were part of MEXT’s
         school facility development budget. As shown in figure ES.3, this budget had decreased before
         the program started due to the gradual decrease in the number of schools. After the accel-
         eration of the program in 2003, the total budget increased dramatically year by year. As local
         governments’ demands for national subsidies for school retrofit increased, MEXT had trouble
         securing sufficient amounts in the initial budget. Figure ES.3 shows that the budget increases
         were mainly covered by the supplementary budgets (the teal bars).
    •	   Local government bonds and local tax allocation also fund the school retrofitting and recon-
         struction. For these projects, local tax allocation covers 80 percent of the costs, which makes the
         actual financial burden on municipalities relatively small.
    •	   Private finance initiatives (PFIs) for seismic retrofitting of public schools were a response to
         regional disparities in the progress of school retrofitting. PFI was meant to cope with limited
         financial resources, a large number of buildings needing retrofit or reconstruction, and a lack
         of local government engineers. In practice, few municipalities used PFI, mainly because unfa-
         miliarity with the scheme made municipalities hesitant to adopt it, and in part because urban
         municipalities had already retrofitted most of their schools by the time MEXT issued the
         manual explaining its use.




                                                                                                                  13
             Executive Summary



¥ 100 million
     4,500


     4,000


     3,500


     3,000


     2,500


     2,000


     1,500


     1,000


     500


      0
              1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012    2013   2014   2015




                      Initial budget                                    Supplementary budget                                                Reserve fund
             Source: MEXT 2015a.
             Note: The budget includes the costs for kindergartens and special needs schools.




               figure ES.3
               Facility development
               budget for public
               elementary and junior
               high schools




14
                                                                                         Executive Summary



MEXT has closely monitored the progress made under the program. Using quantitative and qualitative
information collected from local governments, MEXT determines the overall progress of the program and takes
necessary measures in response. For example, when many local governments initially made slow progress,
MEXT tried to identify common problems and to provide solutions (alternative financial schemes, practical
manuals, seminars). MEXT has also ranked municipalities by the percentage and the number of earthquake-
resistant schools, and publicized this information—an approach that has encouraged lagging municipali-
ties to work more quickly. Such careful monitoring and feedback by MEXT has played an important role in
promoting the program.

Program implementation and the role of local governments
Program implementation is carried out at the local level. Prefectural governors guide the municipal mayors
in applying the national subsidies, provide technical support to mayors, collect program data from municipal
governments and report the results to MEXT, and carry out seismic retrofitting of high schools and prefectural
universities.

The municipal governments carry out the seven planning steps for prioritizing school buildings, as described
above. They are also responsible for the three steps of program implementation that follow planning:
formulating a seismic reinforcement plan to identify possible seismic retrofitting construction methods (step
8); preparing design drawings that specify appropriate construction methods, schedules, and costs (step 9);
and implementing the seismic retrofitting construction works using building contractors (step 10). In most
cases, the steering committees outsource these three steps to the private sector (architectural and construc-
tion firms), though the committees are responsible for both technical and administrative management.




                                                                                                                 15
     Executive Summary



                                                                   General Affairs   Architecture   (Association     Construction    Schools/
       Procedures of School Retrofitting Program                       Dept.,           Dept.,           of)         Confirmation   Community
            Planning and Implementation                               Board of        Municipal     Architecture         Firms
                                                                     Education          Govt.          Firms          (3rd Party)


                         Step 1: Establishment of Investigative
                         Organization

                         Step 2: Implementation of
                         Basic Survey
        PLANNING




                         Step 3: Prioritization of Vulnerable
                         Buildings for Seismic Retrofitting

                         Step 4: Vulnerability
                         Assessment

                         Step 5: Implementation of
                         Seismic Diagnosis

                         Step 6: Determination on Urgency
                         of the Projects

                         Step 7: Formulation of
        IMPLEMENTATION




                         Annual Plan

                         Step 8: Formulation of Reinforcement
                         Plan

                         Step 9: Preparation of Design
                         Drawings

                         Step 10: Implementation of Construction
                         Works




                                 Involved                               Partially Involved                         Not Involved


     General Affairs Dept., Board of Education                                              Local Governments
     •	 Takes initiatives for the program at municipality level                             •	 Responsible for technical assessments and
     •	 Responsible for managing all school retrofitting projects,                             arranges contracts with architectural firms
        inclusive of fundraising and allocation                                             •	 Close communication with
     •	 Might ask support from Architect Dept. for technical procedures                        General Affairs Dept. of BOE


     Source: Based on interviews with local governments by the survey team (2016).


                                                                                                                    figure ES.4
                                                                                                                    Responsibilities of local
                                                                                                                    governments and other
                                                                                                                    local stakeholders for
                                                                                                                    program planning and
                                                                                                                    implementation

16
                                                                                           Executive Summary



The general affairs department of the municipal board of education (BOE) takes the initiative for planning and
implementation and coordinates the stakeholders involved. The general affairs department has administra-
tive staff, but its technical staff is often limited, so it sometimes seeks support from the municipal architec-
tural department.

The steering committee tries to minimize the effect of construction on school activities, so much of the work
is scheduled for the summer vacation in July and August. Done on this schedule, projects can take half a year
to several years, depending on the type of work; but they are planned to take as little time as possible.

Project costs are estimated using a standardized nationwide price list for cost estimation to ensure fairness in
the bidding process. Bids for the construction works generally commence in April when Japanese fiscal year
starts, and works begin in May.

Even with the national subsidies, securing sufficient budget for retrofit and reconstruction projects has been
hard for local governments. Most have been faced with many school facilities needing retrofit, and some
facilities—constructed before the revision of the Building Standards Law in 1981—needing complete recon-
struction. Some prefectural governments (mainly in areas of high earthquake risk) have subsidies available for
reinforcing public facilities, including schools. Some have raised the corporate income tax in order to allocate
budget for program implementation, while others have relied on interest-free loans. Municipal governments
have also established special funds for project implementation, and several municipal governments have used
PFIs.
Throughout the implementation process, steering committees need to reach consensus with schools and
communities. In municipalities that have experienced powerful or frequent earthquakes, communities
understand the need for and support school retrofitting, and consensus is easily reached. Achieving consensus
is more difficult in municipalities that have experienced fewer earthquakes. Steering committees cannot
simply force project implementation in the absence of the community’s consensus. Thus some municipalities
must decide on the acceptable contents and timing of construction works in light of community opinion or
requests, and under these circumstances the work can take longer than usual.

Remaining Challenges
By the end of FY 2015, the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings had succeeded in making more
than 95 percent of public elementary and junior high schools earthquake-resistant. A number of challenges
in making schools safer remain, however. These include (1) making nonstructural elements of school buildings
earthquake-resistant, (2) making schools safer from multi-hazards, (3) improving the functionality of schools
as evacuation centers, (4) addressing aging of school buildings, (5) addressing the impacts of school consolida-
tion, and (6) promoting seismic retrofitting in private schools.

Lessons learned
Japan’s achievements under the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings offer lessons for
developing countries seeking to improve the seismic safety of their schools:
        1.	   Building on experiences from previous disaster events can provide momentum to accelerate
              school retrofitting.
        2.	   Information disclosure is the key to raising public awareness and encouraging program imple-
              mentation.

                                                                                                                   17
     Executive Summary



               3.	   The roles and functions of schools in disaster risk management must be clear to determine the
                     retrofitting and improvements necessary for school facilities.
               4.	   Data needs to underpin the design and the promotion of a seismic retrofitting program.
               5.	   Comprehensive and flexible program development with clear priorities and targets is important.
               6.	   The advancement of engineering research should serve as a basis of developing a school retrofit-
                     ting program.
               7.	   Proactive support by the national government, strong initiative by program implementers and
                     clearly defined role and function of schools within disaster management context are critical to
                     school facility retrofitting and improvements needed.
               8.	   Combining seismic retrofitting with other facility improvement is cost-efficient.

     References

     MEXT. 2003. “Guidelines for Promotion of Earthquake-Resistance School Building.”
     https://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-taishinsuishin.pdf.

     ———. 2015a. “Guidebook for Seismic Countermeasure on Nonstructural Components of School Facilities” (in Japanese).
     http://www.mext.go.jp/a_menu/shisetu/shuppan/1291462.htm.

     ———. 2015b. “Results of Survey on Status of Seismic Resistant School Facilities of Public School Facilities (for AY 2015).”
     http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/houdou/27/06/attach/1358429.htm.

     China: May Quake Killed 19,000 School Kids. (2008, November 21). CBC News. Retrieved from
     http://www.cbsnews.com/news/china-may-quake-killed-19000-school-kids/

     FDMA. 2002. “Study Report on Promotion of Earthquake-Resistance Public Facilities as Disaster Management Bases (Excerpt).
     (in Japanese).

     Minemura, K. (2008, May 27). China strengthens seismic standards of school buildings after the collapse in Sigchuan earthquake.
     The Asahi Shimbun. Retrieved from http://www.asahi.com/special/08004/TKY200805260372.html (in Japanese)




18
Making Schools
Resilient at Scale:
the Case of Japan
     Chapter 1: Context




     Chapter 1
     Context
     This chapter describes the broad context for Japan’s nation-wide Program for Earthquake-Resistant School
     Buildings, including the stakeholders responsible for school safety in Japan and the development and
     application of seismic standards over time.

     1.1	   Roles and Responsibilities for School Infastructure
     The local government authorities who establish, fund, and oversee Japanese schools are responsible for the
     safety of school buildings. In Japan, municipalities (cities, towns, and villages) are the basic level of local
     government and prefectures are the regional level. Municipalities establish schools for nine years of compulsory
     education (six years of elementary school education and three years of junior high school education) within
     the appropriate distance from students’ houses (see table 1.1). Prefectures establish senior high schools and
     prefectural universities.

     The general rule is that responsible authorities bear the expenses of their own schools, i.e., municipal
     governments finance elementary and junior high schools and prefectural governments finance high schools
     and universities. Nonetheless, the national government provides some support to local governments. In public
     elementary and junior high schools, major expenditures—including teacher salaries, school construction, and
     seismic retrofitting of school buildings—are jointly financed by the national and local governments; see table
     1.2 for details.

     Municipalities establish a board of education (BOE) to handle education administration. The BOE, along with
     the mayor and the municipal assembly, decide on school facility improvement such as retrofitting. A similar in-
     stitutional mechanism exists in prefectures, formed by the governor, the prefectural BOE, and the prefectural
     assembly.

     The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) also plays a role in education
     administration. It develops the basic educational framework, sets standards, and offers local governments
     financial and technical support in achieving the targets set by MEXT. Prefectures are expected to develop
     standards within the prefecture, to take responsibility for tasks that need to be carried out beyond the munici-
     palities, and to provide technical and sometimes financial support to municipalities (MEXT 1998). 1 Although
     the municipalities have autonomy, MEXT exerts some control over the prefectures and municipalities through
     its technical and financial support; the prefectures also exert some control over the municipalities in the same
     way (see figure 1.1).

     In light of these arrangements, municipal governments have the primary responsibility of making school
     facilities safe, from both a managerial and a financial viewpoint, but they rely on standardized guidance and
     financial subsidies from MEXT and prefectural governments.




     1   MEXT, 1998, http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/shingi/old_chukyo/old_chukyo_index/toushin/1309671.htm.
20
                                                                                                          Chapter 1: Context




                                         Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
                                           Science and Technology (MEXT)




                     Prefecture                                                                 Municipality
                                                              Guidance
                                                             and advice
                              Board of Education                                                      Board of Education

                              •	Board members                                                         •	Board members
      Governor                •	Superintendent                                       Mayor            •	Superintendent




                                  Secretariat                Guidance                                    Secretariat
                                                            and advice
     Prefectural                                                                  Municipal
     universities                                                                universities
                                  Prefectural
                                                                                                      Municipal schools
                                    schools




Source: Based on MEXT. “About Board of Education System”
http://www.mext.go.jp/a_menu/chihou/05071301.htm (in Japanese).
http://www.mext.go.jp/en/about/organization/title02/detail02/sdetail02/1375114.htm




  figure 1.1
  Relationship
  between MEXT, local
  governments, and
  boards of education




                                                                                                                               21
     Chapter 1: Context



     Table 1.1 lists the number of elementary and junior high schools by the responsible local authority. It shows
     that the majority of these schools are under the jurisdiction of municipal governments.

     Table 1.1: Elementary and junior high schools by establishing authority
       Level of education         Total number               National number           Municipal number        Private number
                                                             (share of total)          (share of total)        (share of total)


       Elementary school          20,601                     72 (0.3%)                 20,302 (98.5%)          227 (1.1%)



       Junior high school         10,484                     73 (0.7%)                 9,637 (91.9%)           774 (7.4%)



     Source: MEXT 2015b.



     Table 1.2 shows the sharing of major educational expenses among various levels of government.

     Table 1.2: Sharing of major expenditures for schools by level of government
       Item                                National government             Prefectural                  Municipal
                                           share                           government share             government share


       Textbooks                           All                             None                         None



       Salaries of teachers                1/3                             2/3                          None
       and staffs


       Facilities
       New construction
       and expansiona                      1/2                             None                         1/2
       Reconstruction of
       hazardous buildingsb                1/3                             None                         2/3
       Seismic retrofitting  c
                                           1/3                             None                         2/3



       Building maintenance                None                            None                         1




     Source: Based on MEXT “About Educational Administration and Financing in Japan”
     http://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/singi/kyouikusaisei/bunka/dai3/dai1/siryou4.pdf,
     and MEXT “About National Subsidies” http://www.mext.go.jp/a_menu/shotou/zyosei/zitumu.htm




22
                                                                                                                  Chapter 1: Context




        a.	 The large national subsidy for new construction recognizes that municipalities are obliged to
            build sufficient schools where need exists, and that new construction is costly.
        b.	 There are two types of the reconstruction: one for structurally hazardous buildings and one
            for educationally inadequate buildings.
        c.	 Seismic retrofitting is necessary to ensure seismic capacity



1.2	      Regulatory Environment for Earthquake Resistant Construction
In Japan, building regulations, seismic standards for buildings, and standards for seismic diagnosis—that
is, evaluation of the seismic capacity of buildings—have continued to evolve in response to needs and new
knowledge. That evolution is described below.

1.2.1	 Development of building standards and related regulations
Seismic design was first included in building standards in Japan in 1924, after the Great Kanto Earthquake of
1923. Since then, building standards have been revised after every major earthquake. The latest major revision
of building standards took place in 1981 and incorporated a new seismic design method. Accordingly, buildings
that are built after 1981 are deemed earthquake-resistant, but those built before 1981 need to be evaluated for
their seismic capacity based on the 1981 standards.2 Even with the new seismic design standards, however, it is
not possible to prevent earthquakes from damaging buildings. The standards aim at protecting human lives
by preventing building damages that prove fatal.

Japan’s early laws on building and urban planning—the Urban Building Law and the City Planning Act,
both passed in 1919 as Japan grew more urbanized—did not include seismic provisions, though the Urban
Building Law did specify an allowable stress threshold for each structural material. After the Great Kanto
Earthquake, a set of structural provisions designed to strengthen buildings against earthquakes was added to
the Urban Building Law. In 1950, the Building Standards Law replaced the Urban Building Law (Ohashi 1993),
and provisions for various aspects of structural design were adopted to reinforce structural safety standards.
The standard value of seismic coefficient was raised from 0.1 to 0.2, and the allowable stresses for structural
materials were doubled. The essential requirements for seismic design remained the same, however.

A turning point for seismic provisions occurred following the 1968 Tokachi Offshore Earthquake, which
caused significant damage to modern reinforced concrete (RC) buildings designed in accordance with building
regulations (Aoyama 1981). The Building Standards Law was revised in 1971 to incorporate ultimate strength
design in shear of RC buildings and to establish a reviewing procedure for the seismic safety of existing
buildings.

The Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism (MLIT) has been the lead agency in promoting
safety of infrastructure and buildings and seismic-resistant design from an engineering perspective. Its
predecessor, the Ministry of Construction, established the Building Research Institute in 1942, and in the 1970s
it financed the Project for Development of a New Seismic-Resistant Design Method (see box 1.1), which drew
on advances in computing technology (and the resulting accumulation of strong ground motion records since
the 1960s).

2     Buildings that meet the building standards are considered safe not only against earthquakes but also strong winds
      and snowfalls.
                                                                                                                                       23
     Chapter 1: Context



     The new seismic design method that grew out of this project was proposed in 1979, and in 1981—three years
     after the Miyagi Offshore Earthquake cut off lifelines and paralyzed social and economic activities in Sendai—
     it was adopted in an amendment to the Buildings Standard Law. The old standard required buildings to
     minimize earthquake damages to minor ones in smaller and more frequent earthquakes. The new standard
     additionally required buildings not to collapse and to secure safety of the people inside in rare and severe
     earthquakes, even if buildings may become deformed and not repairable. In responding to the two require-
     ments, both strength and ductility indicators are considered in the new seismic design, taking into the consid-
     eration of the ultimate lateral load-resisting capacity in two stages.

     The 1995 Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake and subsequent fires highlighted the vulnerability of buildings
     designed prior to the 1981 revision. It led to passage of the 1995 Act on Promotion of the Earthquake-proof
     Retrofit of Buildings (Okada et al. 2000), which has played a key role in the nationwide campaign for the seismic
     diagnosis and retrofit program targeting buildings built before 1981. The Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake also
     showed the need for a new generation of seismic design (BRI 1996), and in 1998 a revised Building Standards
     Law introduced a performance-based design procedure to the existing prescriptive framework. New technical
     specifications were issued in 2000, including the definition of the performance objective: life safety and damage
     limitation of a building at two corresponding levels of earthquake motion (Midorikawa et al. 2003).

     The Building Standards Law specifies design loadings and allowable stresses for each material along with
     minimum requirements for the detailing of members. Further details of structural design are specified in
     design standards issued by the Architectural Institute of Japan (AIJ) and “Commentary on the Structural
     Calculation based on the Revised Enforcement Order, Building Standards Law, (1981)” by MLIT and the Japan
     Conference of Building Administration. Such design standards, prepared separately for each structural type
     and material, have been revised frequently to adopt new technical knowledge and novel materials.

     To address possible falsification of building records, the Building Standards Law added a performance code,
     a construction confirmation system, inspections of private enterprises, and an interim inspection system in
     1998. To address falsification of structural calculation documents—a problem uncovered in 2005 that affected
     dozens of buildings—Japan imposed stricter regulations on the review process for plans of large-scale
     buildings and required a constructional design first-class registered architect to participate in the design of
     all larger buildings.

     In Japan’s most recent earthquake disaster, the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake, most damage was due to the
     tsunami, although there was some shaking-induced damage to nonstructural elements, including falling ceiling
     materials (CDMC 2011). In 2013, the Building Standards Law Enforcement Order was revised to include seismic
     considerations on design and construction of nonstructural components. Also in 2013, Act on Promotion of
     the Earthquake-proof Retrofit of Buildings was revised to obligate owners of certain buildings—including
     large-scale buildings such as hotels and buildings built alongside designated major roads that serve as access
     roads for emergency service vehicles—to undertake earthquake-resistant building inspections (Cabinet Office
     2015a).




24
                                                                                                                 Chapter 1: Context




box 1.1: development and adoption of a new seismic design method

Starting in 1972, the Ministry of Construction (the precursor of MLIT) launched a five-year national research project for establishing a
new seismic design method in Japan. This project was driven by advances in earthquake response analysis technology and the damage
caused by recent earthquakes, including the 1968 Tokachi Offshore Earthquake. The Building Research Institute and the Public Works
Research Institute assembled a project team of researchers from the private sector and universities, and in 1977, the team proposed a
new seismic-resistant design method popularly called “Shin-Taishin.” The new seismic design method was adopted more quickly than
anticipated: after the 1978 Miyagi Offshore Earthquake (magnitude of 7.4) killed 28 people, the new method was reviewed and evaluated
as a practical design method for approximately three years. The Building Standards Law was revised in 1981, and the new seismic design
method has been used since 1981.

Approximately 10 years elapsed between the start of the national research project in 1972 and the enforcement of the new Building
Standard Law in 1981.




1.2.2		 Development of standards for the seismic diagnosis of buildings
This section briefly describes the development of standards for seismic diagnosis and guidelines for seismic
retrofit.

The Ministry of Construction (the precursor of MLIT) commissioned the precursor of the Japan Building
Disaster Prevention Association (JBDPA) to develop standards for seismic evaluation and guidelines for
seismic retrofit of existing buildings. Guidelines for existing RC buildings were issued in 1977, followed by
similar standards and guidelines for steel structures (1979), wood structures (1979), and steel-reinforced
concrete structures (1986).

The guidelines were piloted in Shizuoka Prefecture to minimize the damage of a possible Tokai earthquake
(forecast in 1976), and by 1990 more than 4,000 public buildings had been evaluated and about 400 public
buildings had been retrofitted. The standards and guidelines were revised based on actual practice, and they
have been periodically revised to accommodate the revisions of building standards.
The standards and guidelines were widely promoted and disseminated after the pilot. This was done partly
in response to the 1995 Act on Promotion of the Earthquake-proof Retrofit of Buildings, which obliged local
government authorities responsible for schools to make efforts to conduct seismic evaluation and retrofit
based on the experience of the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake. It was also partly in response to the 2008
amendment of the Act on Special Measures for Earthquake Disaster Countermeasures, which obliged the
government authorities responsible for public schools to conduct seismic diagnosis and disclose schools’
seismic capacity to the public.




                                                                                                                                           25
     Chapter 1: Context



     Table 1.3 summarizes the evolution of regulations with major impetuses.

     Table 1.3: Evolution of seismic regulation and technology in response to events
       Year     of    Precipitating event                             Change in regulations and technology
       change




       1924           1923 Great Kanto Earthquake caused widespread   Revision of the Urban Building Law, 1924
                      damage, leaving few buildings habitable.        •	 First enforcement of seismic design standard
                                                                         in Japan; structural provisions include a
                                                                         seismic coefficient of 0.1, added to the Urban
                                                                         Building Law of 1919.

       1950           After WWII, concerns were raised about poor     Introduction of the Building Standards Law to
                      building quality and threat of urban fires.     replace Urban Building Law (Law No. 201), 1950
                                                                      •	 Includes more elaborate provisions for
                                                                         structural design to improve structural safety
                                                                         standards.
                                                                      •	 Raises standard value of seismic coefficient
                                                                         to 0.2, but does not change essential seismic
                                                                         design requirements, as comparable increase
                                                                         in allowable stresses for various materials
                                                                         accompanies increase in seismic loading.

       1971           1968 Tokachi Offshore Earthquake caused         Revision of the Building Standards Law, 1971
                      significant damage to modern buildings          •	 Incorporates ultimate strength design in
                      designed in accordance with building               shear of reinforced concrete, including a spec-
                      regulations.                                       ification on maximum spacing of hoops of RC
                                                                         columns
                                                                      •	 Establishes review procedure for existing
                                                                         buildings for seismic safety
                                                                      Development of standard for seismic evaluation
                                                                      1977
                                                                      •	 Provides standard for seismic evaluation of
                                                                         existing RC buildings
                                                                      •	 Provides guidelines for seismic retrofit of
                                                                         existing RC buildings

       1981           1978 Miyagi Offshore Earthquake severely        Revision of the Building Standards Law, 1981
                      damaged Sendai and highlighted the              •	 New Earthquake-proof Standards include
                      complicated nature of urban disasters.             two-phase design for safety against severe
                                                                         ground shaking; also verify the ultimate
                                                                         lateral load resistance of designed structure
                                                                         considering deformation capacity of members




26
                                                                                            Chapter 1: Context




Year     of   Precipitating event                              Change in regulations and technology
change




1995          1995    Great    Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake        Introduction of the Act on Promotion of the
              highlighted the vulnerability of buildings       Earthquake-proof Retrofit of Buildings, 1995
              designed before 1981.                            •	 Includes a prescribed measure for seismic
                                                                  retrofit and guidelines for seismic diagnosis
                                                                  and retrofit.
                                                               •	 Revised in 2006 in order to promote seismic
                                                                  retrofit of existing buildings designed to the
                                                                  pre-1981 standards and to increase the seismic
                                                                  retrofitting ratio of housing and specified
                                                                  buildings (schools, nursing homes for the
                                                                  elderly, etc.) from 75% to 90% within 10 years
                                                               •	 Establishes special committee on seismic
                                                                  retrofit evaluation for existing buildings
                                                                  under JBDPA

2000          1995 Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake resulted     Introduction of alternative seismic design
              in extensive destruction of infrastructure and   method, “Response and Limit Deformation,” in
              buildings.                                       the Building Standards Law, 2000
                                                               •	 Introduces     performance-based       design
                                                                  procedure to existing prescriptive framework
                                                                  and defines performance objective: life safety
                                                                  and damage limitation of a building at two
                                                                  corresponding levels of earthquake motion

1998; 1999;   Suspicions were raised about the quality of      Revision of the Building Standards Law, 1998
2000; 2001    housing.                                         •	 Introduces performance code, opens con-
                                                                  struction confirmation and inspections to
                                                                  private enterprise, and introduces interim
                                                                  inspection systems.
                                                               Development of laws, standards, and guidelines
                                                               to avoid defective residence problem
                                                               •	 Law Concerning the Promotion of Quality
                                                                  Guarantee of Housing, 1999
                                                               •	 Residential performance display standards
                                                                  for newly built residences, 2000
                                                               •	 Evaluation system based on the guidelines for
                                                                  earthquake resistance evaluation formulated
                                                                  by MLIT, 2001




                                                                                                                   27
     Chapter 1: Context




       Year         of   Precipitating event                             Change in regulations and technology
       change




       2007, 2009        Falsification of    structural    calculation   Implementation of stricter regulations on the
                         documents (“Aneha Scandal”) was discovered in   review process for plans of large-scale buildings,
                         2005.                                           2007
                                                                         Revision of the Licensed Architect Act, 2009
                                                                         •	 Requires larger buildings to be structurally
                                                                            designed by a constructional design first-class
                                                                            registered architect

       2013              Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011 was tre-    Revisions of the Law Concerning the Promotion
                         mendously destructive. Most of damage was       of Seismic Retrofit of Buildings, 2013
                         due to the tsunami, but some damage occurred    •	 Obligates owners of large-scale buildings
                         to nonstructural elements (including falling       (hotels, institutions) and owners of buildings
                         ceiling materials).                                alongside designated major roads to
                                                                            undertake earthquake-resistant building
                                                                            inspections (the latter ensures access for
                                                                            emergency vehicles)
                                                                         •	 Relaxes certification criteria on seismic
                                                                            retrofit plan and resolution requirements
                                                                            for condominium ownership (to extend
                                                                            application)
                                                                         •	 Introduces   seismic   performance     display
                                                                            system
                                                                         Revisions of the Building Standards Law
                                                                         Enforcement Order, 2013
                                                                         •	 Requires nonstructural components such as
                                                                            large-size suspended ceiling systems to be
                                                                            designed and constructed with detailing in
                                                                            accordance with new technical regulations




28
                                                        Chapter 2: The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings




Chapter 2	
The Program for
Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings
This chapter offers an overview of Japanese efforts to make school buildings earthquake-resistant. It explains
the background to the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings, then describes the program’s
development, priorities, and achievements as well as key factors that drove and facilitated its promotion.

2.1	Overview
Making schools earthquake-resistant has been a long-time effort of both the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) and local governments. For MEXT, promoting earthquake-resistant
school buildings has not been a time-limited initiative but rather an ongoing endeavor, one whose priorities
continue to evolve based on feedback from earthquake experience and technical advances. The discussion
in this chapter focuses mainly on the period between FY2003 and FY2015,3 a time of major achievements in
making schools earthquake-resistant: the acceleration of school retrofitting started in FY2003, when MEXT
issued its comprehensive guideline and the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings took it’s speed,
while FY2015 was the target year for completing retrofitting of public elementary and junior high schools.




3     Japan’s fiscal year in starts in April and ends in March, so FY2015 runs from April 2015 to March 2016.              29
     Chapter 2: The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings




                                                        Steps of the Program                        Responsible Level

                                                  •	   Provision of Technical Guideline

          PROGRAM                                 •	   Technical Support                            National Government
           DESIGN                                                                                         (MEXT)
                                                  •	   Financial Support

                                                  •	   Monitoring


                                                 Step 1: Establishment of Investigative
                                                        Organization

                                                 Step 2: Implementation of Basic Survey
                                PLANNING
       PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION




                                                 Step 3: Prioritization of Vulnerable Buildings
                                                        for Seismic Retrofitting

                                                 Step 4: Vulnerability Assessment                    Local Governments
                                                                                                      (Municipalities)
                                                 Step 5: Implementation of Seismic Diagnosis

                                                 Step 6: Determination on Urgency of the Projects
                                IMPLEMENTATION




                                                 Step 7: Formulation of Annual Plan

                                                 Step 8: Formulation of Reinforcement Plan

                                                 Step 9: Preparation of Design Drawings

                                                 Step 10: Implementation of Construction Works


      figure 2.1
      Steps of the program
      and responsible
      government level




     Japan’s efforts to make schools earthquake-resistant combine policies developed by the national government,
     mainly MEXT, and implementation by local governments. Under the Program for Earthquake-Resistant
     School Buildings, MEXT sets policies, arranges financial schemes, and provides technical guidance in the
     phase of program design, while municipalities develop plans for implementing school retrofitting and
     realize them by taking necessary actions with the support of prefectural governments and the national
     government (see figure 2.1).
30
                                                     Chapter 2: The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings



The program targets existing school buildings and seeks to ensure that they are earthquake-resistant. School
buildings constructed under the 1981 building standards that incorporated the New Earthquake-proof
Standards are deemed to be earthquake-resistant4, while those built before 1981 must be evaluated and then
retrofitted if the seismic capacity does not meet the standards (see box 2.1).



box 2.1:
why many schools were deemed unsafe at the beginning of the program
In the 1970s, when Japan experienced a rapid increase in the number of schoolchildren, many elementary schools and junior high
schools were built to the standards of the time. Building standards were revised in 1981 to incorporate the New Earthquake-proof
Standards. The Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake in 1995 revealed that many buildings built with the pre-1981 standards lacked sufficient
seismic capacity. In order to ensure their safety, these buildings underwent seismic diagnosis, and where seismic capacity was found to
be insufficient, they were retrofitted or reconstructed.

Local governments did not move quickly to diagnose and retrofit schools, due in part to the high cost of seismic diagnosis (usually more
than a few million yen a year for one school building). To address these delays, in 2003 MEXT issued a clear guideline to prioritize and
plan the seismic retrofit. School buildings built after 1981 using the latest building standards were considered earthquake-resistant and
were excluded from the targeted seismic diagnosis and retrofitting under the program.




2.2	      The Start of the Program
The national government’s initiative for making schools earthquake-resistant was first introduced in 1978.
Legally mandated national subsidies were prepared for reconstruction and seismic retrofitting of public
elementary and junior high schools in the Tokai and southern Kanto regions, where earthquakes were deemed
likely. 5

But the 1995 Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake affected a different part of the country, one with comparatively
low levels of earthquake preparedness. This event, which caused serious damage to school facilities (it damaged
3,883 schools in total), became a fresh reminder that earthquakes could happen anywhere and at any time.
In response, MEXT commissioned the Architectural Institute of Japan (AIJ) to survey the seismic capacity
of education infrastructure (AIJ 1997). The survey showed that damage was concentrated in buildings built
before 1981, and that the intensity of damage depended on the seismic capacity of individual buildings. These
results confirmed the necessity of school retrofitting, and in 1995 additional subsidies for seismic retrofitting,
which had been limited to the Tokai area, were extended to the entire nation. MEXT issued an announcement
in the following year urging local government authorities to enhance schools’ earthquake resistance through
seismic diagnosis and seismic retrofitting using the results of the AIJ survey. Such efforts were closely aligned
with the country’s revised Basic Disaster Management Plan.

In February 2002, a survey by the Fire and Disaster Management Agency (FDMA) found inadequate earthquake
resistance in school facilities: only 31 percent of school buildings that were constructed with pre-1981 standards
had completed the seismic diagnosis, and only 46 percent had satisfied the required seismic capacity as of
April 2002. These figures raised an alarm at the slow pace of local governments’ efforts to make schools seis-
mic-resistant. Since the FDMA survey covered only schools that were designated as evacuation centers, MEXT

4   This applies only to reinforced concrete school buildings, which means the majority of school buildings.

5     The additional national subsidy was prescribed in the Act on Special Financial Measures for Urgent Earthquake
      Countermeasure Improvement Projects in Areas for Intensified Measures (1980).
                                                                                                                                            31
     Chapter 2: The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings



     followed with a survey in May 2002 to assess the status of all public elementary and junior high schools in the
     nation. The survey showed a more serious result: 31 percent of the 88,000 school buildings built before 1981 had
     completed the seismic diagnosis, and only 44.5 percent of all existing school buildings and facilities had been
     confirmed as earthquake-resistant.

     In need of comprehensive and practical guidelines that would help local governments to promote seismic-
     resistant school buildings in a timely manner, in October 2002 MEXT convened an expert group to survey and
     study promotion of earthquake-resistant school facilities. Academic experts on building structures, building
     planning, and seismic research, as well as architects and representatives of local governments, examined
     issues regarding promotion of seismic-resistant school buildings and the methodology for planning recon-
     struction and seismic retrofitting. The emphasis for this research was on developing concrete measures for
     local governments.

     MEXT used the group’s final report (MEXT 2003a), which was published in April 2003, to develop the
     “Guidelines for Promotion of Earthquake-Resistance School Building” (MEXT 2003b). Issued in July 2003, this
     work describes the basic principles for making schools earthquake-resistant, methods for planning for earth-
     quake-resistance promotion, and methods for determining the urgency of earthquake-resistance projects. The
     guidelines marked the beginning of the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings and include the
     program’s six principles:
             1.	   Seismic diagnosis and vulnerability assessment should prioritize schools with the poorest seismic
                   capacity for earthquake-resistant activities.
             2.	   Seismic diagnosis should be prompt and should use the standards appropriate for the construc-
                   tion type.
             3.	   Municipal governments should disclose results of the seismic diagnosis and progress under the
                   program to stakeholders, including teachers, parents, and communities.
             4.	   Nonstructural elements of school facilities should be inspected and necessary measures taken to
                   ensure their earthquake resistance.
             5.	   General improvements in the quality of school facilities should be carried out at the same time as
                   earthquake-resistance improvements.
             6.	   The earthquake-resistance promotion plan should be formulated promptly by local governments.

     In addition to building on the expert group’s report, the MEXT guidelines also incorporated findings from
     several studies conducted between 1995 and 2002; see figure 2.2 for a summary.




                                                                                           figure 2.2
                                                                                           Background studies
                                                                                           for the Program for
                                                                                           Earthquake-Resistant
                                                                                           School Buildings

32
                                                Chapter 2: The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings




                 Study of seismic capacity of school facilities (1995–2002)
                         Focus: Measures to ensure earthquake-resistance of individual buildings
              Examination of technical considerations regarding the seismic capacity of educational facilities
                     based on the survey of damages caused by the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake.


                                                                  •	 Publication of “Promotion of Improving Seismic
                                                                     Capacity of Educational Facilities” (1995, 1996)
  Consideration in planning for earthquake-resis-
                                                                  •	 Publication of “Promotion of Improving Seismic
  tance and design of new and existing buildings
                                                                     Capacity of Educational Facilities” (1999)
                                                                     (integrating the above two announcements)

  Formulation of standards of seismic                               Formulation of standards of seismic
  diagnosis for gymnasiums                                          diagnosis for gymnasiums (1996)

  Provision for seismic diagnosis and retrofitting                  Publication of the report “Study on Seismic
  of precast concrete (roof of large structures)                    Capacity of Educational Facilities” (1997)

	 Provision for diagnosis and retrofitting                          Publication of “Ensuring Seismic Capacity of
  methods for nonstructural elements                                Nonstructural Elements of School Facilities” (2002)

                                                                    Publication of “Promotion of Seismic Retrofit of
  Provision for methods of seismic retrofit of
                                                                    School Facilities”—ensuring seismic capacity of
  school facilities with functional improvement
                                                                    nonstructural elements of school facilities (2002)




      Study on promoting earthquake-resistant school facilities (FY 2002)
                   Focus: Measures to ensure earthquake-resistance of school facilities in the community


     •	 Recommendation of basic principles for promoting
                                                                    Publication of report by group convened
        seismic retrofit of existing school facilities
                                                                    to survey and study promotion of earth-
     •	 Recommendation of planning methods and                      quake-resistant school facilities (2003)
        principles in promoting seismic retrofit




        •	   Dissemination of the report to municipal/prefectural governments and architects
             through dissemination seminars
        •	   Support for development of plans for promoting earthquake-resistant school facilities
             by municipalities (FY 2003–FY2007)


Source: Based on MEXT 2002.




                                                                                                                          33
     Chapter 2: The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings



     2.3	Priorities
     The priorities of the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings have evolved over time, not only
     in response to the country’s continuing experience with earthquakes but also in response to the program’s
     own progress.

     Early on, the program focused on schools’ structural seismic resistance. But when the Great Hanshin-Awaji
     Earthquake highlighted the risks posed by nonstructural elements, MEXT prepared guidelines for making
     nonstructural elements earthquake-resistant. Fifteen years later, the Great East Japan Earthquake highlighted
     the need for tsunami countermeasures and functional improvement of schools as evacuation centers. MEXT
     also took this opportunity to reexamine damage to nonstructural elements and measures to prevent damages
     in the future; the conclusions were summarized in a collection of case studies and guidebooks.

     Another shift in priorities occurred as the majority of schools became earthquake-resistant. MEXT then
     started to face the impending issue of how to maintain aging school facilities. In accordance with a 2013 plan
     developed by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism (MLIT) for extending the life span
     of infrastructure, MEXT developed guidelines for extending buildings’ life span through measures that could
     be carried out in conjunction with school retrofitting.

     March 2016 was the target date by which all schools were to be earthquake-resistant, specifically in terms of
     their main structure and the suspended ceilings found in gymnasiums. But efforts to make school buildings
     safer will continue. Ensuring the safety of nonstructural elements, equipping more disaster-resilient facilities,
     and extending the life span of existing buildings are the current priorities.

     Technical meetings commissioned by MEXT played a crucial role in developing both the policies and the
     concrete measures for earthquake resistance of schools. The meetings brought together groups of academics
     and practitioners who could respond to new and emerging needs related to school retrofitting and so
     formulate the new priorities. A list of the meeting topics and description of how the results contributed to the
     development of MEXT policies are included in annex 2A.

     2.4	Achievements
     As a result of the program, the share of earthquake-resistant public elementary and junior high schools
     has significantly increased. In 2002, earthquake-resistant schools accounted for 44.5 percent of the total; in
     April 2015 they accounted for 95.6 percent (figure 2.3). Most of the remaining percent of buildings have to
     be postponed due to the planned consolidation or closure of the schools. Since 2003, approximately 52,000
     buildings have been confirmed earthquake-resistant by seismic diagnosis or seismically improved by seismic
     retrofitting or reconstruction. 6

     Progress under the program sped up after 2008, partly in response to the revision of the Act on Special
     Measures for Earthquake Disaster Countermeasures. The revised act increased the national subsidy for
     school retrofitting and reconstruction and made local governments responsible for seismic diagnosis and
     disclosure of the results.




     6 	 The decrese in remaining buildings is due to either confirmed safe by seismic diagnosis or seismic retrofitting or
         reconstruction.Seismic diagnosis for the majority of existing school buildings were completed by 2007. Therefore,
         the decrease in remaining buildings after 2007 was mostly due to seismic retrofitting or retrofitting.
34
                                                                    Chapter 2: The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings



           In addition to these achievements in ensuring the overall structural resilience of school buildings, MEXT
           has also made considerable progress in ensuring the safety of nonstructural elements. As early as 2002 it
           developed a relevant guideline, and in 2008 it began preparing the national subsidy. For a few years, progress
           in retrofitting of nonstructural elements was slow, mostly due to the limited budget at the local government
           level. But after the Great East Japan Earthquake, MEXT prioritized the suspended ceilings (nonstructural)
           in gymnasiums, which can cause fatal injuries if they fall. Since then, there has been significant progress
           in removing suspended ceilings, retrofitting ceilings, and installing ceiling safety nets. As of April 2015, 85.5
           percent of school ceilings were considered safe (including gymnasiums without a suspended ceiling), and 93
           percent of schools had conducted the inspection for major nonstructural elements.


¥ 100 million
   4,500


   4,000


   3,500


   3,000


   2,500


   2,000


   1,500


   1,000


   500


    0
            1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012    2013   2014   2015




                    Initial budget                                    Supplementary budget                                                Reserve fund



           Source: MEXT 2015c.
           Note: The data are as of April for each year.

                                                                                                                            figure 2.3
                                                                                                                            Share of public elemen-
                                                                                                                            tary and junior high
                                                                                                                            schools whose main
                                                                                                                            structures are earth-
                                                                                                                            quake-resistant                     35
     Chapter 2: The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings



     2.5	         Drivers of Success
     To understand the program’s evolution and achievements, it is important to recognize certain key factors that
     drove or facilitated its development and promotion. These include (1) the experience of earthquakes; (2) the
     accumulation of engineering research and practices; (3) the availability of data, specifically data on schools, on
     damages caused by past earthquakes, and on hazard risks; and (4) the political will to carry out the program.

     2.5.1		 Occurance of Large Earthquakes
     The important effect of the 1995 Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake—in particular what it revealed about
     the earthquake resistance of pre-1981 buildings, and how it led to the development of the comprehensive
     guidelines—has already been described (section 2.2). But at least three other earthquakes also exercised
     significant influence on the program. The 2004 Chuetsu Earthquake increased the nascent program’s
     momentum. The May 2008 Sichuan (China) Earthquake, which caused the collapse of 6,898 school buildings
     (Minemura 2008) and the deaths of 19,065 schoolchildren (Author unknown. 2008), drove Japanese politicians
     and MEXT officials to make the program stronger: less than a year after the Sichuan Earthquake, the revised
     Act on Special Measures for Earthquake Disaster Countermeasures was passed, providing more money for
     school retrofitting and reconstruction and increasing the role of local governments. Finally, the experience of
     the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake induced the program to give higher priority to nonstructural elements,
     including certain ceilings and exterior materials. This earthquake also highlighted the need for tsunami coun-
     termeasures and functional improvement of schools as evacuation centers.

     2.5.2	 Prior Engineering Experience and Research
     Of particular relevance to the program is the development in 1949 of a prototype school building of reinforced
     concrete (RC). Commissioned by the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture (the precursor of MEXT),
     the AIJ developed four unit plans with complete drawings using a model school in Tokyo; this marked the
     beginning of architectural development of school buildings. A prototype steel-frame structure was developed
     in 1954, but the RC prototype was more widely accepted because it was considered more earthquake-resis-
     tant from the engineering point of view, and because it was easily replicable without additional structural
     calculation and plan drawing. This prototype was employed in many schools built during the 1970s and 1980s.
     Its use has made retrofitting of those schools fairly standardized and hence efficient.

     The development of standards for seismic evaluation and guidelines for seismic retrofit of existing buildings,
     which grew out of a pilot program in Shizuoka Prefecture7, were also highly relevant to the program. In 1976,
     in response to the prediction of a possible Tokai earthquake centered in Suruga Bay, the governor of Shizuoka
     Prefecture asked experts at the University of Tokyo for technical support in making buildings earthquake-
     resistant. The prefecture completed seismic retrofitting for all prefectural buildings in 2006, after more than 30
     years of work. In the process, engineering research and practices were developed that would serve the needs
     of the program:
             •	   An evaluation standard for seismic capacity for RC structures was developed and applied (1977).
             •	   The Special Committee on Seismic Evaluation of Public Buildings was established (1978). It
                  served as the model for the later Committee on Seismic Assessment Judgment. 8
             •	   Methods were developed for seismic retrofitting for RC structures, such as use of steel-frame

     7   This section is based on Shizuoka Architectural Firms Association (2012).

     8     Results of seismic evaluation needs to be validated by this committee. See Step 5 in 3.1.1 for details.
36
                                             Chapter 2: The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings



          braces and steel walls (1982– ).
     •	   The method for seismic evaluation of steel-framed gymnasiums was developed (1990– ).
     •	   A certification system was established in which experts conducted quick post-earthquake
          inspections of damaged buildings (1991). Those experts played an active role after the 1995
          Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake.
     •	   A method was developed for temporary seismic retrofitting of buildings requiring reconstruc-
          tion (2001).
These developments in seismic engineering and implementation all grew out of the Shizuoka Prefecture
initiative, which benefited from extensive research by the University of Tokyo and Japan Building Disaster
Prevention Association, and cooperation with the Shizuoka Architectural Firms Associations. These standards,
methods, and systems have been fully utilized throughout Japan to promote seismic retrofitting efforts under
the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings.

2.5.3	 Availability of Data
Data were crucial to the design and promotion of the program. Three types of data have been particularly
important: school data, data on damages caused by past earthquakes, and data on hazard risks.

School data. As described earlier, the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings was begun because
of alarming data on schools. The 2002 FDMA survey, which indicated poor seismic capacity of public school
buildings and weak effort to remedy it, drove MEXT to conduct a wider survey, which confirmed the FDMA
findings. These concerning data triggered MEXT’s development of the comprehensive guideline for making
schools earthquake-resistant.

Ongoing annual school surveys conducted by MEXT—the School Basic Survey and Public School Facilities
Survey—continue to play an important role in the program by providing the basic school infrastructure
inventory. The former survey provides data on the number of classrooms and students, and information on
school facilities for all levels and types of schools; and the latter provides quantitative data related to public
school facilities, such as building area and condition. (More detail on these two surveys is in annex 2B.)
To gain other needed information for the program, MEXT has conducted an additional survey, the Status of
Seismic Resistance of Public School Facilities, annually since 2002. The survey covers all governing authorities
(municipalities and prefectures) for kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, senior high schools,
secondary schools, and special-needs schools. It collects data on the seismic resistance of school structures
(both wood and nonwood) as well as suspended ceilings of gymnasiums and other nonstructural elements of
school buildings.

All the collected data are used to monitor the progress of the program and to determine additional support
or measures required by MEXT. Data are also disclosed to the public to indicate program results and progress.
Municipalities and prefectures that have been slow in promoting the program are named in press releases, and
prefectures and municipalities are ranked by the percentage of earthquake-resistant school buildings. This
tactic has proved effective in stimulating the local authorities to take prompt action.




                                                                                                                     37
     Chapter 2: The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings



     Data on damages. Another fundamental data set used to direct policies concerns damage to buildings, specifi-
     cally the kind of damage suffered by various types of buildings, the location where the damage occurred and
     under what circumstances, and the kind of earthquake (intensity, cycle, and length of shaking) that caused
     the damage. This information is collected by the earthquake damage investigation. For mega-disasters like the
     Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake and the Great East Japan Earthquake, MEXT has commissioned an expert
     group (AIJ) to conduct the survey. MEXT typically collects the data on damages through municipalities and
     prefectures as well as through a direct field survey for each earthquake. Lessons learned from these data are
     reported to MEXT and used to minimize the damage caused by future earthquakes.

     Data on hazard risk. Data on earthquake risk, and in particular data showing where that risk is elevated, are
     used by the national government to prioritize necessary actions. Seismological research has identified those
     areas that require intensified measures to mitigate earthquake damages, namely the Tokai, southern Kanto,
     and Nankai regions. This information has been incorporated in laws to promote mitigation of risks—for
     example, through provision of additional subsidies (see box 2.2). This risk information has also raised people’s
     awareness and led to strong support for efforts by national and local governments to make schools earth-
     quake-resistant.




     box 2.2: how laws reflect data on anticipated focal areas and damages
     Research on seismology advanced significantly during and after the 1970s. In 1976, the Seismological Society of Japan found that a large
     subduction zone earthquake in Suruga Bay near Shizuoka Prefecture was probable. The yet-to-come Tokai Earthquake became a large
     social concern, in particular to the Tokai region itself, including Shizuoka Prefecture. With the strong leadership of the prefecture’s
     governor, intensive, ongoing efforts have been to ensure the prefecture’s earthquake resilience.

     In 1978, in accordance with the Act on Special Measures Concerning Countermeasures for Large-Scale Earthquakes, the Central Disaster
     Management Council predicted the assumed epicenter of the Tokai Earthquake, and areas requiring intensified measures to prevent
     earthquake disasters were designated (Cabinet Office 1978). The Act on Special Financial Measures for Urgent Earthquake Counter-
     measure Improvement Projects in Areas for Intensified Measures (Cabinet Office 1980) was enacted in 1980 to support anti-earthquake
     projects in high-risk areas, by increasing the ratio of national subsidies for seismic retrofitting of public elementary and junior high
     schools from one thirds to one half. Using the subsidy supported by the special financial measure, a large number of public elementary
     schools and junior high schools of Tokai region were retrofitted. The measure of additional subsidies were later expanded to the
     nationwide after the 1995 Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake.

     As of 2015, the government had identified several regions at elevated seismic risk (Cabinet Office 2015), including the Chubu and Kinki
     regions. The CDMC announced the estimated human and physical damages in 2007, and it published its estimation of the damages on
     transportation systems, economy, and lifelines in 2008. The countermeasures against the earthquake include promotion of disaster
     management measures in the city areas with high concentrations of wooden houses, a damage reduction plan for the cultural heritage
     areas in the Kyoto and Nara areas, and security plans for the petrochemical plant complexes concentrated in Osaka and Ise Bays.




38
                                           Chapter 2: The Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings



2.5.4	 Political Will
The political will to make schools safe is strong in Japan. The policy has been popular among politicians, i.e.,
members of the Diet, for both humanitarian and economic reasons. In a culture that prioritizes human life, a
policy for making schools earthquake-resistant has the noble aim of saving the lives of schoolchildren. The
policy also is considered an effective investment that contributes to local economies and produces tangible
results that are well-received by the public. Thus the major political parties have supported acceleration of
school retrofit and helped to secure the budget for the purpose.

These efforts have largely been bipartisan. Devastating damages to school buildings and fatalities of school-
children caused by the Sichuan Earthquake in China caught the attention of the people in Japan to the safety
of Japanese school buildings. Being aware of the fact that all Japanese schools were not yet earthquake-re-
sistant mostly due to the financial limitations of local governments, members of the Diet voted to revise the
Act on Special Measures for Earthquake Disaster Countermeasures in order to reduce the burden on local
governments for school retrofitting. The increased subsidy rate was extended in 2011 for five years and again
in 2016 for another five years by the efforts of members of the Diet.

Discussions held in certain Diet committees, including the Special Committee on Disaster Management, the
Committee on Education and Science, and the Committee on Budget Planning, also contributed to development
and promotion of the program and helped to secure the program’s budget.




                                                                                                                   39
     Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government




     Chapter 3
     Program Design and the Role Played
     by the National Government
     Through the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), the national government
     is responsible for directing and supporting local governments’ implementation of school retrofitting projects.
     This chapter describes MEXT’s provision of technical support, preparation of financial measures, and
     monitoring of the projects’ progress. It also highlights some of the challenges MEXT has faced as the program
     has been carried out, and MEXT’s responses.

     3.1	Prioritization
     MEXT lays out the basic principles of school retrofitting in the first chapter of the “Guidelines for Promotion
     of Earthquake-resistance School Building” (MEXT 2003b); subsequent chapters suggest steps for planning
     school retrofitting, including methods for how to use the results of seismic diagnosis to prioritize vulnerable
     buildings and judge the urgency of retrofitting. The next section explains these steps.

     3.1.1	 Prioritization Process
     The MEXT guidelines include a flow

     chart (figure 3.1) to guide planning for earthquake-resistant school buildings by local governments, the imple-
     menters of the program. The main purpose of the flowchart is to show how to prioritize the most hazardous
     buildings over others to minimize damages. The seven steps shown in the chart are explained below.




                                                                                         figure 3.1
                                                                                         Flowchart for for-
                                                                                         mulating a plan for
                                                                                         earthquake-resistant
                                                                                         school buildings

40
                                             Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government




                                                            Step 1: Establishment of
                                                          Investigative Organizations




                                                               Step 2: Implementation
                                                                   of Basic survey

[Building expected to be reconstructed]

The strength of concrete is quite low.

Reinforcing steel and structural steel is
widely corroded.
                                                                       Step 3:
                                                                  Prioritization of
                                                                Vulnerable Building
                                                                for Seismic Retrofit




                               Step 4:                          [average conditions]
                            Vulnerability
                             Assessment          Over 5,000 points


                                                                      Step 5:
                                                                      Seismic                                            *For 1st diagnosis applied to
          5,000 points or less                                       Diagnosis                                           reinforced concrete building
                                         Is < 0.3 or q < 0.5                            0.3≤ Is < 0.7 or 0.5 ≤ q < 1.0   calculation, Is ≥ 0.9




                    Reconstruction                              Seismic Retrofit
                                                                                                     No problem (aging retrofit)
                emergency reinforcement                    (emergency reinforcement)




                                                                      Step 6:
                                                                  Determination
                                                                   of Urgency




                                                               Step 7: Formulation of
                                                                    Annual Plan




Source: Adapted from MEXT 2003b.
Note: Is = seismic index of structure; q = horizontal load-carrying capacity index.




                                                                                                                                                         41
     Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government


     Step 1: Establish an investigative organization. The guideline suggests the establishment of a local government
     steering committee that consists of the board of education and relevant departments and agencies, such as
     finance, construction, and disaster prevention, as well as academic experts on architectural structure, designers,
     and teachers and staff of schools. This approach makes it possible for stakeholders to reach a common un-
     derstanding about the importance of earthquake-resistant school facilities. The guideline also recommends
     developing a subgroup of engineering experts within the committee to support planning.

     Step 2: Implement the basic survey. The basic survey has five concerns: (1) condition of facilities, (2) confirma-
     tion of design drawings and documents, (3) collection of data and information on any active fault and subduc-
     tional zone earthquake, (4) confirmation of school’s designation as an evacuation center, and (5) identification
     of any merger or closure plan. Table 3.1 provides more detail. The information collected in the survey is utilized
     in the remaining steps.

     Table 3.1: Focus areas and items of basic survey

       Focus area                    Items to be surveyed

       (1) Condition of facilities   •	 Basic information:
                                              ››Year of construction
                                              ››Building area
                                              ››Number of buildings
                                     •	 Results of the seismic diagnosis and vulnerability assessment, if any
                                     •	 Information on previous retrofitting activities, if any
                                     •	 Damages by previous natural disasters, if any

       (2) Confirmation of design    •	 Availability and contents of design documents:
       drawings and documents                 ››Design drawings and documents (design and structure)
                                              ››Structural calculation sheets
                                              ››Ground survey data and information
                                     •	 Development of floor plans and framing elevations and other necessary
                                        documents through site survey in case the original documents are unavailable
                                     •	 Comparison of the design drawings and documents
                                        with the actual conditions of the buildings

       (3) Collection of data        •	 Collection of data and information:
       and information on any                 ››Location of active fault
       active fault and subduc-
                                              ››Estimated focal region of subductional zone earthquake
       tional zone earthquake
                                              ››Expected scale of earthquake motion
                                              ››Estimated damages by the earthquake motion
                                     •	 Utilization of “Seismic Hazard Map in General View of the Whole
                                        Japan” and “Seismic Shaking Map for Specified Seismic Source Faults”
                                                                                                                          Source: Based on MEXT 2003b.




                                        prepared by the Headquarters for Earthquake Research Promotion

       (4) Confirmation of
                                     •	 Confirmation of whether the school facilities are designated as a
       school’s designation
                                        disaster evacuation center in the local disaster management plan
       as evacuation center

       (5) Identification of any     •	 Identification of merger, closure, or diversion plans
       merger or closure plan           of schools and local governments
42
                                          Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government


Step 3: Conduct survey to prioritize vulnerable building for seismic retrofitting. MEXT suggests that local
governments conduct the survey to prioritize vulnerable buildings before conducting a vulnerability
assessment and/or seismic diagnosis. The objective of the prioritization survey is to determine which buildings
should be prioritized for the vulnerability assessment and/or seismic diagnosis. This step is particularly useful
where there are many school buildings and the local government cannot simultaneously assess or diagnose
them all. Where the number of school facilities is small and local governments are able to directly conduct
vulnerability assessment and/or seismic diagnosis, the prioritization survey can be skipped.

The prioritization survey has been established only for reinforced concrete (RC) school buildings and
structural steel-framed gymnasiums, which are the most common type of school facilities in Japan. Both types
are discussed below. For other structural types—such as wooden, concrete block, and steel-reinforced concrete
facilities—MEXT recommends conducting the prioritization in cooperation with experts and reference to the
relevant guidelines.

The prioritization survey for RC school buildings is based on (1) basic classifications, including year of con-
struction and number of floors; and (2) correction items, including concrete strength, degree of aging, floor
plan, wall alignment, and assumed seismic intensity. See Annex 3B for a detailed description of the prioritiza-
tion study.

Steps 4 and 5: Conduct vulnerability assessment (Step 4) and seismic diagnosis (Step 5) Depending on the
results of the prioritization survey, either a vulnerability assessment or seismic diagnosis is conducted. When
the strength of concrete is quite low or reinforcing steel and structural steel are widely corroded, and when
the likelihood of reconstruction is high, a vulnerability assessment is conducted. On the other hand, when
buildings are found to be in average or above average condition, seismic diagnosis is conducted without vul-
nerability assessment.

Vulnerability assessment determines the degree of deterioration of school buildings comprehensively, looking
at the structural strength of the building, the deterioration of its strength due to aging, and impacts of
locational conditions. The assessment calculates buildings’ vulnerability score out of a total of 10,000. If the
calculated score is 4,500 or less, the building is considered dangerous and is slated for reconstruction. Such a
building is eligible for the national subsidy for reconstruction, and the results of the vulnerability assessment
also serve as the evidence necessary in requesting the national subsidy. 9
If the calculated score of the vulnerability study is over 5,000, the next step is to conduct seismic diagnosis to
determine the level of seismic capacity. The same process of seismic diagnosis is carried out for buildings in
average or above average condition.

The aim of seismic diagnosis is to judge the degree to which a building can withstand an earthquake from the
perspective of structural dynamics, and to evaluate the safety (aseismic capacity) of the building when the
building is expected to be continuously used.10 The guidelines for the seismic diagnosis are published by the
Japan Building Disaster Prevention Association (JBDPA) under the supervision of the Ministry of Land, Infra-
structure, Transport and Tourism (MLIT) (see JBDPA 2001a, 2001b). The entire evaluation must be conducted
by a constructional design first-class registered architect and his or her office.


9     MEXT plans to revise the procedures for vulnerability assessment by 2017 to incorporate revisions in related laws
      and regulations as well as advances in building engineering. Kensetsu News, April 15, 2016, https://www.kenset-
      sunews.com/?p=64196.

10   In the context of school buildings, seismic diagnosis examines the seismic capacity of buildings that were designed
     under the pre-1981 building standards in light of the latest building standards.
                                                                                                                           43
     Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government



     In order to evaluate the seismic performance of the buildings based on pre-1981 building standards, the seismic
     index of structure (Is) and the horizontal load-carrying capacity index (q or CTUSD) resulted from the seismic
     diagnosis are utilized. The procedure for computing the seismic index of structure is briefly described in annex
     3A. The seismic performance standards for Is and q defined by MLIT are summarized in table 3.6.

     Table 3.6: Evaluation standard of seismic performance based on Is and q


       Is < 0.3 or q < 0.5                         The risk of collapsing from the shock of earthquake is high

       0.3 ≤ Is < 0.6 or 0.5 ≤ q < 1.0             There is a risk of collapsing from the shock of earthquake

       0.6 ≤ Is and 1.0 ≤ q                        The risk of collapsing from the shock of earthquake is low


     Source: Based on Act on Promotion of the Earthquake-proof Retrofit of Buildings (1995)
     Note: Assumed seismic intensity is between VI and VII on the Japan Meteorological Agency seismic intensity scale.



     When Is is found equal to or greater than 0.6, the building is considered safe, and the risk of collapsing from the
     shock of earthquake is low. When Is is less than 0.6, seismic retrofitting is necessary as prescribed in the Act
     on Promotion of the Earthquake-proof Retrofit of Buildings. Using the Japan Meteorological Agency seismic
     intensity scale of I to VII, with V and VI each divided into “lower” and “upper,” the expected seismic capacity
     with the standard of 0.6 ≤ Is is as follows: 11

     Earthquake with seismic intensity of VI (upper) and VII: Buildings may be partly damaged, but will not collapse,
     no threat to human life.
           •	   Earthquake with seismic intensity of V (upper): Buildings will not be damaged.
           •	   It should be highlighted that the standard for school buildings is set at 0.7 < Is and 1.0 < q,
                considering the need to ensure the safety of schoolchildren and schools’ function as evacuation
                centers, as prescribed in the operational details defined by MEXT.
     The urgency of the school retrofitting is determined by the seismic capacity expressed in Is and q. Basically, the
     smallest values of the indexes for each floor and each direction (beam and girder directions) are used, although
     some correction can be made by considering the distribution of the indexes and other indexes, including those
     for strength and ductility. The urgency level is defined using the chart shown in figure 3.3.




     11   The expected seismic capacity is currently in discussion to upgrade such as “buildings should not only be anti-
          collapse but be kept functional in severe earthquakes.”
44
                                       Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government



Figure 3.3: Urgency level determination chart (reinforced concrete school building)



                                                                                         Urgency Level
Is
                                 ⑥                                  ⑦
     0.7                                                                                 ①                    High

                                 ⑤                                  ⑥
     0.6
                                                                                         ②
                                 ④                                  ⑤
     0.5


                                 ③                                  ④                    ③
     0.4


                                 ②                                  ③                    ④
     0.3


                 ①                                                                       ⑤
                         0.5               1.0               1.5          q
                                                                                         ⑥                     Low


                        (0.15)            (0.3)            (0.45)       (CnSo)
                                                                                         ⑦                     Nil




Source: MEXT 2003b.

                                                                                              figure 3.3
                                                                                              Urgency level
                                                                                              determination chart
                                                                                              (reinforced concrete
                                                                                              school building)




The results of seismic diagnosis need to be validated by a third-party organization, namely the Committee on
Seismic Assessment Judgment,12 so that the retrofitting plan can be certified and submitted as evidence for
receipt of the national subsidy.




12	 The committee needs to comprise more than five members and should include academics of building engineers and
    a constructional design first-class registered architect.
                                                                                                                     45
     Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government



     Step 6: Determine urgency. The priority of projects is discussed by the investigative organization and its
     subgroup of experts based on schools’ earthquake resistance. As a rule, priority should be given to school
     facilities with a high urgency level that are in danger of collapsing or being badly damaged. MEXT emphasizes
     the importance of considering making general improvements to school facilities at the same time that retrofit-
     ting is carried out.

     The urgency levels for RC school buildings, structural steel-framed gymnasiums, and gymnasiums with light
     precast concrete roofs are determined separately for each type of facility. The investigative committee needs
     to decide which school facilities among each type should be prioritized by reviewing results of the seismic
     diagnosis for each facility and taking into consideration each facility’s specific needs.

     Step 7: Formulate annual plan. Using the list of school facilities to be reconstructed or retrofitted, local
     governments need to formulate an annual plan for implementing construction. They must first calculate the
     volume and the necessary costs of the work. Then, taking into consideration the financial situation and other
     specific needs of the area, they can determine how long the work will take.

     MEXT also highlights the importance of ensuring consistency with other facility development projects, setting
     adequate unit costs for school retrofitting, incorporating school retrofitting into a regional development
     master plan and a local disaster prevention plan, and disclosing the annual plan to stakeholders.

     3.1.2	 Reconstruction versus Seismic Retrofitting
     School buildings that do not meet seismic standards can be made earthquake-resistant either by reconstruc-
     tion or retrofit. The local governments, as the responsible authority, have to select which method to employ
     based on each building’s earthquake-resistance capacity and durable period, stakeholders’ needs for the school
     facility, and the costs involved.13

     Reconstruction is recommended when the seismic diagnosis finds the earthquake resistance capacity to be
     notably low (that is, when the urgency level is ①, or Is < 0.3 or q < 0.5), or when the building receives a low score
     on the vulnerability assessment. Reconstruction is also chosen when significant reinforcement is needed,
     which might negatively affect the educational activities of schoolchildren, or when the retrofit construction
     would be extremely difficult. For the structural steel-framed gymnasiums, the retrofit option may be workable
     even if the urgency is level ① (Is < 0.3 or q < 0.5). For urgency level ②, the retrofit option is considered.

     Any retrofitting approach, MEXT says, must maintain sufficient earthquake resistance capacity in its design
     by introducing the “importance coefficient” and increasing the magnitude of the earthquake in the design
     criteria.

     There are various construction methods for seismic retrofitting, such as steel-frame bracing, RC shear wall,
     column reinforcement by steel jacketing or fiber reinforced polymers, and out frame. The decision about
     which method to use is made by local governments based on the type of structure, actual condition of the
     building, duration of the construction, costs, etc. MEXT prepares the manual for school retrofitting and collects
     examples of work on different types of structures, and provides them to local governments as references.




     13 	 MEXT did not explicitly indicate a preference for school retrofitting over reconstruction in the 2003 guideline, but it later
          indicated that retrofitting, which costs less and requires a shorter construction period, makes sense in light of the need to
          promptly and efficiently ensure sufficient seismic capacity in as many schools as possible with limited financial resources.
46
                                               Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government



A third option in addition to retrofit and reconstruction is emergency reinforcement; MEXT may suggest this
when the building’s seismic capacity is quite low and when there is likely to be a significant delay before recon-
struction or seismic retrofitting can be started.

3.2	          Technical Support to Local Governments
In addition to setting policies and furnishing technical guidelines, MEXT has provided technical support to
local government through various means:

Publications. MEXT has published manuals (MEXT 2003a, 2003c, 2008b), references (MEXT 2006), and case
studies (MEXT 2008a, 2012) to support local governments’ understanding of approaches to school retrofitting.
A list of the documents developed by MEXT as well other engineering institutions is posted on the MEXT
website (see also table 3.7).

Workshops and meetings with governors. MEXT and MLIT have provided prefectural governors with guidance
through national workshops and have conducted 8 regional block-based meetings to disseminate necessary
information to municipal governors.
         •	   Technical training by academics. MEXT has commissioned academic organizations—such
              as Japan Building Disaster Prevention Association and Research Institute of Educational
              Facilities—to conduct more technical-based information dissemination and practical training.
              The themes of the training have varied to reflect the needs of local governments and the
              progress of the program.
         •	   Consultation desk. To quickly respond to inquiries from local governments or private education
              institutions about earthquake-resistant school facilities, including basic principles of the
              program, available national subsidies, and engineering-related issues, MEXT has maintained
              a consultation desk since 2004.14 Questions are sent to this desk through e-mail or fax, and
              answers are returned in kind by MEXT officials or outside experts.




14      The Research Institute of Educational Facilities was originally commissioned to establish the consultation desk but it is now
       run by MEXT.
                                                                                                                                        47
     Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government



     Table 3.7: List of major references on school retrofitting

       Area                   Title

       Policy                 MEXT. 2003. “Guidelines for Promotion of Earthquake-resistance School Building.”

                              JBDPA. 2001. Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit (seismic evaluation
                              standard and guideline for retrofit for RC structure).
       Seismic diagnosis

                              MEXT. 2006 “Standards for Diagnosis for Seismic Capacity of Gymnasium” (in Japanese).

                              Ministry of Education, Sports, and Culture.. 1985. “Methods of Vulnerability Assessment
                              for Reinforced Concrete Masonry” (in Japanese). (revised version)” (in Japanese).
       Vulnerability
       assessment
                              MEXT. 2001. “Methods of Vulnerability Assessment for RC School Building and
                              Structural Steel-framed School Building (revised version)” (in Japanese).

                              AIJ. 2003. “Survey on Seismic Capacity of School Facilities” (in Japanese).

                              AIJ. 2003. “Survey on Seismic Retrofitting of School Facilities” (in Japanese).

                              AIJ. 2003. “Survey on Seismic Inspection of Nonstructur-
                              al elements of School Facilities” (in Japanese).

       Seismic retrofitting   MEXT. 2003. “Manual of Seismic Retrofitting of School Facilities (for
                              RC School Building) Revised Edition 2003” (in Japanese).

                              MEXT. 2003. “Manual of Seismic Retrofitting of School Facilities (for Structural
                              Steel-framed Gymnasium) Revised Edition 2003” (in Japanese).

                              MEXT. 2006. Seismic Retrofitting Quick Reference, School Facilities that
                              Withstand Earthquakes – Examples of Seismic Retrofitting.

                              MEXT. 2010. “Protecting Children from Falling and Tumbling Objects due to an Earthquake”

                              MEXT. 2012. “Countermeasures against Fallen Objects in Gymnasium” (in Japanese).

       Retrofitting of Non-
                              MEXT. 2012. “Case study of Retrofitting of Nonstructur-
       structural elements
                              al elements of School Facilities” (in Japanese).

                              MEXT. 2015. “Guidebook for Earthquake Protection for Non-
                              structural elements of School Facilities.”




       Emergency              Ministry of Education, Science and Culture. 1999. “Manual of
       retrofitting           Emergency Restoration of School Facilities” (in Japanese).




48
                                  Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government




                          MEXT. 2014. “Ideal State of Disaster-Resilient School Facilities –Tsunami protection
  Tsunami protection
                          measures and enhancement of disaster prevention function as evacuation shelter–“

  Financing measures      MEXT. 2008. “PFI Manual for Seismic Retrofitting of Public Schools” (in Japanese).




3.3	   Financial Support to Local Governments
The main financial scheme prepared by MEXT is the special provision of subsidies for reconstruction and
seismic retrofitting of school building structures and nonstructural elements. To further accelerate the
program, MEXT has urged the use of fiscal measures by local governments, namely local bonds and local tax
allocation, and introduced a private finance initiative (PFI) for seismic retrofitting of public schools. These are
briefly described below. In addition, MEXT has made available to local governments a complete list of funding
mechanisms prepared by other agencies (such as the Cabinet Office, Fire and Disaster Management Agency,
MLIT, and Fisheries Agency) that can be used for seismic retrofitting and functional strengthening of schools.

3.3.1	 National Subsidies
As described in section 1.3, major educational expenditure is shared between the national government and
local governments. The national government provides local governments with additional subsidies for seismic
retrofitting and reconstruction of schools with insufficient seismic capacity. In principle, national subsidies
for retrofitting and reconstruction cover one-third of associated costs for public elementary and junior high
schools, but the national share has been raised to two-thirds and one-half respectively by the Act on Special
Measures for Earthquake Disaster Countermeasures (see table 3.8). This is a time-limited measure, but the
period has been extended repeatedly and currently expires on March 31, 2021. The subsidies can be used for
vulnerability assessment, seismic diagnosis and retrofit planning, design of construction, and outsourcing of
construction management, in addition to the construction itself.




                                                                                                                      49
     Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government



     Table 3.8: Principle and special provision of national government subsidies as of 2015
                                                                                                    Special provision

                                                                                                    Act on Special Measures
       Level of schools, types of construction,
                                                                  Principle                         for Earthquake Disaster
       and targets of construction                                                                  Countermeasures

                                                                                                    Is < 0.3         Is ≥ 0.3

                                                                  Classroom
                                                                                      1/3           2/3a             1/2
                                                                  buildings

                                             Retrofitting         Gymnasium           1/3           2/3              1/2

                                                                  Student
       Elementary school, junior                                                      1/3           2/3              n.a.
                                                                  housing
       high school, and lower
       level of secondary school
                                                                  Classroom
                                                                                      1/3           1/2b             n.a.
                                                                  buildings
                                             Recon-
                                             struction            Gymnasium,                        1/2b
                                                                  student             1/3                            n.a.
                                                                  housing

                                                                  Classroom
                                                                  buildings,
                                             Retrofitting         Gymnasium,          1/3           2/3              n.a.
                                                                  student
       Special-needs school
                                                                  housing
       (kindergarten, elementary,
       junior high school),
                                                                  Classroom
       kindergarten
                                                                  buildings,
                                             Recon-
                                                                  Gymnasium,          1/3           1/2              n.a.
                                             struction
                                                                  student
                                                                  housing

                                             Retrofitting                             1/3            n.a.            n.a.
       Special-needs school
       (senior high school)
                                             Reconstruction                           1/3           n.a.             n.a.


     Source: MEXT, 2015, “About Government Subsidy Programs”
     Note: n.a. = not applicable.
     a. 	 The proportion of the national government subsidy was increased to 2/3 from 1/2 in the 2008 revision of the Act on
          Special Measures for Earthquake Disaster Countermeasures.
     b. 	 The proportion of the national government subsidy was increased to 1/2 from 1/3 in the 2008 revision of the Act on
          Special Measures for Earthquake Disaster Countermeasures.




50
                                        Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government



The subsidies prepared for the program were part of MEXT’s school facility development budget. Figure 3.4
shows the total annual facility development budget for new construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, and
seismic retrofitting for public schools. As shown in the figure, the budget had decreased over years before the
program started; this was due to the gradual decrease in the number of schools. After the commencement of
the program in 2003, the total budget increased dramatically until 2009 and showed variation after that 15.
What is interesting to note is that the budget increases were mainly covered by the supplementary budgets,
shown as the teal bars in the figure. The supplementary budget is meant to be used to prepare for unexpected
disasters, but in practice, it is often utilized to expand government expenditures and compensate for the dete-
rioration of the economy. The supplementary budget needs to be determined as quickly as possible at the end
of the fiscal term and requires only six days of discussion in the Diet, which makes approval easier.

As local governments’ demands for national subsidies for school retrofit increased, it became difficult for
MEXT to secure sufficient amounts in the initial budget. Members of the Diet, particularly members of the
Committee on Education and Science, supported a budget increase for the program and asked the Minister
of Finance to allocate sufficient budget for seismic retrofitting of school buildings using the supplementary
budget. They have also urged the government to use the reserve fund, which is set aside as a contingency fund
and usually left unused.




15   The variation in the budget after 2009 may be attributed to the change of government and aftermath of the Great
     East Japan Earthquake occurred in 2011.
                                                                                                                       51
             Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government



¥ 100 million
     4,500


     4,000


     3,500


     3,000


     2,500


     2,000


     1,500


     1,000


     500


      0
              1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012    2013   2014   2015




                      Initial budget                                    Supplementary budget                                                Reserve fund


             Source: MEXT 2015.
             Note: Data from 2004 onward is limited to budgets related to seismic reconstruction and retrofitting. Data before 2004
             shows the total budget for facility development. Figures include budget for kindergartens, elementary schools, junior
             high schools, and special-needs schools.


               figure 3.4
               Facility development
               budget for public
               elementary and junior
               high schools


             Construction for school retrofit needs to be conducted during the summer school holidays in July and August
             to avoid negative impacts on educational activities. In order to meet this schedule, the budget needs to be
             approved in the “first” supplementary budget, preferably within April of the same year. Such a demand from
             local governments has also placed pressure on the central government to allocate funds for seismic retrofit-
             ting of school buildings.



52
                                           Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government



3.3.2	 Local bonds and Local Tax Allocation
In addition to the national subsidies described above, another source of program funding comes from fiscal
measures for local governments, namely, local government bonds and local tax allocation. Local governments
are permitted to issue local bonds only to raise financial resources for public enterprises (such as transporta-
tion, gas, and water) and infrastructure development.

As a general rule, the local tax allocation can be allocated to cover two-thirds of the redemption of principal
and interest.16 In the case of seismic retrofitting and reconstruction, 80 percent of the costs can be covered by
the local tax allocation. This makes the actual financial burden of municipalities relatively small: 6.7 percent
for seismic retrofitting (when Is < 0.3) and 10 percent for seismic reconstruction (as shown in figure 3.5).

Such fiscal measures using the local tax allocation were originally limited to specific areas that had financial
difficulties, but they have been nationwide since FY2007.




16   Local tax allocation is granted to fill the financial gaps of local governments and to ensure the sufficient size of the
     general account budget for local governments whose local tax revenue is not large enough. The amount of the local
     tax allocation is based on the size of the local government’s budget deficit, which is calculated with the amount of
     redemption of principal and interest of the local government bonds.
                                                                                                                                53
     Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government



     Case 1: Seismic retrofitting for public elementary and junior high schools (Is<0.3)

                                     National Subsidy (2/3)                                      Costs to be borne by municipalities (1/3)
                                                                                                            Local Bond (100%)




                                               66.7%                                                           26.6%              6.7%
                                                                                                                         Actual Burden of
                                                                                                                          municipalities

     Case 2: Seismic retrofitting for public elementary and junior high schools (Is≥0.3) or Seismic reconstruction
     for public elementary and junior high schools

                         National Subsidy (1/2)                                    Costs to be borne by municipalities (1/2)
                                                                                              Local Bond (100%)




                                    50%                                                              40%                         10%
                                                                                                                         Actual Burden of
                                                                                                                          municipalities
     Case 3: Seismic retrofitting for non-structural elements

                         National Subsidy (1/3)                         Costs to be borne by municipalities (2/3)

                                                                                      Local Bond (100%)




                        33.3%                                                      53.4%                                      13.3%
                                                                                                                         Actual Burden of
                                                                                                                          municipalities

     Source: Based on MEXT, 2015, “Financial support measures for school retrofitting of public elementary and junior high
     schools.”
     Note: This financial scheme is based on the special account for reconstruction, which is a time-limited measure.



                                                                                                              figure 3.5
                                                                                                              Example of fiscal
                                                                                                              measures for seismic
                                                                                                              reconstruction and
                                                                                                              retrofitting as of
                                                                                                              FY2015
54
                                  Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government




3.3.3	 Private Finance Initiative
In light of regional disparities in the progress of school retrofitting, MEXT proposed the use of a private finance
initiative. In 2008, it developed and disseminated PFI manuals (e.g., MEXT 2008c) focusing on seismic retrofit-
ting and reconstruction of public schools.

PFI was considered an effective way to cope with problems commonly experienced by local governments,
including limited financial resources, a large number of buildings needing retrofit or reconstruction, and a lack
of local government engineers. The idea was that PFI would (1) reduce fiscal spending through use of a blanket
order; (2) equalize annual fiscal spending of local government over the years with the use of private financing;
(3) reduce the workload of local government staffs (by reducing the need to place orders and make contracts);
and (4) accelerate school retrofitting through a blanket order covering many schools at the same time.

In practice, however, the use of PFI by municipalities was limited—not because the scheme was not functional,
but because unfamiliarity with the scheme made municipalities hesitant to adopt it. Another possible reason
why use of PFI was limited was that by the time the manual was disseminated, urban municipalities had
already retrofitted most of their schools.

3.4	   Monitoring of Progress
MEXT has closely monitored the progress made under the program by collecting information from local
governments. The quantitative data are collected from the annual survey on the Status of Seismic Resistance
of Public School Facilities. The qualitative data, such as information on difficulties faced by local governments
or on good practices, are collected periodically through the questionnaire survey for local governments.

MEXT uses these data to understand the overall progress of the program and take necessary measures in
response. Early on, when progress was slow for many local governments, MEXT tried to identify common
problems and to provide solutions—that is, prepared alternative financial schemes, developed practical
manuals, and held seminars. When regional differences became evident, MEXT prepared an information sheet
on good practices for prefectural and municipal governments, including detailed accounts of how some mu-
nicipalities overcame problems. Such information was publicly shared and helped to promote mutual learning
among local governments.

MEXT has also ranked municipalities by the percentage and the number of earthquake-resistant schools,
an approach that has encouraged lagging municipalities to work more quickly. The minister of MEXT wrote
directly to mayors of lower-ranking municipalities to urge prompt action, and MEXT officials visited them to
provide specific guidance. Such careful monitoring and feedback by MEXT has played an important role in
promoting the program.

3.5	Challenges
In the course of developing and carrying out the program, MEXT has faced and sought to meet various
challenges, both at the central and local government levels. Challenges relating to human resources, finance,
and technology, among others, some of which have been described above, are summarized in table 3.9 along
with countermeasures taken to address them.




                                                                                                                      55
     Chapter 3: Program Design and the Role Played by the National Government



     Table 3.9: Challenges faced by MEXT and responses

       Categories         Challenges                                   Countermeasures taken

                                                                       •	 Publicly disclosed (in annual press release)
                                                                          ranking of prefectures and municipalities in
                          •	 Lack of initiative in leaders                progress toward earthquake-resilient schools
                             of local governments                      •	 Minister wrote directly to
                                                                          lagging municipalities to demand
                                                                          acceleration of projects

                                                                       •	 Prepared manuals, quick guides,
       Human resources                                                    and collections of cases
                                                                       •	 Conducted (or commissioned third
                          •	 Lack of technical staff at the               parties to conduct) training programs
                             local government level who are               in different parts of the country
                             knowledgeable about seismic                  targeting both local government officials
                             evaluation and retrofitting                  and architects in private firms
                                                                       •	 Used those who completed the training
                                                                          as “expert engineers” in dissemination
                                                                          of the retrofitting methods

                                                                       •	 Increased the national subsidies in
                          •	 Financial burden on the local                seismic retrofitting and reconstruction
                             governments, which led to slow            •	 Frequently introduced various financial
                             progress by the program                      schemes, including funding from other
       Finance                                                            ministries with detailed manuals

                          •	 Difficulty in securing sufficient
                                                                       •	 Explored the use of supplementary
                             funding for retrofitting subsidies
                                                                          budget and reserve fund
                             from the initial national budget

                          •	 Failure to clearly establish guidance
                                                                       •	 Implemented pilot projects with
                             for institutional arrangements and
       Technical                                                          municipalities to establish a method
                             technical specifications (for nonstruc-
                                                                          in different parts of the country
                             tural elements of school buildings)

                                                                       •	 Visited the municipalities that were slow
                                                                          and provided advice and consultation
                                                                          for individual municipalities
                          •	 Disparities in progress among
       Others                                                          •	 Conducted both quantitative and
                             prefectures (and municipalities)
                                                                          qualitative monitoring to better understand
                                                                          problems faced by local governments,
                                                                          and took measures to solve them




56
                              Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments




Chapter 4
Program Implementation and the Role
Played by Local Governments
In Japan, the main players in implementing the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings are the
local governments, which are the authorities responsible for public schools. Following the steps described in
the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) guidelines, they plan retrofitting
projects for their schools and implement necessary construction. How stakeholders in local governments act
and collaborate at each step is described in this chapter, with reference to particular challenges and good
practices.

4.1	Planning
4.1.1	 Prefectural Governments
In line with the government hierarchy, the prefectural governors’ role has mainly been to (1) guide the municipal
governors in applying the national subsidies and supervise the process with MEXT’s guidance and advice, (2)
give the mayors the technical support needed to implement the program with MEXT, the Ministry of Land, In-
frastructure, Transport and Tourism, and academic organizations, and (3) collect program data from municipal
governments and report the results to MEXT.

To ensure that they can carry out these roles, the prefectural governors have the opportunity to attend the
annual meetings and periodic workshops held by MEXT, where they can acquire the knowledge of guidelines
and applications needed to promote the program both technically and financially. Most prefectural governors
attend national annual meetings in the central region that address general issues, as well as several workshops
targeting blocs of prefectures with more detailed engineering information.

In addition, prefectural governors have various chances to get more specified technical knowledge from groups
in academia; the Japan Building Disaster Prevention Association (JBDPA), for example, shares advanced data
and knowledge about seismic retrofitting, and coordinates the key players in disaster prevention in the public,
private, and academic sectors. Based on this knowledge, prefectural governments are expected to give instruc-
tions to municipal governments through local meetings or e-mail, depending on the type of issue. Such a
system of knowledge transfer has worked quite effectively to promote the program nationwide.

Simultaneously, prefectural governments are responsible for the seismic retrofitting of high schools and
prefectural universities (though not kindergartens, elementary schools, or junior high schools, which are the
responsibility of municipal governments). Prefectural governors sometimes lead in implementing the seismic
retrofitting projects ahead of municipalities, and then give directions and suggestions to the mayors based on
their experience. The procedure for the seismic retrofitting projects is the same at the prefectural level and the
municipal level. It is described in the next section.




                                                                                                                     57
     Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



     4.1.2	 Municipal Governments
     The municipal governments carry out the program steps as described in chapter 3, namely (1) establishing
     steering committees for the program; (2) implementing basic surveys; (3) implementing and assessing the prior-
     itization of vulnerable school buildings; (4) determining the vulnerability assessments; (5) implementing seismic
     diagnosis; (6) discussing the urgency of projects based on the seismic resistance evaluation; and (7) formulating
     an annual plan to make school buildings earthquake-resistant. As figure 4.1 shows, the municipal governments
     have responsibility for all of the processes in that they must get support from relevant private sector stakehold-
     ers at each step, though the task demarcation among the stakeholders and the level of involvement slightly vary
     by municipality.




58
                                             Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



                                                              General Affairs   Architecture   (Association     Construction    Schools/
  Procedures of School Retrofitting Program                       Dept.,           Dept.,           of)         Confirmation   Community
       Planning and Implementation                               Board of        Municipal     Architecture         Firms
                                                                Education          Govt.          Firms          (3rd Party)


                    Step 1: Establishment of Investigative
                    Organization

                    Step 2: Implementation of
                    Basic Survey
   PLANNING




                    Step 3: Prioritization of Vulnerable
                    Buildings for Seismic Retrofitting

                    Step 4: Vulnerability
                    Assessment

                    Step 5: Implementation of
                    Seismic Diagnosis

                    Step 6: Determination on Urgency
                    of the Projects

                    Step 7: Formulation of
   IMPLEMENTATION




                    Annual Plan

                    Step 8: Formulation of Reinforcement
                    Plan

                    Step 9: Preparation of Design
                    Drawings

                    Step 10: Implementation of Construction
                    Works




                            Involved                               Partially Involved                         Not Involved


General Affairs Dept., Board of Education                                              Local Governments
•	 Takes initiatives for the program at municipality level                             •	 Responsible for technical assessments and
•	 Responsible for managing all school retrofitting projects,                             arranges contracts with architectural firms
   inclusive of fundraising and allocation                                             •	 Close communication with
•	 Might ask support from Architect Dept. for technical procedures                        General Affairs Dept. of BOE


Source: Based on interviews with local governments by the survey team (2016).

                                                                                                              figure 4.1
                                                                                                              Responsibilities of local
                                                                                                              governments and other
                                                                                                              local stakeholders for
                                                                                                              program planning and
                                                                                                              implementation

                                                                                                                                           59
     Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



     4.1.3	 Roles and Responsibilities of Stakeholders at Municipal level
     In general, municipal governments get effective support from their prefectural governments, as mentioned
     above. Municipal governments have opportunities to deepen their understanding of technical, financial, and
     administrative procedures and guidelines by attending workshops held by the prefectural government, as well
     as through periodic flexible consultations. Some municipalities have also consulted with MEXT directly to
     ensure effective use of national subsidies.

     In any case, successfully promoting earthquake-resistant schools requires strong action on the part of
     municipal government leaders, whether mayors or municipal assemblies. Such initiatives also involve the
     active participation of various stakeholders, such as the prefectural governor, the prefectural assembly, and
     MEXT. This strong, layered structure has served the program well.

     The different sections/departments under the municipal governments are in charge of the various steps
     involved in carrying out the program, as explained below. Job demarcations are clear, though these change
     slightly depending on the availability of human resources. In general, the general affairs department of the
     board of education (BOE) takes the initiative for the whole process and coordinates the stakeholders involved.

     The general affairs department has administrative staff and some technical staff, including staff in architec-
     ture, civil engineering, electrical engineering, and facility management. The technical staff is often limited,
     however, so support is sometimes sought from the municipal architectural department (which might go under
     a different name). The architectural department usually works closely with the general affairs department (in
     the same government building; see box 4.1 for a brief description of its responsibilities). In addition, in some
     cases, the general affairs department asks for initial consultations with a private architectural firm or a local
     association of architectural firms.

     box 4.1: sample tasks of architectural department in a municipal
     government
     •	   Designing, and supervising construction of public buildings

     •	   Devising disaster prevention measures; seismic retrofitting of buildings

     •	   Planning policies related to housing

     •	   Constructing and managing municipal housing

     •	   Certifying good-quality housing

     •	   Handling transfer operations for housing in hazardous areas

     •	   Handling permission, approval, and authorization of building construction

     •	   Taking measures to prevent illegal architecture

     •	   Investigating road conditions

     Step 1: Establishment of steering committee. The steering committees for the program have been established
     under the BOE directly, or under the general affairs departments of BOE. Since the early 2000s, when MEXT
     strengthened initiatives under the program, it has been easier for municipal BOEs to allocate more human
     resources to the committee. Some municipalities were even able to create a new division specifically for
     promoting the program, having been given the authority for all the related procurements from the finance
     divisions. Even before the 2000s, some general affairs departments of BOEs flexibly formed such committees
     by using their own relationships with local resources, such as associations of architectural firms and academic
     experts. In areas at high risk of earthquake, the prefectural governors have formed strong initiatives that led
60
                               Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



to prefectural BOEs strictly monitoring and being involved with the municipality-level committees.

Step 2: Implementation of Basic Survey. The steering committees implement the basic survey (as described in
section 3.1.1 and table 3.1) In most cases, the general affairs department of the BOE is able to handle these tasks
by itself without outsourcing to any firms.

Step 3: Prioritization of Vulnerable Buildings for Seismic Rehabilitation. The steering committee implements
prioritization of vulnerable building for reconstruction or seismic retrofitting in order to determine priority for
the vulnerability assessment or seismic diagnosis (procedures are described in section 3.1.1). This assessment
must be carried out for buildings maintained under the old building standards, although the process could be
omitted if (1) the municipality has a small number of schools and it is not necessary to prioritize them, or (2) the
earthquake capacity is identified by the first diagnosis for low-rise buildings with wall structures.

The steering committees sometimes ask for technical contributions from the architectural department (or
from a civil engineering or facility-related department). If this support is not enough, they outsource some
surveys to associations of local architectural firms. There are two patterns of outsourcing, one in which a
single firm handles all the surveys, and one in which different firms handle different surveys. The former
procedure can ensure that data are unified, comparable, and to the same standards, while the latter cannot.

Step 4: Vulnerability Assessment. Based on the results of the prioritization assessment, the seismic diagnosis
or the vulnerability assessment is sequentially implemented to school buildings of high priority (as described
in section 3.1.1). If the building’s concrete strength is low and the reinforcing steel bar and structural steel are
widely corroded, the school buildings’ vulnerability is assessed. This process can also be outsourced to archi-
tectural firms or to academic professionals if necessary. Because of its technical knowledge, the municipal
architectural department (or civil engineering or facility-related department) is in charge of outsourcing and
managing the contract rather than the general affairs department of the BOE.

Step 5: Implementation of Seismic Diagnosis. Based on the results of the prioritization assessment or the
vulnerability assessment, assessment of seismic resistance capacity is implemented using the technical
procedures described in section 3.1.1. With the results of the seismic diagnosis, the buildings are categorized
into three types: (1) buildings with Is lower than 0.3, or q lower than 0.5, which are to be reconstructed; (2)
buildings with Is between 0.3 and 0.7, or q between 0.5 and 1.0, which are to be reinforced; and (3) buildings with
Is greater than 0.7, and q greater than 0.9, which have low need for reinforcement.

Beyond these guidelines, some municipalities with a high risk of earthquake have set their own rules, stricter
than those set by MEXT. In such cases, the prefectural governments (prefectural BOEs) have strong incentives
to ask the municipal BOEs to accelerate the evaluation and submit reports from time to time. In Japan,
especially in rural areas, many schools were built before 1981 when the new standards were enforced, and re-
construction has seemed highly necessary.

The seismic diagnosis process can be also outsourced to architectural firms or to academic professionals if
necessary, possibly through the architecture-related departments of municipal governments.

Step 6: Determination of Urgency of the Projects. The steering committee considers the urgency of projects
based on the results of seismic resistance evaluation and according to the urgency level determination chart
(figure 3.3). In other words, the steering committees determine which school buildings are to be reconstruct-
ed or retrofitted. To make these decisions, they consider the buildings’ earthquake-resistance capacity and
durable period, the needs of parties concerned for the school buildings, costs necessary for the projects, and
so forth.
                                                                                                                       61
     Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



     In the process, the steering committees investigate if the judgments are in compliance with the Building
     Standards Law, the Fire Defense Law, and other laws and regulations in force; if there are any plans for school
     merger/closure or diversion; whether the buildings have historical importance; and whether there are plans
     for municipality mergers. Furthermore, the committees should consider relevant functional improvements
     to buildings. Thus the steering committee, including both the general affairs department of the BOE and the
     municipal architectural department (or civil engineering/facility-related department), sometimes inclusive of
     local architectural firms, need to have a series of meetings with schoolmasters and communities to explain
     their plan and get consensus at this stage of implementation. Schoolmasters and communities may offer
     various opinions, but the municipal governors have the final authority to decide based on the results of the
     assessments.

     Step 7: Formulation of Annual Plan. The steering committees formulate a yearly plan—one considering costs
     and schedule—to make school buildings earthquake-resistant. When the steering committees prioritize
     the vulnerable school buildings, they should consider multiple viewpoints based on the seismic resistance
     assessment results and the schools’ needs. They should also keep in mind the local political situation and the
     overall municipal development plan. The municipal governors set the rules by themselves and describe the
     entire plan.

     The costs of each project, as calculated by technical experts, are considered. At this stage, the most important
     role for the administrator is securing a sufficient budget for the projected costs. Basically, finance for earth-
     quake-resistant schools is managed by national subsidies, local bonds, and municipal taxes, as described in
     sections 3.3.1 and 3.3.2.

     4.2	Implementation
     4.2.1	 Implementation processes
     After the planning stage, the steering committees continuously coordinate the implementation process. The
     main steps are formulating a seismic reinforcement plan (“preliminary design,” in technical terminology)
     to identify possible seismic retrofitting construction methods and seismic performance of structures with
     the proposed methods (step 8); preparing design drawings that specify appropriate construction methods,
     schedules, and costs (step 9); and implementing the seismic retrofitting construction works by building
     contractors (step 10). In most cases, the steering committees outsource these three steps to the private sector
     (architectural and construction firms), though they are responsible for both technical and administrative
     management. Procurement procedures are described in more detail in box 4.2.




62
                                   Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



Step 8: Formulation of Seismic Reinforcement Plan (“preliminary design”).The steering committees investigate
the performance of structures using the results of seismic evaluation. The committee architects or outsourced
architectural firms identify which retrofitting construction methods would be effective for each part of the
structures, and calculate earthquake resistance of the retrofitted body expected to be strengthened by each
method.

The major seismic retrofitting methods are listed in the manuals on seismic reinforcement of school facilities
that have been produced and revised by MEXT.17 The steering committees could refer to these manuals, or
could simply choose the methods proposed by the firms. The most frequently used methods involve reinforced
concrete (RC) wall and steel-framed brace. It is important for the steering committees at this stage to hear
from users such as schoolmasters about the merits and demerits of particular methods and about how the
construction schedule affects the annual education plan. This perspective should be included in the seismic
retrofitting plan to ensure it meets users’ needs.

Step 9: Preparation of Design Drawings specifying construction methods, schedule, and costs. The steering
committees then prepare design drawings specifying which construction methods to use in each section of
the building (samples are shown in figure 4.2). The committee architects or outsourced firms draw a detailed
seismic retrofitting design with the selected construction methods, show the expected construction schedule,
and estimate the construction costs. During this process, the committee again solicits opinions from school-
masters, parent groups, local residents, and local assemblies—both informally and formally—to make the plan
more effective and acceptable to schools and architectural design firms.




17   Manuals published by JBDPA are also relevant.
                                                                                                                 63
     Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



     Existing Floor Plan




     Reinforcement Floor Plan




                                                                                  figure 4.2
                                                                                  Examples of seismic
                                                                                  retrofitting design
                                                                                  drawings

64
                         Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



Cross Section




Reflected Ceiling Plan




	




                                                                                                      65
     Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



     Reinforced Framing Evaluation




     Reinforced Framing Evaluatio

     Source: NIER 2005.
     RCW: Reinforced concrete walls
     SBR: Steel-framed brace



     Regarding the work schedule, the committees try to minimize the effect of construction on school activities,
     so much of the work is scheduled for the summer vacation in July and August; in general the work has taken
     place from June to September, or on weekends or after school. During the school year, quiet work tasks, such as
     painting, are implemented, monitored by the security guards. Thus, in most cases, work does not affect school
     activities.

     Projects can take half a year to several years, depending on the type of work; but in general they are planned
     to take as little time as possible. For reconstruction work that will take several years, temporary facilities are
     built before the summer vacation, and all school functions take place there until the completion of the project.

     Step 10: Implementation of Seismic Retrofitting Construction Works. The steering committee contracts the
     works with the completed construction design to building contractors, usually located in the municipality. The
     steering committee, particularly the local government’s technical body, takes the initiative for this process. If
66
                                      Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



the municipality has a shortage of firms, it flexibly works with those in the surrounding area. The bid methods
depend on municipalities. Construction management is quite important for ensuring the quality of retrofitting, so
the steering committees take care of management responsibilities during construction.

In general, the bids for the construction works commence in April, and works begin in May. During the
preparation period, the contractor proceeds with site investigation, designs RC walls and steel-framed braces,
and orders materials. If needed, external scaffolding is built during weekends in June, and the retrofitting con-
struction works of facilities and equipment commence in July.

The municipalities also take care of students’ safety during the construction period. The construction area is
surrounded by fences and monitored by security guards. Both administrative and architectural staff as well as
the building contractors visit schools and explain the earthquake-resistant retrofitting/reconstruction plan
to schoolmasters. This process occurs before schools plan their next annual schedule, i.e., by every March. The
steering committee explains the types of construction, the places that need to be retrofitted, the length of
construction, and so forth.

For each of the three steps of the implementation process, the steering committees manage smooth implemen-
tation by communicating/negotiating with architects, building contractors, schools, and community residents.
Moreover, as they include staff of the government authority responsible for schools, they are responsible for
routine checks on school facilities and equipment. They maintain school facilities and equipment by carrying
out inspections, repairs, and regular maintenance. It is particularly important to regularly check ceiling
materials, equipment, and apparatus, as well as installed machines and nonstructural elements whose seismic
capacity is doubtful, and to consider them in the appropriate improvement plan. The Architectural Institute
of Japan has published relevant manuals for these considerations.



box 4.2: procurement in seismic reinforcement projects in japan
Three steps in the planning stage—prioritization of vulnerable buildings for seismic rehabilitation (step 3), determination of the vulner-
ability assessment (step 4), and implementation of seismic diagnosis (step 5)—are usually implemented by third-party architects and
construction firms contracted through a bidding process. Three steps in the implementation stage—formulation of a seismic reinforce-
ment plan (step 8), preparation of design drawings (step 9), and implementation of seismic retrofitting construction works (step 10)—are
usually implemented in the same way. The construction firms bid for step 10, while architectural firms with registered seismic rein-
forcement experts bid for the others. Most municipalities plan and undertake the procurement process over three years: procurement
of steps 3, 4, and 5 occurs in the first year, of steps 8 and 9 in the second year, and of step 10 in the third year. This is because local
governments need to plan and establish the necessary budget for the three main processes yearly under financial administration rules;
governments can then flexibly proceed with the work stage by stage within their limited budget.

Procurement procedures and content are mostly uniform nationwide, but each local government sets its own guidelines and forms to
follow (these are prepared for general use, not only for the seismic retrofit projects). The municipalities can invite bidding on a series of
projects—as many as 10 schools needing retrofit can be handled together—but only if they expect that big local firms could implement
such projects. More commonly bids are on a single school-based project for budgetary and efficiency reasons.

An interesting feature of the procurement procedure is its localization. The main bidders are local architectural/construction firms, and
the bidding process is prioritized for them. Furthermore, some seismic trading companies and staff agencies that specialize in retrofit
actively work in each region, with the construction works frequently done during the summer vacation season. It is noteworthy that
the seismic retrofit projects indirectly create the sort of business opportunities where specified resources are necessary, and have even
contributed to regional economic development in Japan.




                                                                                                                                                67
     Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



     4.2.2	Financing
     The steering committees are responsible for securing sufficient budget for all planning and implementation
     processes. As shown in chapter 3, special provision is made for national subsidies for seismic retrofitting and
     reconstruction of school buildings. To the extent possible, MEXT gives preferential treatment to economically
     disadvantaged local governments in rural area to address their lack of funds.

     The merits of the national subsidy are that (1) the local governments can choose the projects to carry out in
     line with their plan of facility maintenance; (2) they can change the volume of projects to carry out every fiscal
     year according to the progress of the projects; and (3) they can utilize the subsidy beyond the projects. This
     flexible subsidy system has encouraged local governments to pursue seismic retrofitting and reconstruction
     in spite of the attendant difficulties of administration.

     Even with the national subsidies, however, limited budgets have posed a substantial challenge to local
     governments. In most cases, the basic survey showed that many school facilities needed retrofit, and that
     some facilities—constructed before the revision of the Building Standards Law in 1981—needed complete re-
     construction, which resulted in high costs. Coming up with the necessary funding was therefore the toughest
     stage for the municipal staff.

     In areas with relatively high risk of damaging earthquakes, prefectural governments tend to prepare subsidies
     for reinforcing public facilities, including schools. In Shizuoka Prefecture, for example, where estimates of
     earthquake probability are high, the local government asked permission from the local chamber of commerce
     to increase the corporate income tax by 7–10 percent for 15 years in order to allocate budget for making public
     buildings more earthquake-resistant. Some other prefectural governments relied on interest-free loans to
     fund program implementation.

     Municipal governments have also established special funds for project implementation. One municipality
     even increased the property tax to ensure sufficient funding. Municipalities that were slated to be merged
     with surrounding municipalities sought to carry out relatively high-cost reconstruction or seismic retrofitting
     projects before the merger, using national subsidies available for municipal mergers.

     Several municipal governments have used private finance initiatives (PFIs) to fund project implementation. In
     most cases, these have allowed work to be completed more quickly than it would otherwise have been. With
     the success of such attempts, municipal governments have studied how to conduct their own fundraising and
     have consulted with other municipal governments in the same situation. Local banks have backed them up
     financially, and consulting firms have supported them administratively.

     The case of Kushiro suggests the benefits of PFI. Its completion rate for earthquake-resistant school
     projects remained at 50 percent for a decade, as the city reconstructed old school buildings that were at
     highly vulnerable to earthquake through the beginning of the 2010s. Since the reconstruction costs were
     high even with the national subsidies, and projects were time-consuming, the city could not implement
     several projects at once. In 2012, at the very end of the reconstruction of four schools, the city introduced
     a special division for project planning and implementation under the municipal BOE with the goal of ac-
     celerating future projects.

     The special division first allocated additional technical staff capable of handling the projects, and then choose
     to finance work with the PFI method. The staff visited other BOEs that had introduced PFI and got useful
     advice for implementation. The city went on to complete the targeted retrofitting projects within three years,
     achieving an 85.8 percent retrofitting completion rate in 2015 with the completion of the first PFI launches. It is
68
                              Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



expected to reach a 98 percent completion rate with the second PFI launches in 2016 (the remaining 2 percent
includes schools that may be merged).

In meeting these financial challenges, local governments contributed to the overall successful performance of
the program.

4.2.3	 Collaboration with schools and communities
Throughout the process of implementation, steering committees need to reach consensus with schools and
communities. In the municipalities that have experienced powerful or frequent earthquakes in the past, there
tend to be few obstacles to consensus, as the community understands the need for and supports school retro-
fitting. But consensus is harder to achieve in municipalities that have experienced fewer earthquakes. Steering
committees cannot simply force projects’ implementation in the absence of the community’s consensus. Thus
some municipalities must decide on the acceptable contents and timing of construction works in light of
community's opinion or requests, and under these circumstances the work can take longer than usual.

It should also be mentioned here that although school retrofitting procedures are initiated by local governments,
school staff and community residents also play an important role in maintaining school facilities for use as
evacuation centers. Schoolmasters, teachers, and staff are responsible for checking facilities and equipment
regularly and for reporting the need for repairs to local governments. Teachers periodically update evacuation
plans by incorporating the information on reinforced buildings. In addition, teachers prepare and provide
newsletters and release articles on their school websites to update parents, children, and residents about the
school seismic retrofitting project plans and results.

4.3	   Drivers of Success
Local governments faced various challenges and took various countermeasures in implementing the school
retrofitting. Table 4.2, which summarizes the results of interviews with local governments, shows that local
governments utilized available resources and existing relationship with stakeholders to meet challenges.

As has been noted above, the decision by MEXT to announce municipalities’ annual progress in seismic ret-
rofitting/reconstruction has motivated municipalities quite well, particularly in rural areas where initially
progress was slow. MEXT periodically analyzes the reasons for slow progress and offers advice to and consults
with the municipalities in needs. It has also motivated governors to accelerate work under the program by
releasing the comparative rankings of municipalities on its website and through other media, an approach
that in addition to speeding up progress has also helped to raise community awareness.




                                                                                                                    69
     Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments



     Table 4.2: Challenges faced and measures taken by local governments

                                                                            Countermeasures
       Category                         Challenge
                                                                            Taken

                                                                            •	 Allocation of additional staff
                                                                               according to the annual plan
                                        •	 Staff shortages                  •	 Clear task demarcation
                                                                               among stakeholders
                                                                            •	 Administrative support
                                                                               by prefectural BOEs

                                                                            •	 Introduction of special section
       Human resources
                                                                               for program implementation
                                                                               with procurement authority
                                                                            •	 Allocation of technical staff
                                        •	 Complicated process for
                                                                               specializing in architecture
                                           procurement / other procedures
                                                                            •	 Effective use of consulting
                                                                               firms (e.g., for assistance with
                                                                               private finance initiative
                                                                               procedures) at municipal level

                                                                            •	 Multiple applications of different
                                                                               types of subsidies; consideration
                                                                               of various ways to secure budget
                                                                               / raise funds (good access to
                                                                               national subsidies prioritized
                                                                               for economically disadvan-
                                                                               taged areas was a big help)
                                                                            •	 Establishment of special funds
                                                                               for project implementation at
       Financial                        •	 Limited municipal budget            prefectural and municipal levels
                                                                            •	 Increase in taxes (e.g., corporate
                                                                               income tax and fixed property
                                                                               tax) to supplement the budget
                                                                               for projects at prefectural
                                                                               and municipal levels
                                                                            •	 Collaboration with local banks
                                                                               to secure a sufficient budget
                                                                               in the use of PFI schemes




70
                                    Chapter 4: Program Implementation and the Role Played by Local Governments




                                                                                          Countermeasures
  Category                                     Challenge
                                                                                          Taken

                                                                                          •	 Opening of bidding op-
                                                                                             portunities for seismic
                                               •	 Shortage of technical firms                evaluation and construction
                                                  in the municipality                        works beyond prefecture
                                                                                          •	 Effective use of consultation
                                                                                             from third parties (academia,
                                                                                             private sector, etc.)

                                               •	 Difficulty in ensuring                  •	 Outsourcing of a series of
                                                  consistency in procurement                 projects (for seismic retrofit
  Technical                                       processes over some steps of               planning and implementa-
                                                  planning and implementation                tion) to one architectural firm

                                                                                          •	 Use of popular methods
                                                                                             recommended by technical
                                                                                             institution (JBDPA) to shorten
                                               •	 Need to complete seismic retrofit-
                                                                                             the construction process and
                                                  ting projects in a short period
                                                                                             make construction works
                                                  such as during summer vacation
                                                                                             smoother (where recommended
                                                                                             materials and specialists trained
                                                                                             by the institute were available)

                                                                                          •	 Holding of frequent workshops
                                                                                             for awareness raising
                                                                                          •	 Effective use of MEXT annual
                                                                                             progress report (e.g., ranking
                                                                                             of results by municipalities)
                                                                                          •	 Effective use of school seismic
                                                                                             retrofitting progress reports at
                                               •	 Low levels of awareness of                 prefectural and municipal levels
                                                  the need for school retrofit-              to get consensus from residents
                                                  ting among communities                  •	 Effective use of media for
  Other                                                                                      announcing the municipal-
                                                                                             ity’s seismic retrofitting plans
                                                                                             to get public interest in and
                                                                                             consensus for the projects
                                                                                          •	 Sharing of information via school
                                                                                             newsletters and school websites
                                                                                             to get consensus from parents

                                                                                          •	 Flexible response by munici-
                                               •	 Unexpected decision to
                                                                                             palities—i.e., change in schools’
                                                  merge certain schools
                                                                                             priority for retrofitting, possibly
                                                                                             speeding up overall progress

Source: Based on study team’s interviews with randomly selected local governors (2016).


                                                                                                                                   71
     Chapter 5: Remaining Challenges




     Chapter 5
     Remaining Challenges
     By the end of FY 2015, the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings had succeeded in making more
     than 95 percent of public elementary and junior high schools earthquake-resistant. A number of challenges in
     making schools safer remain, however.

     Challenge 1: Make schools safer from multi-hazards. While both the central government and local governments
     have sought to make schools earthquake-resistant, they have until recently placed less emphasis on preventive
     measures against multi-hazards. The 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake, however, showed that schools could
     be earthquake-resistant and still completely vulnerable to tsunami. In 2014, the cabinet secretary issued a plan
     for developing hazard maps, particularly for floods and water inundation disasters, which schools and local
     government authorities could use in order to understand their risk and prepare for future hazards.

     Challenge 2: Make nonstructural elements of school buildings earthquake-resistant. In spite of prioritizing
     safety of nonstructural elements in schools buildings, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
     and Technology (MEXT) found inadequate inspection and remediation measures in place in a 2012 survey on
     Status of Seismic Resistance of Public School Facilities.18 Schools and local government authorities are more
     conscious about ceiling and nonstructural safety generally than in the past, but greater efforts to conduct
     regular inspections and take necessary measures for all nonstructural elements are needed.

     Challenge 3: Improve functionality of schools as evacuation centers. With more than 90 percent of public
     schools designated as evacuation centers, it is important to ensure their functionality in the event of disaster.
     Currently, under half (46.8 percent) of schools are equipped with emergency information network devices, and
     only around one–third (34.2 percent) are equipped with electric generators. As of 2015, less than half of munici-
     palities and 70 percent of prefectures had a school utilization plan in case of emergency.

     Challenge 4: Address aging of school buildings. The average age of Japan’s school buildings is rising: the
     percentage of schools older than 25 years of age increased from 21.4 percent in 1994 to 74.6 percent in 2014.
     Maintaining and renovating these buildings will entail a great deal of work and will need to address various
     problems that affect the safety of schoolchildren (such as falling exterior walls, window frames, and handrails),
     among other issues. Following the lead of the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, MEXT
     now promotes rehabilitation that extends buildings’ life span (MEXT 2014). Under this approach, all parts of
     the building are removed and completely refurnished using the original post and beam as the structure, which
     costs 30–40 percent less than conventional reconstruction. If correctly timed—that is, not more than 45 years
     after the initial construction—this method can lengthen the life of the buildings by 30 years or longer.




     18 	 The survey found that 66.0 percent of schools were inspected, and that of these, under half (48.5 percent) took coun-
          termeasures when abnormal conditions were uncovered. The survey also found that only one-third of nonstruc-
          tural elements that could prove fatal if they fell—such as ceiling materials, lightning apparatuses, and basketball
          hoops—were inspected.
72
                                                                                            Chapter 5: Remaining Challenges



Challenge 5: Address the impacts of school consolidation. Consolidation or closure of schools, which occurs
because of population decline or urbanization, has had a negative impact on the program. Almost 3,000
municipal elementary schools and 600 municipal junior high schools were closed between 2002 and 2014.
When a school is targeted for closure or for consolidation with another school, any investments in the school
building are postponed in some cases, even when it is found to have insufficient seismic capacity. Thus closures
and consolidations have made balancing the safety of schools with cost-efficient investment a major issue.

Challenge 6: Promote seismic retrofitting in private schools. Seismic retrofitting of private schools has lagged
behind that of public schools. As of April 2015, more than 15 percent of private school buildings were waiting
for school retrofitting or reconstruction. The national subsidy has been available for retrofitting of private
school buildings but was considered insufficient in light of private schools’ financial difficulties (due to the
decreasing number of schoolchildren). MEXT has recently increased available subsidies—including one spe-
cifically for reconstruction of private schools and one that covers the prefecture’s expenditures on private
school retrofitting19—and private school retrofitting is expected to make better progress as a result.




19 	 The national subsidy covers 70 percent of the repayment of interest and principal on prefectural bonds through
   the local tax allocation system.
                                                                                                                              73
     Chapter 6: Lesson Learned




     Chapter 6
     Lesson Learned
     Japan’s notable achievements under the Program for Earthquake-Resistant School Buildings suggest certain
     lessons for developing countries seeking to improve the seismic safety of their schools. Lessons on policy
     development, program design, and program implementation are summarized below.



     1. Building on experiences from previous disaster events can provide momentum to accelerate school retrofitting.
          •	   One of the biggest impetuses for developing and promoting school retrofitting is the experience
               of earthquakes.
               ››	 The 1995 Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake triggered the development of the program’s
                   comprehensive guidelines, and the program gained momentum after the 2004 Chuetsu
                   Earthquake and the 2008 Sichuan Earthquake in China.
               ››	 Collection and analysis of accurate data on past damages, the implications of this
                   information for building structure and standards, and the disclosure of this information to
                   the public were effective in raising the awareness of program implementers as well as the
                   general public.
               ››	 In Japan, concrete measures were taken to prepare for potential large-scale earthquakes
                   long before the recent major earthquakes. Making schools safe is considered a long-term
                   initiative.
     2. Information disclosure is key to raising public awareness and encouraging program implementers.
          •	   The disclosure of information on hazard risk and damage caused by past earthquakes has
               been the most powerful tool for raising public awareness about the need for seismic retrofit-
               ting of schools. An informed public supports local governments’ efforts in the program and
               puts pressure on them to make progress.
          •	   The public disclosure of data on the progress of each local government can be effective in
               stimulating local leaders and can in turn speed up the seismic retrofitting.


     3. The roles and functions of schools in disaster management must be clear to determine the retrofitting and
     improvements necessary for school facilities.
          •	   In Japan, a school is the core of the community, and many schools are legally designated as
               evacuation centers. Governments’ efforts to retrofit schools and schools’ own efforts to prepare
               for an emergency are prompted by these roles.
          •	   Schools have the responsibility of using the school building properly—that is, for checking
               facilities and equipment regularly and conducting regular evacuation drills.
          •	   When a school is used as an evacuation center, the disaster management unit of the community
               works closely with the school. The responsibilities of school headmasters and the community
               are clearly specified so that the evacuation runs smoothly.
74
                                                                                     Chapter 6: Lesson Learned



4. Data play a powerful role in the design and the promotion of the seismic retrofitting program.
    •	   The availability and usage of data—on school facilities, program progress, analysis of past
         earthquake damage, and hazard risks—contributed to the development and promotion of the
         school retrofitting program.
         ››	 School facility data collected through an annual survey was used as baseline data.
         ››	 Additional surveys on the status of seismic retrofitting provided detailed information on
             the progress of the program, which served to drive program promotion.
         ››	 Explicit indicators of progress, such as the percentage of local schools that were earth-
             quake-resistant schools, were utilized to secure funding for the program.
         ››	 Qualitative data were utilized to help the national government grasp the difficulties faced
             by local governments and to take measures during the implementation of the program to
             address these difficulties.


5. Comprehensive and flexible program development with clear priorities and targets is important.
    •	   The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) developed a
         program with clear priorities and targets, and designed implementation strategies that were
         feasible from the technical, managerial, and financial points of view. All these contributed to
         the success of the program.
         ››	 MEXT developed detailed technical documents with various references to achieve the
             target, and conducted dissemination seminars/training for local governments.
         ››	 MEXT prepared the funding scheme, which was reviewed and upgraded based on the
             progress at the municipal level.
         ››	 MEXT carried out close monitoring and offered appropriate feedback to ensure the
             feasibility of the program and to improve it.


6. The advancement of engineering research should serve as a basis of developing a school retrofitting program.
The ready availability of engineers to design and implement the program better ensures effective and efficient
school seismic retrofitting.
    •	   Retrofitting technology was accumulated and advanced based on past earthquakes and
         practices in the model area. MEXT policy and strategies were built upon such accumulation of
         engineering research and knowledge.
         ››	 The Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism (MLIT), along with the
             Building Research Institute, played a central role in establishing building standards.
         ››	 The Japan Building Disaster Prevention Association (JBDPA) played a major role in
             developing evaluation standards of seismic diagnosis, and in developing an implementa-
             tion model of seismic diagnosis and retrofitting in the model area. The collaboration of the
             local government in the model area with engineering experts in JBDPA accelerated the
             development of retrofitting activities. JBDPA introduced a series of practical manuals and
             guidelines throughout the activities that were applicable nationwide.


                                                                                                                  75
     Chapter 6: Lesson Learned



     7. Proactive support by the national government that considers the capacity of program implementers is critical
     to the program’s success.
          •	   MEXT provided technical support to local governments in response to their needs.
               ››	 MEXT produced various manuals, reference materials, and case studies that explained
                   procedures in detail with concrete examples.
               ››	 MEXT and MLIT periodically conducted workshops for dissemination of necessary
                   information to local governments.
               ››	 MEXT commissioned professional organizations to conduct technical training for engineers
                   both in the public and private sector.
               ››	 MEXT set up a consultation desk to quickly respond to inquiries from local governments.


     8. Combining seismic retrofitting with other facility improvement is cost-efficient.
          •	   In order to achieve the seismic retrofitting by the target year, MEXT focused on seismic ret-
               rofitting in facility development and postponed other facility improvement. As a result, some
               schools—mostly aged buildings—will have to go through further rehabilitation about 10 years
               after the seismic retrofitting was carried out. This approach is expensive and burdensome to
               schools.




76
                                                                                    Annex 2A




Annex 2A
Technical Meetings and Evolution
of Program Priorities

Studies commissioned by MEXT                                          Policy

              Study on promoting earthquake-re-
Topic
              sistant school facilities



              Results of the survey on status of earthquake
              resistance of school facilities conducted by MEXT in
              May 2002 indicated that the pace of seismic diagnosis
Background
              or seismic retrofitting was slower than expected.
              The study was conducted to examine the concrete
              measures and steps for seismic retrofitting.                Earthquake
                                                                         resistance in
                                                                       structures as the
              1)	 Issues related to seismic retrofit                     first priority
              2)	 Method of seismic retrofit plans
Study items
              3)	 Case study nonstructural elements
                  earthquake-resistant




Period        October 2002–April 2003




                                                                                               77
     Annex 2A




      Studies commissioned by MEXT                                      Policy

                    Improvement of school facilities based on the
      Topic
                    Great East Japan Earthquake experience


                    The Great East Japan Earthquake raised new
                    issues about the safety of school facilities and
      Background    their ability to function as evacuation centers.
                    This study urgently examined both the safety and     Countermeasures
                    the disaster management function of schools.            for tsunami,
                                                                           strengthened
                                                                            functions as
                    1) School safety measures (earthquake
                       resistance, tsunami disaster prevention)         evacuation centers,
                    2) Necessary functions as evacuation centers
                                                                         and energy saving
      Study items
                    3) Energy-saving measures (responding to decrease
                                                                             measures
                       in electricity supply due to the earthquake)




      Period        June 2011–July 2011



                    Working group to examine measures to prevent
                    ceiling materials from falling, under survey and
      Topic
                    study on promotion of earthquake resistance to
                    nonstructural elements of school facilities



                    The Great East Japan Earthquake caused
                    ceiling materials (nonstructural elements) in           Measures for
      Background    gymnasiums and large halls to fall. This study       suspended ceilings
                    examined how to prevent ceilings from falling          as the priority
                    and causing potentially fatal injuries.



                    Measures to prevent gymnasium
      Study item
                    ceiling materials from falling



      Period        May 2012–March 2014




78
                                                                                        Annex 2A




Studies commissioned by MEXT                                              Policy

              Special committee to examine measures
Topic
              against deterioration of school buildings




              A large number of school buildings were built during
              1970s and 1980s, and their deterioration is now a serious
Background    issue. A special committee was set up to develop a policy
              on rehabilitation of school facilities and measures
              to be taken by MEXT and local governments.
                                                                           Rehabilitation for
                                                                          life-span extension
                                                                          as the next agenda

              1) Development of policy for life-span
                 extension of school buildings
Study items
              2) Development of handbook for rehabilita-
                 tion to extend life span of school facilities




Period        April 2012–February 2013




                                                                                                   79
     Annex 2A




      Studies commissioned by MEXT                                      Policy

                    Study on promoting earthquake-resistant non-
      Topic
                    structural elements of school facilities (2014)




                    The Great East Japan Earthquake highlighted the
                    importance of making nonstructural elements of
      Background    school facilities earthquake-resistant. Yet coun-
                    termeasures to achieve this were lagging. This
                    study was meant to promote this process.                Earthquake-
                                                                           resistance in
                                                                           nonstructural
                                                                          elements as the
                                                                            urgent issue
                    1) Basic principle of inspection and measures for
                       nonstructural elements of school facilities
      Study items   2) Strategy to promote efforts to make non-
                       structural elements earthquake-resistant
                    3) Collection and provision of case studies




      Period        June 2014–March 2015




80
                                                                                         Annex 2A




Studies commissioned by MEXT                                               Policy

              Review meeting for developing a handbook for re-
Topic
              habilitation to extend life span of school facilities




              “Basic Plan to Prolong the Life of Our Infrastructure”
              developed by MLIT in November 2013 urged those
              responsible for public infrastructure to develop a plan
              for rehabilitation to extend life spans of individual
Background
              buildings. School facilities account for 40% of all public
              infrastructure, and local municipal and prefectural
              authorities responsible for public schools are expected
              to smoothly develop a long-term improvement plan.              Rehabilitation for
                                                                            life-span extension
                                                                           as the urgent agenda




              1) Development of a handbook
Study items   2) Concrete methods of planning for life-span extension
              3) Issues related to planning




Period        October 2014–March 2015




                                                                                                    81
     Annex 2A




       Studies commissioned by MEXT                                                       Policy

                               Working group to examine measures to
       Topic
                               develop disaster-resilient school facilities




                               After the Great East Japan Earthquake, various institu-
                               tions amended laws, analyzed the damages caused by
                               the earthquake and tsunami, and reviewed the functions
                               of evacuation centers at the time of the disaster. MEXT
                               set up a working group to examine the countermea-
       Background
                               sures for tsunami disasters and functions of schools
                               as evacuation centers based on the above research
                               results and legal framework. The working group spent
                               one year examining how to reduce disaster risks and
                               strengthen disaster management at school facilities.




                                                                                            Development of
                                                                                           disaster-resilient
                                                                                            school facilities




                               1) Development of measures to reduce tsunami
                                  risks and to strengthen the functions
                                  of schools as evacuation centers
       Study items             2) Development of a report to summarize the results
                                  of researches incorporating the legal framework
                                  and educational measures such as cooperation with
                                  communities, emergency drills, and disaster education




       Period                  March 2013–March 2016

     Source: Based on MEXT data.




82
                                                                                                       Annex 2B




Annex 2B
School Basic Survey and Public
School Facilities Survey
Since 1948, MEXT has conducted an annual school census, the School Basic Survey, targeting all schools and
boards of education at the municipal level that are stipulated in the School Education Act.

The School Basic Survey aims at collecting basic information on schools, including (1) the numbers of schools,
(2) the number of classrooms (for elementary, junior high, and high schools), (3) the number of departments
(for higher education institutions), (4) the number of pupils/students, (5) the number of teachers and staff, (6)
the nature of the school facilities, (7) school expenses, and (8) graduates’ career records. The procedures and
schedule are as follows: (1) MEXT provides the questionnaires to schools in April; (2) by May 1, the schools
submit the answers either by mail or website directly to MEXT, or via prefectures/municipalities, depending
on the school’s function; (3) MEXT gives an initial report in August; and (4) MEXT releases the final report in
December. The results are used for discussing education policies and for planning local tax avenues.

The Public School Facilities Survey, which was first administered in 1954, aims at collecting quantitative data
related to public school facilities (except higher education institutions) for budget planning and implementa-
tion. The survey determines (1) the school facilities area, (2) the actual minimum required area (calculated as
the standard size of area per pupil/student multiplied by the total number of pupils/students), and (3) school
buildings whose score on the vulnerability assessment is lower than the standard. MEXT conducts this survey
in May by mail or via website.




                                                                                                                    83
     Annex 3A - 3B




     Annex 3A
     Seismic Index of Structure (Is)
     In the Standard for the Seismic Diagnosis of Existing Reinforced Concrete Buildings (JBPDA 1990a), the seismic
     performance index of a building is expressed by Is for each story and each direction as

     Is = E0 × SD ×T.

     E0 is a basic structural index calculated from the product of strength index (C), ductility index (F), and story
     index (φ). C denotes the lateral strength of the building in terms of shear force coefficient. F denotes the ductility
     index of the building ranging from “more brittle” to “most ductile,” depending on the sectional properties and
     detailing. φ is a modification to allow for the mode shape of the response along the building height. SD and T
     indexes are reduction factors to allow for the disadvantages in the seismic performance of structures. Specifi-
     cally, the SD index accounts for unbalanced distribution of stiffness both in the horizontal plane and along
     the height of the structure, resulting from irregularity and complexity in the structural configuration; and the
     T index is employed to allow for the deterioration of strength and ductility due to age after construction, fire,
     and/or uneven settlement of foundation (Okada et al. 2000).




     Annex 3B
     Prioritization Survey
     Table 3B.1: Classification by construction year and number of stories

       Classification                 Category

       I                              Building built before 1971 and higher than 3 stories

                                      Building built before 1971 and 2 stories; or building
       II
                                      built after 1972 and higher than 4 stories

       III                            Building built before 1971 and 1 story; or building built after 1972 and 3 stories

       IV                             Building built after 1972 and 2 stories

       V                              Building built after 1972 and 1 story

     Source: MEXT 2003b.




84
                                                                                                                                Annex 3B



Using the classification shown in table 3B.2, each correction item is evaluated at three ranks, A, B, and C, with
A indicating correction to lower the priority and C indicating correction to raise the priority.


Table 3B.2: Classification by correction items

  Correction                   Classifica-
                                                            A                            B                          C
  item                         tion

                               Strength test value
  Strength of                                                                            When neither
                               Design criteria              Over 1.25                                               Below 1.0
  concrete                                                                               A nor C
                               strength

                                                            Both corrosion of                                       Both corrosion of
  Aging conditions                                          reinforcing steel            When neither               reinforcing steel
                               Conditions
  of main members                                           and cracks are               A nor C                    and cracks are
                                                            evaluation 1a                                           evaluation 3b

                                                                                                                    A half or more
                               Number of spans              No single-span               When neither
                                                                                                                    have single-span
                               in beam direction            structural frame             A nor C
                                                                                                                    structural frame
  Plan
                                                                                                                    A half or more
                               Length of spans in           All of span length           When neither
                                                                                                                    have span length
                               girder direction             is less than 4.5 m           A nor C
                                                                                                                    over 6 m

                               Structural frame
                                                                                         When neither
                               with missing wall            Nil                                                     Existing
                                                                                         A nor C
                               in lower level
  Position of quake-
  resisting wall               Intervals of walls in
                                                            Less than 9 m and
                               beam direction and                                        When neither               More than 12 m or
                                                            also with gable
                               with or without                                           A nor C                    no gable walls
                                                            walls in both side
                               gable walls

  Expected seismic                                          Seismic intensity            Seismic intensity          Seismic intensity
  intensityc                                                less than V+                 VI                         more than VI+

Source: Based on MEXT 2003b.
a. 	 Evaluation 1 for cracks = almost nil; evaluation 1 for reinforcing steel = no specific problem.
b. 	 Evaluation 3 for cracks = cracks wider than 1 mm are seen; evaluation 3 for reinforcing steel = outcrop of reinforcing
     steel or expanded rusting is seen.
c. 	 The Japan Meteorological Agency seismic intensity scale is used. It is a scale of I to VII, with V and VI each divided
     into “lower” and “upper.”




                                                                                                                                           85
      Annex 3B



      Finally, the priority level Rp is determined using the flowchart shown in figure 3B.1.



       Basic clas-      Concrete       Aging            Plan         Position of     Existing         Priority
       sification       strength                                     quake reisiting seismic          Level Rp
                                                                     walls B,C       intensity B, C

                                                                      A                   A

                                   C
                                   B
                                                                                                                 ①   High

                       C           A
I                      B
                       A


II
                                                                                                                 ②

III
                                                                                                                 ③

IV
                                                                                                                 ④
                       C
V                      B
                       A           C
                                   B
                                                                                                                 ①   LOW

                                   A                C                 C



                                                    A, B              A, B



                                                                                               figure 3B.1
                                                                                               Assessment flow
                                                                                               in prioritization
                                                                                               incorporating
                                                                                               correction items

      Source: MEXT 2003b.



      The prioritization survey for structural steel-framed gymnasiums uses items such as earthquake resistance of
      steel bracings, corrosion rate of steel members, existence of buckling, weld quality, structural safety, non-struc-
      tural safety regarding fall prevention, and assumed seismic intensity. Just as for RC, each item is evaluated at
      three ranks, A, B, and C, with A indicating correction to lower the priority and C indicating correction to raise
      the priority. The classification is shown in table 3B.3.

86
                                                                                                Annex 3B



Table 3B.3: Classification by correction items for structural steel-framed gymnasiums


 Correction
                       Classification                    A                B              C
 item

 Strength of           Strength test value                                When neither
                                                         Over 1.25                       Below 1.0
 concrete              Design criteria strength                           A nor C

 Seismic capacity      ISB valuea                                         More than
 of structural steel                                     More than 0.7    0.3 and less   Less than 0.3
 framing brace                                                            than 0.7


                       F valueb                                           More than
 Corrosion of
                                                         More than 0.8    0.6 and less   Less than 0.6
 structural steel
                                                                          than 0.8


                       N valuec                                           More than
 Conditions of
                                                         More than 0.7    0.5 and less   Less than 0.5
 buckling
                                                                          than 0.7

 Conditions
                       M valued                          1.0              0.7            0.4
 of welding

                       Existence of dangers such as
                       •	 Lack of members, differences
                          in sectional sizes and
                          number of bolts as compared
                          with the design drawing
                       •	 Notable deformation and
                          damages other than rust
 Safety of Structure      and buckling, sectional        Not recognized   n.a.           Recognized
                          fractures, cracks in
                          structural steel regarding
                          the major members of
                          frame and their joints
                       •	 Partial removal of framing
                          braces on the frame
                          in girder direction




                                                                                                           87
     Annex 3B




       Correction
                                    Classification                           A                       B                      C
       item

                                    Existence of danger such as
                                    •	 Collapsing of exterior
                                       wall surface
                                    •	 Falling by break at joints
                                    •	 Falling of piece of
       Safety of falling               concrete by damages                   Not recognized          n.a.                   Recognized
       objects
                                    •	 Falling of finishing
                                       material of wall, pendants,
                                       ceiling material
                                    •	 Shifting and collapsing
                                       supports to floor
                                       framing (post)

                                                                             Seismic                                        Seismic
       Expected seismic                                                                              Seismic
                                    Expected seismic intensity               intensity less                                 intensity more
       intensitye                                                                                    intensity VI
                                                                             than V+                                        than VI

     Source: Based on MEXT 2003b
     Note: n.a. = not applicable.
     a.	 ISB is the earthquake resistance capacity of the steel framing brace, which is calculated by ISB = Cyi × 1.3/AiFesi
         where Cyi is estimated value of yield layer shear modulus of the steel, Ai is the indicator showing vertical dis-
         tribution of earthquake layer shear force coefficient based on vibration characteristics of buildings, and Fesi is
         the indicator to show the shape characteristic of each floor. Calculation method of Ai and Fesi is prescribed in
         Enforcement Regulations of the Building Standards Law.
     b.	 F value, corrosion of structural steel is calculated by F = 0.5 (fframe + fcolumn base) where fframe is conditions of
         corrosion on the major members of frame and fcolumn base is conditions of corrosion on the exposed type column
         base.
     c.	 N value, Conditions of buckling is calculated by N = nlocal × ntotal, where nlocal is the local buckling of major
         members of frame, and the ntotal is the total buckling of the major members of frame.
     d.	 M value is calculated by M = min (m0, m1, m2, m3, mn), where mn is welding conditions of the welded seams between
         columns and beams of the major Rahmen frame. The lowest m in the surveyed portion is to be M.
     e.	 The Japan Meteorological Agency seismic intensity scale is used. It is a scale of I to VII, with V and VI each divided
         into “lower” and “upper.”




     The value of priority index P is calculated using the following formula:
     	
     	      Priority index P = (Number of level B) + 5 × (Number of level C)

     The prioritizing level Sp is determined as shown in table 3B.5.




88
                                                                        Annex 3B



Table 3B.5: Priority assessment for structural steel-framed gymnasium

  Value of priority index P   Priority level Sp

  21-35                       ①                   High

  16-20                       ②
  11-15                       ③
  6-10                        ④
  0-5                         ⑤               LOW



Source: MEXT 2003b.




                                                                                   89
     References




     References

     Chapter 1
     Aomori Prefecture Disaster Management website. (n.d.) List of Earthquakes (in Japanese).

     http://www.bousai.pref.aomori.jp/DisasterFireDivision/archivedata/earthquakeoverview/index.html

     Aoyama H. 1981. “Outline of Earthquake Provisions in the Recently Revised Japanese Building Codes.” Bulletin of the
        New Zealand Society for Earthquake Engineering 14, no. 2: 63–80.

     BRI (Building Research Institute). 1996. A Survey Report for Building Damages due to the 1995 Hyogoken-Nanbu
        Earthquake. Tokyo: BRI.

     Cabinet Office. 2006. 1923 The Great Kanto Earthquake (in Japanese).

     ———. 2009. White paper on disaster management (in Japanese). http://www.bousai.go.jp/kaigirep/hakusho/h21/
       bousai2009/html/honbun/1b_1s_1_01.htm.

     ———. 2015a. Disaster Management in Japan. http://www.bousai.go.jp/1info/pdf/saigaipanf_e.pdf

     ———. 2015b. White Paper on Disaster Management in Japan 2015 (in Japanese).

     http://www.bousai.go.jp/kaigirep/hakusho/pdf/WP2015_DM_Full_Version.pdf

     CDMC (Central Disaster Management Council). 2011. Report of the Committee for Technical Investigation on Counter-
       measures for Earthquakes and Tsunamis Based on the Lessons Learned from the 2011 Earthquake off the Pacific
       Coast of Tohoku Earthquake (in Japanese)

     FDMA (Fire and Disaster Management Agency). 2015. White paper on fire and disaster management 2015 (in Japanese).
        http://www.fdma.go.jp/html/hakusho/h27/h27/pdf/h27_all.pdf.

     MEXT (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology), 2013. Information on Damages to School
       Facilities Caused by the Great East Japan Earthquake (in Japanese). http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/shingi/chousa/
       shisetu/017/shiryo/__icsFiles/afieldfile/2011/06/28/1307121_1.pdf

     ———. 2014. Ideal State of Disaster-Resilient School Facilities: Tsunami Protection Measures and Enhancement of
       Disaster Prevention Function as Evacuation Shelter. https://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-disaster-resilient.pdf.

     ———. 2015a. Guidebook for Earthquake Protection for Nonstructural Elements of School Facilities, Revised Edition.
       http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-gijyutsu2.pdf.

     ———. 2015b. School Basic Survey. (in Japanese). http://www.e-stat.go.jp/SG1/estat/NewList.do?tid=000001011528.

     ———. (n.d.) About Educational Administration and Financing in Japan (in Japanese). http://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/singi/
       kyouikusaisei/bunka/dai3/dai1/siryou4.pdf.

     ———. (n.d.) About National Subsidies (in Japanese). http://www.mext.go.jp/a_menu/shotou/zyosei/zitumu.htm.

     Midorikawa, M., I. Okawa, M. Iiba, and M. Teshigawara. 2003. “Performance-Based Seismic Design Code for Building in
        Japan.” Earthquake Engineering and Structural Semiology 4, no. 1: 15–25.

     Ministry of Education, Science and Culture. 1995. Response of Ministry of Education, Science and Culture to the
        Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake (in Japanese). http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/hakusho/html/hpad199501/
        hpad199501_2_278.html.

     MLIT (Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism). 2005. White Paper on Land, Infrastructure, and
        Transport 2005 (in Japanese). http://www.mlit.go.jp/english/white-paper/mlit05.html.

     ———. 2007. Explanation of Revised Building Standards. (in Japanese). http://www.mlit.go.jp/jutakukentiku/build/
       h18_kaisei.html.

     NIER (National Institute for Education Policy Research). 2008. For Improvement of School Facilities (in Japanese).
        http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/bousaitsuiki.pdf.

     NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration). 2015. Significant Earthquake Database. http://www.ngdc.
       noaa.gov/nndc/struts/form?t=101650&s=1&d=1.

     Ohashi, Y. 1993. The History of Structural Codes of Buildings in Japan. Building Center of Japan.

     Oikawa, Y. 2015. Synergy of Education and Sustainable Development and Disaster Education in the Post-Tsunami
        Recovery Context of Kesennuma Japan. PhD dissertation, Kyoto University.
90
                                                                                                                           References



Okada T., T. Kabeyasawa, Y. Nakano, M. Maeda, and T. Nakamura. 2000. “Improvement of Seismic Performance of
   Reinforced Concrete School Building in Japan—Part 1: Damage Survey and Performance Evaluation after 1995
   Hyogo-Ken Nambu Earthquake.” Proceedings of the 12th World Conference of Earthquake Engineering.

Shizuoka Prefecture Disaster Management Center. (n.d.). Earthquake Disaster Case: Higashi-Izu Town (in Japanese).
    https://www.pref.shizuoka.jp/bousai/e-quakes/shiraberu/higai/saigaishi/sh002.html.	

Suda, Y. 2012. Linking Human Behavior, Participatory Mapping and Community Infrastructure for Disaster Risk
   Reduction: Approaches in Shiso and Kamaishi. Master’s thesis, Kyoto University.

Teshigawara, M. 2012. Preliminary Reconnaissance Report of the 2011 Tohoku-Chiho Taiheiyo-Oki Earthquake. Edited by
    Architectural Institute of Japan. Springer.

Tottori Prefecture Agency Crisis Management Bureau. 2000. “Western Tottori Earthquake in 2000” (in Japanese).
    Earthquake Disaster Magazine.

Tsunami Digital Library. 1966. History of Niigata Earthquake (in Japanese). http://tsunami-dl.jp/document/145#section-
   67f9fa3f44943d3055dde0476b098f98.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2004. Reducing Disaster Risk: A Challenge for Development. New
  York: UNDP. http://www.preventionweb.net/files/1096_rdrenglish.pdf.




Chapter 2
AIJ (Architectural Institute of Japan). 1997. Damage Investigation Report on RC Buildings due to the 1995 Hyogoken-
    Nambu Earthquake—Part II: School Buildings (in Japanese).

———. 2003. Research Report on Seismic Rehabilitation of School Facilities (in Japanese).

Cabinet Office. 1978. Act on Special Measures Concerning Countermeasures for Large-Scale Earthquakes (in Japanese).
   http://law.e-gov.go.jp/htmldata/S53/S53HO073.html.

———. 1980. Act on Special Financial Measures for Urgent Earthquake Countermeasure Improvement Projects in Areas
  for Intensified Measures (in Japanese). http://law.e-gov.go.jp/htmldata/S55/S55HO063.html

———. 2015. Disaster Management in Japan. http://www.bousai.go.jp/1info/pdf/saigaipanf_e.pdf.

CDMC (Central Disaster Management Council). 2003. Report on Review of Designation of Enhanced Earthquake Pre-
  paredness Region related to a Tokai Earthquake (in Japanese).

China: May Quake Killed 19,000 School Kids. (2008, November 21). CBC News. Retrieved from http://www.cbsnews.com/
   news/china-may-quake-killed-19000-school-kids/

FDMA. 2002. Study Report on Promotion of Earthquake-Resistance Public Facilities as Disaster Management Bases
   (Excerpt) (in Japanese).

MEXT (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology). 2002. History of Research on Seismic Measures
  for School Facilities (in Japanese). http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/shingi/chousa/shisetu/007/gaiyou/021003.htm.

———. 2003a. Promotion of Earthquake-resistance School Building (in Japanese).

———. 2003b. Guidelines for Promotion of Earthquake-resistance School Building. https://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/
  pdf/e-taishinsuishin.pdf.

———. 2015. Results of Survey on Status of Seismic Resistant School Facilities of Public School Facilities (for AY 2015)”
  (in Japanese). http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/houdou/27/06/attach/1358429.htm.

Minemura, K. (2008, May 27). China strengthens seismic standards of school buildings after the collapse in Sichuan
   earthquake. The Asahi Shimbun. Retrieved from http://www.asahi.com/special/08004/TKY200805260372.html (in
   Japanese)

MLIT (Ministry of Land, infrastructure, Transport and Tourism). 2013. Basic Plan to Prolong the Life of Our Infrastruc-
   ture (in Japanese). http://www.mlit.go.jp/common/001040309.pdf

MLIT and JCBA (Japan Conference of Building Administration). 1981. Commentary on the Structural Calculation based
   on the Revised Enforcement Order, Building Standards Law (in Japanese).

Nakano, Y. 2007. “Seismic Rehabilitation of Seismically Vulnerable School Building in Japan.” Regional Development
   Dialogue 28, no. 2: 66-81.

Shizuoka Architectural Firms Association. 2012. Advances in Anti-Tokai Earthquake Measures for Buildings in Shizuoka
    Prefecture (in Japanese).
                                                                                                                                        91
     References




     Chapter 3
     AIJ (Architectural Institute of Japan). 2003. Survey on Seismic Capacity of School Facilities (in Japanese).

     ———. 2003. Survey on Seismic Retrofitting of School Facilities (in Japanese).

     ———. 2003. Survey on Seismic Inspection of Nonstructural Elements of School Facilities (in Japanese).

     JBDPA (Japan Building Disaster Prevention Association). 1990, 2001a. Standard for the Seismic Diagnosis of Existing
        Reinforced Concrete Buildings (revised in 1990 and 2001) (in Japanese).

     ———. 2001b. Guidelines for Seismic Retrofit of Existing Reinforced Concrete Buildings (revised in 2001) (in Japanese).

     ———. 2001c. “Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit (seismic evaluation standard and guideline for retrofit for RC structure)
       (in Japanese).

     MEXT (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology). 2001. Methods of Vulnerability Assessment for
       RC School Building and Structural Steel-framed School Building (revised version) (in Japanese).

     ———. 2003a. Manuals for Improvement of Seismic Performance of School Buildings: Reinforced Concrete Buildings
       (in Japanese).

     ———. 2003b. Guidelines for Promotion of Earthquake-resistance School Building. https://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/
       pdf/e-taishinsuishin.pdf.

     ———. 2003c. Manual for Seismic Retrofitting of School Facilities (for RC School Building,, Revised Edition 2003 (in
       Japanese).

     ———. 2003d. Manual for Improvement of Seismic Performance of Structural Steel-framed Gymnasium, Revised
       Edition 2003 (in Japanese). http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-taishinjirei.pdf

     ———. 2006a. “Seismic Retrofitting Quick Reference: School Facilities That Can Withstand Earthquakes—Examples of
       Seismic Retrofitting.”

     ———. 2006b Standards for Diagnosis for Seismic Capacity of Gymnasium (in Japanese).
       http://www.mext.go.jp/component/a_menu/education/detail/__icsFiles/afieldfile/2011/12/08/1237613_01.pdf

     ———.     2008a. Case     Studies  for   Seismic    Retrofitting  of              School     Facilities   (in    Japanese).
       http://www.mext.go.jp/a_menu/shotou/zyosei/syuppan/081028/002.pdf.

     ———. 2008b. PFI Manual for Seismic Retrofitting for Public Schools (in Japanese). http://www.mext.go.jp/a_menu/
       shotou/zyosei/pfi/001.pdf.

     ———. 2010. Protecting Children from Falling                  and    Tumbling     Objects    due    to    an    Earthquake.
       http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-hikouzou.pdf

     ———. 2012a. Case Studies for Seismic Countermeasure on Nonstructural Components of School Facilities (in Japanese).
       http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/hikouzoujirei.pdf.

     ———.      2012b.   Countermeasures        against    Fallen         Objects     in     Gymnasium         (in    Japanese).
       http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/anti-drop_all.pdf

     ———. 2014. Ideal State of Disaster-Resilient School Facilities–Tsunami protection measures and enhancement of
       disaster prevention function as evacuation shelter–. http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-disaster-resilient.pdf

     ———. 2015a. Guidebook for Earthquake Protection for Nonstructural Elements of School Facilities Revised Edition—
       Protecting Children from Falling and Tumbling Objects due to an Earthquake—Implementing Earthquake
       Resistance Inspection. http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-gijyutsu2.pdf

     Ministry of Education, Science and Culture. 1985. Methods of Vulnerability Assessment for Reinforced Concrete
        Masonry (in Japanese).

     ———. 1999. Manuals for emergency reinforcement of school buildings (in Japanese). https://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/
       pdf/e-taishinsuishin.pdf.

     Nakano, Y. 2007. “Seismic Rehabilitation of Seismically Vulnerable School Building in Japan.” Regional Development
        Dialogue 28, no. 2: 66 – 81.

     Okada T., T. Kabeyasawa, Y. Nakano, M. Maeda, and T. Nakamura. 2000. “Improvement of Seismic Performance of
        Reinforced Concrete School Building in Japan—Part 1: Damage Survey and Performance Evaluation after 1995
        Hyogo-Ken Nambu Earthquake.” Proceedings of the 12th World Conference of Earthquake Engineering.


92
                                                                                                                         References



Chapter 4
Matsuoka Y., Joerin J., Shaw R. and Takeuchi Y. (2012). “Partnership between City Government and Community-based
   Disaster Prevention Organizations in Kobe, Japan”. In Shaw R. (ed), Community Based Disaster Risk Reduction.
   151-184. Emerald Publisher. UK.

MEXT (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology). 2003. Guidelines for Promotion of Earthquake-
  resistance School Building. https://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-taishinsuishin.pdf.

NIER (National Institute for Educational Policy Research). 2005. Manual for Seismic Retrofitting of School Facilities
   with Quality Improvement (in Japanese). http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/manyu.pdf.

Shaw, R. 2014. “Kobe Earthquake: Turning Point of Community-based Risk Reduction in Japan.” In Community Practices
   for Disaster Risk Reduction in Japan, edited by R. Shaw, 21–32. Japan: Springer.




Chapter 5
MEXT (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology). 2012. Survey on Status of Seismic Resistance of
  Public School Facilities (in Japanese).

———. 2014. Handbook for Rehabilitation for Life-span Extension of School Facilities (in Japanese). http://www.mext.
  go.jp/component/b_menu/shingi/toushin/__icsFiles/afieldfile/2014/01/08/1343018_01_2.pdf.




                                                                                                                                      93
     References



     Manuals and handbooks on seismic retrofitting and resistance translated into English
     Committee for Research Studies on the Visions of School Facilities. 2013. Countermeasures against the Deterioration
        of School Facilities: Promotion of the Lifespan Extension of School Facilities. http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-
        lifespanextention.pdf.

     Investigative Commission on School Facility Improvement in Light of the Damage Caused by the Great East Japan
         Earthquake. 2011. Urgent Recommendation Concerning ‘School Facility Improvement in Light of the Damage
         Caused by the Great East Japan Earthquake. http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e_Urgent_Recommendationl_
         Body.pdf.

     ———. 2011. Urgent Recommendation Concerning ”School Facility Improvement in Light of the Damage Caused by the
       Great East Japan Earthquake” (outline). http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e_Urgent_Recommendation_Outline.
       pdf.

     MEXT (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology). 2003. Guidelines for Promotion of Earthquake-
       resistance School Building. https://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-taishinsuishin.pdf.

     ———. 2004. Barrier-free School Facility Promotion Guideline. http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-bariashishin.pdf.

     ———. 2006. Seismic Retrofitting Quick Reference: Schools Facilities That Withstand Earthquakes—Examples of
       Seismic Retrofitting. https://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-taishinjirei.pdf.

     ———. 2010a. A Collection of Exemplary Design of Elementary and Junior High School Facilities based on the Revision
       of Guidelines for Designing Elementary and Junior High School Facilities http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-
       ejschool.pdf

     ———. 2010b. Anthology of Ideas for Creating New School Facilities – Achieving Fulfilling Educational Activities and an
       Enriched School Life. http://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-ideaschool.pdf

     ———. 2010c. Protecting Children from Falling and Tumbling Objects Due to an Earthquake: Guidebook for Earthquake
       Protection for Nonstructural Elements of School Facilities. https://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-hikouzou.pdf.

     ———. 2014. Ideal State of Disaster-Resilient School Facilities: Tsunami Protection Measures and Enhancement of
       Disaster Prevention Function as Evacuation Shelter. https://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-disaster-resilient.pdf.

     ———. 2015. Guidebook for Earthquake Protection for Nonstructural Elements of School Facilities, Revised Edition:
       Protecting Children from Falling and Tumbling Objects Due to an Earthquake—Implementing Earthquake
       Resistance Inspection. https://www.nier.go.jp/shisetsu/pdf/e-gijyutsu2.pdf




94
References




             95
The Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
(GFDRR) is a global partnership that helps developing
countries better understand and reduce their vulner-
abilities to natural hazards and adapt to climate change.
Working with over 400 local, national, regional, and interna-
tional partners, GFDRR provides grant financing, technical
assistance, training and knowledge sharing activities
to mainstream disaster and climate risk management
in policies and strategies. Managed by the World Bank,
GFDRR is supported by 34 countries and 9 international
organizations.


www.gfdrr.org



The World Bank Disaster Risk Management Hub, Tokyo
supports developing countries to mainstream DRM in
national development planning and investment programs.
As part of the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery and in coordination with the World Bank Tokyo
Office, the DRM Hub provides technical assistance grants
and connects Japanese and global DRM expertise and
solutions with World Bank teams and government officials.
Over 37 countries have benefited from the Hub’s technical
assistance, knowledge, and capacity building activities. The
DRM Hub was established in 2014 through the Japan-World
Bank Program for Mainstreaming DRM in Developing
Countries – a partnership between Japan’s Ministry of
Finance and the World Bank.


www.worldbank.org/drmhubtokyo



Contact:
World Bank Disaster Risk Management Hub, Tokyo
Phone: +81-3-3597-1320
Email: drmhubtokyo@worldbank.org
Website: http://www.worldbank.org/drmhubtokyo
