                                    Analysis
    Court Fee Waiver System in the Republic of Serbia




 




                                 Author: Blazo Nedic


                                Belgrade, August 2016
 
        Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Justice Sector Support in Serbia, World Bank




                                                                                  1 
Analysis „Court Fee Waiver System in the Republic of Serbia”1

Content

Introduction................................................................................................................................4 
Legislative framework in the Republic of Serbia ......................................................................8 
Comparative overview .............................................................................................................11 
    Brief review of practices in the European Union.................................................................11 
    Croatia..................................................................................................................................13 
    Montenegro ..........................................................................................................................16 
    Slovenia................................................................................................................................18 
Court fees & financial factors in the region.............................................................................20 
Implementation of the provisions on exemption from payment of court fees
in the Republic of Serbia..........................................................................................................26 
    Problems identified in practice ............................................................................................26 
    Analysis of the questionnaire on courts practice regarding the court fee waiver requests ..34 
Conclusions and recommendations..........................................................................................39 
    Preconditions for the reform of the system of court fees in the Republic of Serbia............39 
    Recommendations for the reform of the system of court fees in the Republic of Serbia:...40 
Annexes....................................................................................................................................44 
    Questionnaire .......................................................................................................................44 
    References............................................................................................................................45 
    Table of court fees in the Republic of Slovenia...................................................................47 
 

 

                                                                        




1
  All terms used in the text in the male grammatical gender include the male and female individuals to which
they relate.

                                                                                                                                             2 
        Multi-donor Trust Fund – Justice Sector Support (MDTF-JSS) in Serbia

                 ANALYSIS OF THE COURT FEE WAIVER SYSTEM
                             IN THE REPUBLIC OF SERBIA


With the aim of accelerating the justice sector reforms in Serbia, the Multi Donor Fund for
Justice Sector Support (MDTF-JSS) was established with support of the key development
international partners and is jointly managed by the World Bank and the Ministry of Justice
of the Republic of Serbia. The main areas of focus of the MDTF-JSS relate to various aspects
of the reform of the judiciary in the process of Serbia's EU accession, strengthening
institutional capacity and resource management in judicial institutions and ensuring the
coordination and efficiency of donor support.

One component of MDTF-JSS is to support the Ministry of Justice and judicial institutions in
the planning, implementation and evaluation of reforms in the justice sector, which includes
technical support and implementation of analyses and evaluation, as well as provision of
recommendations and proposals - in order to adopt guidelines for the reform in the individual
areas, development of strategic plans to improve assistance and coordination, as well as
effectiveness and facilitation in the design and implementation of projects.

This analysis of the court fee waiver system (system for exemption from payment of court
fees), supported by MDTF-JSS, involves a review of the legislative framework in the
Republic of Serbia, with regard to key international documents in this field. Analysis includes
a comparative review of the provisions relating to court fee waiver system in some of the EU
Member States, as well as countries in the region, Slovenia, Croatia and Montenegro. The
analysis contains a brief comparative review of the level of court fees in certain countries in
the region, with an overview of the main economic indicators. It also includes analysis and
display of current practices of the courts of the Republic of Serbia, with the presentation of
the basic criteria to be met for exemption from payment of court fees. For the purposes of
data collection, a questionnaire was used to obtain information from judges and lawyers
dealing with requests for exemption from payment of court fees. Different views regarding
potential amendment оf the court fees are also discussed. Finally, recommendations for
improvement of the court fee waiver system that would allow easier access to justice for the
citizens are provided.




                                                                                             3 
Introduction

         In democratic societies, availability of effective protection of a breached or hindered
right represents one of the basic preconditions for the exercise of the legal order and the rule
of law. Provided legal protection must meet certain standards, derived from the right to a fair
trial, a basic human right guaranteed by international documents on human rights and the
Constitution of the Republic of Serbia. Fair trials means that individuals have equal access to
justice and that they can access the court and other public institutions for protection, and
exercise their rights equally and effectively, under equal conditions and without
discrimination. Access to justice is one of the basic human rights and therefore must be
provided to all under equal conditions; hence it must apply to all layers of the population,
regardless of the financial and other personal circumstances or traits. In order to achieve this,
each individual must have access to legal aid, which implies the duty of the state to ensure the
provision of legal aid of satisfactory quality, without payment or at reduced costs, in case the
person in need of legal aid is unable to cover the costs of legal representation or when the
provision of legal aid is necessary for the reasons of fairness.

        In accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia2, Serbia is defined as a
state based on the rule of law and social justice, founded on the principles of protection of
human and minority rights and freedoms and democracy. The Constitution also establishes
the obligation of the state to ensure effective access to justice for all citizens. This obligation
arises from the ratified international human rights instruments, including the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (European
Convention)3.

        It should be noted that equal access to justice represents a much broader concept than
the right to a fair trial and the right to trial within a reasonable time. Equal access to justice
implies an equal opportunity of citizens to protect their rights before the court and other state
authorities. Equal access to justice also includes the existence of regulations that take into
account the needs and specific circumstances of citizens belonging to vulnerable and
marginalized groups, as well as the effective implementation of these regulations which do
not depend on the social power of citizens who seek protection of their rights.

       In Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights4 it is stated that "legal aid should
be available to those who lack sufficient resources and if the provision of such aid is
necessary to ensure effective access to justice." Thus, unavailability or refusal of legal aid
may constitute a violation of the basic right of access to justice, given that the lack of legal
aid could lead, for example, to the inequality of arms in court proceedings. European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, expressly
recognizes the right to legal aid only to individuals accused of a crime, by providing in

2
  Constitution of the Republic of Serbia, Official Gazette RS, no. 98/06
3
  http://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Convention_BOS.pdf
4
  http://www.europarl.europa.eu/charter/pdf/text_en.pdf

                                                                                                 4 
Article 6, paragraph 3 (c) that "everyone charged with a criminal offence has the right to
defend himself in person or through legal assistance of his own choosing or, if he has not
sufficient means to pay for legal assistance, to be given it free when the interests of justice so
require”.

        However, since the standard of effective access to justice and fair trial also applies to
the field of civil protection, the right to legal aid is also guaranteed in proceedings regarding
civil rights and obligations. According to the European Convention, the duty of providing
free legal aid exists when the "interests of justice" so require. The criteria for the "interests of
justice" standard have been developed in a long practice of the European Court of Human
Rights and expressed in its numerous decisions. These crucial criteria refer to: the legal and
factual complexity of the case, the severity of the imposed penalty, the nature of substantive
law in the process, as well as its importance for the individual, lack of capacity of an
individual under the provisions of national law, the actual ability of an individual to defend
himself, and undertake the procedural steps, whereby all the circumstances relating to the
individual are considered, such as age, level of literacy, belonging to the socially
disadvantaged, and marginalized social groups, etc.

        Therefore, in order to achieve equality in practice, it is necessary to provide assistance
to those citizens who do not have the financial means to bear the costs of legal advice,
information, representation or defense. In principle, legal aid may have two complementary
forms:5

           (a) exemption from payment of all or part of the court fees; and/ or
        (b) assistance of a lawyer, through provision of advice or representation, for free or at
a subsidized rate.
         The essence of the issue of access to justice refers to the fact that if there is no
possibility of effective judicial protection, it is not possible to exercise the rights that belong
to citizens, in which case the principle of the rule of law shall not be achieved.

         Analysis of relevant practices of the EU member states shows that the fear of
incurring additional costs, which refers to the high costs of legal proceedings related to court
fees and lawyers' fees, can represent a significant factor which often hinders access to justice,
and determines whether the person will decide to address the court, especially given the
prevalence of the practice in the EU that the losing party pays the costs. For these reasons, the
research shows that in some countries the space is left to the courts to determine whether to
request the payment of court costs. Depending on the financial situation of the individual, as
well as the merits of the case, the court may decide to fully or partially exempt a party from
payment of court costs. In addition, a person may receive other types of legal aid from the
state, such as the appointment of counsel for representation in court proceedings.6


5
 European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights , Annual Report 2014, p. 13-15
http://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra-annual-report-2014_en.pdf
6
    European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights , Annual Report 2014, p. 13-15

                                                                                                  5 
        Most of the states stipulate payment of court fees, which contribute to the budget of
the court, as well as the state budget in various ways. There are many and varied reasons
which establish levels of revenue from court fees in the EU Member States. Therefore, it is
difficult to precisely define the ratio of existence of a particular system in a particular
country, especially bearing in mind that it varies during time. CEPEJ7 report indicates that the
level of income earned by the state from court fees depends on several factors, including:

            1) the number of cases before the court;

            2) the nature and complexity of the cases;

            3) the value of the cases before the court;

       4) the structure of fees prescribed by the state (definition of the type of cases for
which the fee is charged);

       5) the actual level of income from fees, including when some persons are exempted
from payment of court fees;

            6) the categories of persons exempted from paying court fees.

            These factors influence policy making on court fees in a different way in individual
states.

        However, access to justice in the Republic of Serbia is one of the main issues in the
process of accession to the European Union. The EC Progress Report on Serbia 2015, similar
to the previous years, states that availability of legal aid is not satisfactory in the Republic of
Serbia8.

      Existing mechanisms for provision of free legal aid have a number of disadvantages,
some of which are essential:

       o free legal aid is inaccessible to many citizens;
       o there is no possibility of collecting credible statistical data on the state level that are
         necessary for the successful planning and management of the system of free legal aid;
       o there is no possibility for collecting complete and accurate data providing insight into
         the efficiency of existing mechanisms, analysis of expenditures and making valid
         financial plans (e.g: In court statistics there are no consolidated data on the number of
         defendants who received ex officio defense counsel);
       o quality control is not provided for free legal aid services;
       o free legal aid providers are not sufficiently motivated to provide high quality free
         legal aid services.




http://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra-annual-report-2014_en.pdf
7
  CEPEJ http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/cooperation/cepej/evaluation/2014/Rapport_2014_en.pdf
8
    http://www.seio.gov.rs/upload/documents/eu_dokumenta/godisnji_izvestaji_ek_o_napretku/godinji_izvestaj_15_final.pdf

                                                                                                                          6 
        Although the Law on Local Self-Government9 stipulates that the municipality shall
organize free legal aid service through its bodies, in accordance with the Constitution and the
law (Article 20, Para 1, item 31), majority of municipalities in Serbia have not yet fulfilled
this obligation. Similarly, the Law on Legal Profession10 ("Law on the Bar"), in Article 66,
item 7 and Articles 73 and 74 provides that the Bar Association of Serbia and regional bar
associations shall organize the provision of free legal aid in accordance with the law and that
the bar association may organize free provision of legal aid within its territory. However,
beyond a few exceptions in the recent past (in cooperation with municipalities in Nis,
Pancevo, New Belgrade), and in the absence of project financing, the Bar Association does
not provide free legal aid to citizens in a systematic and organized way.

        Access to justice is one of the key factors in humanization and democratization of a
society and the exercise of the principle of the rule of law. Access to justice is, at the same
time, one of the instruments for reducing poverty and has a strong impact on citizens'
satisfaction and their identification with the legal, political and social system. A long lasting
degradation of the judiciary as a system, has generated a deep crisis of rights, and a loss of
citizens' trust that the values of freedom, equality and justice are truly accessible, and resulted
in diminishing legal awareness of citizens. Nowadays, citizens have meager level of
understanding of legal principles and procedures, and almost no knowledge of their rights and
methods how to exercise and protect them. Bearing in mind that the existence of a legislative
framework that puts an excessive financial burden on individuals seeking to receive
compensation for the violation of their rights may be considered as interference with the
rights to an effective remedy, and can discourage them from exercising their rights in general,
there is a clear need to examine the justification and efficiency of the existing system.

        In anticipation of the adoption and implementation of the Law on Free Legal Aid,
there are alternative methods that can be used to facilitate access to justice. In this sense, the
possibility of exemption from payment of court fees is one of potential ways to enable more
efficient access to justice to citizens in financial difficulties. In some EU member states,
exemption from payment of court fees for the applicant in financial difficulties, legal aid
insurance, as well as the agreed limits of attorney fees, represent some of the available
methods. In order to identify a suitable model in the Republic of Serbia, the current situation
and identified shortcomings of the system of court fees will be analyzed, as well as
comparative practice of the EU member states and countries in the region.




9
    Law on Local Self-Government, Official Gazette RS, no. 129/07
10
     Law on Legal Profession, Official Gazette RS, no. 31/11 and 24/12

                                                                                                 7 
Legislative framework in the Republic of Serbia

       In the Republic of Serbia, the matter of court fees is regulated by the Law on court
     11
fees . The Law regulates the system of court fees and contains the Tariff specifying the
amount of court fees in different proceedings.

         According to the Law on Court Fees (hereinafter: LCF), exemption from payment of
court fees is possible with regard to specific subjects, as well as in case a person does not
have sufficient financial resources. Some subjects are ex lege exempted from payment of
court fees (mandatory exemption from payment of court fees). These subjects are the
following: the Republic of Serbia, state authorities and special organizations, bodies of
autonomous province and local self-government bodies, organizations of the Red Cross, as
well as dependents in proceedings regarding alimony and persons who are seeking payment
of the minimum wage (Article 9 Para 1, LCF). Similarly, the court fee for submissions and
actions shall not be paid by persons who gave their property to the Republic of Serbia, socio-
humanitarian, scientific or cultural organizations, institutions and foundations that waived
their right to ownership of real estate or gave other real rights to immovable property without
compensation in their favor. The foreign country is exempted from paying court fees if it is
provided by an international treaty or subject to the principle of reciprocity. In non-
contentious proceedings, the party is exempted from the payment of court fees for the acts or
actions that are entrusted by the court to the notary public (Article 9 - new Para 5, LCF).

        On the other hand, exemption from payment of the fee is also possible in case of other
persons who are not specifically listed in the law, but there are reasons of socio-economic
nature that require exemption (potential exemption from payment of court fees). In
accordance with the law (Article 10, LCF), the court may exempt a person from payment of
court fees if the payment of court fees would hinder his/her social security (and/or social
security of the members of his household), given the level of resources used for maintenance
of this person and the members of his/her household. For the purposes of this Law, a
household means a community of living, earning and spending of income. The Law defines
dependant persons including the following: 1) minor children or foster children, 2) children
or foster children in regular education or in early studies, if they are unemployed - up to the
age of 26, 3) grandchildren, if they are not supported by parents and if they live together in a
household, 4) the spouse and 5) parents or adoptive parents.

        The decision on the exemption from court fees shall be made by the first instance
court at the applicant’s request (motion), considering all the circumstances, particularly
taking into account the relevant value of the court fee, the total income of the applicant and
members of his household, and number of the persons maintained by the applicant. The Court
shall determine the amount of applicant's revenue based on the certificate of the competent
authority ("Uverenje") or other evidence submitted by the applicant on his financial situation
11
  Law on court fees, Official Gazette RS, no. 28/94, 53/95, 16/97, 34/2001 –oth.law, 9/02, 29/04, 61/05, 116/08
–oth.law, 31/09, 101/11, 93/12, 93/14 and 106/15

                                                                                                              8 
(Article 11, LCF). The certificate contains information on income of the applicant and
members of his household, as well as general information on the financial situation. The
certificate is submitted by the applicant, along with the Proposal (motion) for exemption from
payment of court fees.

        However, this certificate serves as a proof for exemption from payment of court fees
only if is submitted to the court within than six months from the date the certificate was
issued. This condition may further complicate the situation of the applicant, bearing in mind
the need to collect various document on income his income, from various institutions, and
also taking into account average duration of the court proceedings in Serbia. The Court may
also obtain and verify the necessary information on the financial situation of the applicant and
members of his household ex officio, and may also hear the opposing party's position. The
decision of the court approving the motion for exemption from payment of court fees is not
subject to appeal. In the case of a foreign national, exemption from payment of fees is
possible if it is stipulated by international treaty or subject to reciprocity (Article 12)

        When the decision for exemption from payment of fees is brought in civil, non-
contentious and criminal proceedings, as well as the proceedings in administrative disputes,
the same decision applies in the process of enforcement of the decisions in these proceedings
if enforcement is required within three months after the final completion of the procedure
(Article 13 LCF). When the decision for exemption from payment of court fees is brought in
non-contentious and enforcement proceedings, it applies in civil proceedings arising during
and in relation to non-contentious and enforcement proceedings. The decision on exemption
from court fees applies to all fees in the specific case regardless when it was incurred (Article
14 LCF).

        If the proceedings for the collection of fees for submissions, actions and documents
for which the fee obligations were incurred prior to the decision granting the exemption, the
proceeding will be terminated and paid court fees will be refunded to the applicant. In
accordance with Article 15 of the LCF, the court may revoke the decision granting the
exemption from paying court fees at any time during the proceedings if the court finds that
the applicant is able to pay the fee; on that occasion, the court shall decide whether the
applicant must pay back the fees fully or partially. If the court proceeding take more than two
years, a person exempted from paying court fees is obliged to submit the certificate on
financial situation after the second and each subsequent year of the proceedings (Article 16
LCF).

        The guardian of the absent person whose whereabouts are unknown, guardian of
property whose owner is unknown, the temporary representative of the party appointed by the
court in the proceedings and appointed counsel, are not required to pay a fee for a person who
is represented (Article 17 LCF). In these cases the collection of court fees shall be made from
the assets of the represented person.

      Exemption from payment of court fees benefits only the person who has been granted
exemption (Article 18 LCF). When several persons make a joint court submission or


                                                                                               9 
undertake joint action in the proceedings, and one or more of them is exempted from paying
the fees, a person who is not exempted shall be obliged to pay the fee as if there is no
exemption from payment of court fees, except in cases of formal litigation.

        If the person exempted from paying court fees succeeds in the civil, enforcement or
criminal proceedings brought by private prosecution, the fees that the party would be obliged
to pay if it has not been exempted, shall be paid by a party that does not enjoy the exemption
and in the proportion in which the exempted party has failed in the proceedings (Article 19).
If a party exempt from payment of court fees and the party that is not exempted reach a
settlement, the fee that should be paid by the party exempted from payment of court fees shall
be paid by a party that is not exempted. According to Article 20 of LCF, where the court
proceedings include one party who is exempt from payment of court fees and the other is not
exempted, the court is obliged to keep a list of fees that should be paid by the party exempt
from payment of court fees. List shall be concluded at the end of the proceedings and the
court shall issue an order for the payment of the fee to the person who is not exempted.

        When considering the legal framework, it is important to mention the structure of
revenues that are generated from court fees. In accordance with Article 51 of the LCF, the
collected court fees are revenue of the budget of the Republic of Serbia. This income is
distributed so that 40% of the collected taxes is used for current expenses of the courts,
except for expenses for court staff and the staff of the Republic Public Prosecutor's Office,
whereas 20% is used for an improvement in the material position of the employees in the
courts and public prosecutors’ offices (court staff and staff in public Prosecutor's Office),
other expenditures, as well as investments in accordance with the law. The remaining 40% is
the revenue of budget of the Republic of Serbia.




                                                                                           10 
Comparative overview

        This section presents the findings of a comparative analysis of the court fees rules in
some of the EU member states and countries in the region such as Croatia, Montenegro and
Slovenia, with special emphasis on the exemption from payment of court fees (waiver) in the
countries in the region, with the aim if reviewing practices in neighboring countries and
identifying potential methods for improving the practice and/or legal framework in the
Republic of Serbia.



Brief review of practices in the European Union


        According to CEPEJ report12, in most EU Member States, court fees are used to cover
a part of the operating costs of the courts. With the exception of France and Luxembourg,
which apply the principle of free access to the courts, all Member States generate revenue
from court fees. Also, in most countries which apply court fees, the revenue from fees
represents also a general income of the state budget. Revenues from court fees have different
levels of impact on the judicial budgets. For example, in Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Turkey, Malta and the UK, revenue from court fees makes more than half of the courts’
budget, while in Austria it generates revenue surplus that exceeds the self-financing of the
judicial system.

         An overview of the systems of court fees in individual countries in the CEPEJ report
indicates that only France and Luxembourg provide free access to all courts. In criminal
matters, in all Member States, there is no court fee to initiate proceedings before the court,
except in Croatia, Cyprus, Greece, Monaco, Montenegro, Portugal, Serbia and Switzerland,
where court fees are charged (unless free legal aid, which includes court fees, is granted). In
Austria there is an obligation to pay court fees as of initiation of civil proceedings in the
court, but the court process does not depend on the payment of this fee. In other words, even
if the fee is not paid, a request can be filed for waiver of court fees. In the Netherlands, in
order to improve access to justice, a new service model has been developed, whereby citizens
can receive free legal aid in the form of initial advice at the so-called ’Legal Service
Counters’, whereas more complex cases are referred to lawyers or mediators who participate
in the free legal aid system.

       The Czech law regulates exceptions of the obligation to pay court fees, such as for
certain subjects (e.g. government, diplomatic missions, foundations), and the types of
procedures (e.g. procedure for guardianship, adoption, inheritance), which are exempt from
court fees. In addition to the mandatory exemption, there is a possibility that the party
submits a request for exemption from court fees. Sweden provides for exemption from
12
     CEPEJ Evaluation Report, 2014. (based on 2012. data).

                                                                                            11 
payment of court fees in administrative proceedings. In Greece, a party has to pay fee stamps,
which is followed by depositing a certain amount depending on the type of claim13. The
deposit is intended to prevent frivolous or unfounded lawsuits. A party may apply for
exemption from court fees on the grounds of indigence. If the request is approved by the
court, the applicant is exempted from all costs of the proceedings, as well as fees for a
lawyer.

        In the United Kingdom14, a system of exemption from payment of court fees is
available only for citizens who are unable to fully or partly cover the costs of legal process.
There are three ways for exemption from payment of fees: (ex lege) exemption from payment
of fees for citizens who are eligible to receive social support, full exemption from payment of
fees (upon request) for citizens whose gross annual income is lower than the set threshold,
and complete or partial exemption from payment of fees based on the calculation of income
and expenses (test to calculate the monthly disposable income). Mainly civil and family
courts are self-financed through the revenue from court fees, while the rest of the expenses
that are not covered by court fees are covered from contributions by taxpayers made through
the Ministry of Justice budget. The contribution of the taxpayer may cover two elements: a
potential revenue shortfall due to the court fee waiver, and a lack of revenue when the court
fees do not cover the total cost even if there is no exemption from paying the fees. Thus, the
fees are generally set at the level that, on average, and if charged without any fee waivers,
should cover the total cost, That is, fees are not set in a way to generate any profit. The basic
principle in determining court fees is to promote the efficient allocation of resources so that
service users are encouraged to use them efficiently, and to maintain the relationship between
costs and contributions, thereby improving decision-making and responsibility.

        In the Netherlands, court fees are primarily determined based on the value of claims,
but certain (relatively lower) court fees are charged in labor disputes and in the family law
matters. One of the factors influencing the amount of court fees is the jurisdiction of the
court15. There are statutory exceptions to the basic rules, for example, in civil proceedings,
the court may cover the costs fully or partially, if the parties are married or live in a registered
consensual union, or otherwise live together, or if they are relatives in the direct vertical line.
Also, in the Netherlands, a significant number of people use legal aid insurance. In one of the
studies from 2003, over 53% of the respondents used insurance to cover the costs of the legal
proceedings16. Individual consumers represented by consumer organizations do not bear any
costs in the proceedings in which the reached solution is binding17. However, in practice, the
negotiating consumer organizations, represents the interests of its members ad hoc and is
funded from relatively modest membership dues. The membership fee is used to facilitate the
negotiation process (which also covers the costs of an attorney by the ad hoc consumer
organizations).

13
    CECL, www.cecl.gr
14
   CEPEJ Evaluation Report, 2014. (based on 2012 data).
15
   Cost and fee allocation in civil procedure Dutch report Prof. dr. M.B.M. Loos (University of Amsterdam),
Available at: http://www-personal.umich.edu/~purzel/national_reports/Netherlands.pdf
16
    Id.
17
   Id.

                                                                                                              12 
        The parties are free to represent themselves if the complaint is within the jurisdiction
of kantonrechter (district court). This is the case when the dispute does not exceed the value
of 5,000 € (including interest accumulated by the date of the claim), the disputes of uncertain
value, and if there are clear indications that the value is below this amount. In addition, all
cases relating to labor law, collective labor contracts, employment agencies, rental
agreements, and purchase agreement, also fall under the jurisdiction of the district court;
hence the same rules apply, reducing the mandatory cost for a lawyer. It is interesting that
there is a special tax which aims to prevent groundless litigation and ensure efficiency of the
process. So, for example, the court may order that the costs which were incurred
unnecessarily shall be borne by the party that caused such costs, even if that party has won
the case18. If the claim is submitted to the court without any prior communications between
the parties, the court may consider that the action was premature (given that the defendant
may be willing to voluntarily perform its obligations, or settle the claim). In this case, the
court may determine that the costs of the proceedings have been unnecessarily incurred and
decide that such costs shall be borne by the complainant.

        It is necessary to take into account the fact that in most Member States citizens with
lower income may qualify for free legal aid in civil, administrative and criminal proceedings.
In this regard, the exemption from payment of court fees is possible (in addition to cases
provided by the regulations on court fees) through the application for free legal aid.
Exemption from payment of court fees in this case represents a form of free legal aid. In
addition, in many Member States, it is possible to exercise the right to free legal aid for
alternative dispute resolution (Netherlands, Portugal, Bulgaria, France, Slovakia, United
Kingdom), thereby reducing the number of court proceedings and facilitating access to justice
for citizens in difficult financial situation. Furthermore, in some of the Member States, free
legal aid users are encouraged to attempt peaceful resolution of the dispute, before initiating
court proceedings.



Croatia


        In Croatia, the Law on Court Fees19 regulates this matter. The law is drafted in a
similar way to the Serbian law, but provides wider guarantees for individuals in terms of
exemption from payment of court fees. Fees are paid in civil proceedings, extra-judicial,
enforcement proceedings, inheritance proceedings, the land registry proceedings, private
criminal proceedings, in administrative disputes, the procedure of entry into the court
registry, bankruptcy and liquidation, and in other cases prescribed by law.

        The court fee for initiation of the proceedings in the Republic of Croatia is stipulated
in the range from 100 kuna to the maximum of 5,000 kuna (7.5 kuna = 1 EUR).
18
   Stein/Rueb 2007, p. 202-203, in: Cost and fee allocation in civil procedure Dutch report Prof. dr. M.B.M. Loos
(University of Amsterdam), Available at: http://www-
personal.umich.edu/~purzel/national_reports/Netherlands.pdf
19
   Law on court fees, NN 74/95, 57/96, 137/02, (26/03), 125/11, 112/12,157/13, 110/15

                                                                                                              13 
       Thus, in accordance with Article 15 of the Law on Court Fees, ex lege exemption
from payment of court fees includes a substantially wider range of subjects then in Serbia,
and they are enumerated in the law:

          “Republic of Croatia and state authorities,
          persons and bodies in the exercise of public authority,
          workers and employees in labor disputes and civil servants in administrative
           disputes concerning the exercise of their rights in civil servants relations,
          individuals disabled during Homeland War, on the basis of appropriate documents
           proving their status,
          spouses, children and parents of soldiers who were killed, missing and detained in
           the Homeland War, on the basis of appropriate documents proving their status,
          spouses, children and parents of killed, missing and detained persons in the
           Homeland War, on the basis of appropriate documents proving their status,
          refugees, displaced persons and returnees, on the basis of appropriate documents
           proving their status,
          recipients of social subsistence allowance,
          humanitarian organizations and organizations dealing with the protection of
           disabled persons and families of killed, missing and detained persons, in carrying
           out humanitarian activities,
          plaintiffs in lawsuits concerning the right to legal maintenance or claims based on
           that right,
          plaintiffs in lawsuits on the recognition of motherhood and fatherhood and on the
           costs incurred during pregnancy and childbirth outside of marriage,
          parties seeking restoration of legal capacity,
          minors who authorization of the acquisition of legal capacity because they became
           parents,
          parties in the proceedings for the surrender of the child and for the exercise of the
           decision to meet and spend time with the child,
          plaintiffs in disputes over rights from compulsory pension and basic medical
           insurance, on the rights of unemployed persons on the basis of regulations on
           employment and rights in the field of social welfare,
          plaintiffs, and advocates in procedures for the protection of constitutionally
           guaranteed human rights and freedoms against final individual acts, or for the
           protection from the illegal action,
          plaintiffs in disputes on compensation for environmental pollution,
          trade unions and trade union coalitions in the civil proceedings before court andin
           collective labor disputes and the union representatives in civil proceedings in the
           exercise of the powers of the workers council”.

        The same article provides for the exemption from paying the court fee, if so provided
by international treaty or subject to reciprocity. Given the above, it can be concluded that the
legislator carefully specified the circle of subjects which are subject to mandatory exemption

                                                                                              14 
from payment of court fees, citing the specific vulnerable groups, children and humanitarian
organizations, as well as representatives in human rights cases.

        Croatian law also stipulates that the court may waive the court fees. According to
Article 14, the party whose general financial situation is such that it cannot bear the costs of
court fees without adverse consequences for the necessary maintenance of themselves and
their families, shall be exempted from payment of court fees by the court. Along with a
motion for exemption from payment of court fees, the party shall submit a certificate of
financial status and give a statement on its financial condition and financial status of their
spouse to the court. The certificate of financial status is issued by the Tax Administration of
the Ministry of Finance (Article 13).

        It is interesting that this provision clearly specifies the competent authority which
prescribes the conditions and issues such certificate, unlike the law in Serbia, where such the
competent authority is not clearly defined (which implies that the person in Serbia may have
to obtain different certificates from different state bodies). In making the decision to waive
the fees, the court considers all circumstances, particularly the value of the dispute, number
of persons maintained by the applicant, and the income of the party and members of his/her
household.

        As in Serbia, exemption from payment of fees in civil, non-contentious and criminal
proceedings, as well as in administrative disputes, is also applied in the enforcement of the
decision in these proceedings (Article 11), whereby exemption from payment of court fees in
non-contentious and enforcement proceedings applies in civil proceedings incurred during
and in relation to these proceedings. According to Article 12, the decision on exemption from
payment of court fees applies from the day the motion for exemption was submitted to the
court and applies to all submissions and actions for which the obligation was created on that
day or later. Appeal against the decision to grant exemption from payment of court fees is not
allowed.

       The law defines the rules in the case when the party exempt from payment of court
fees wins the case, in which case the amount of such fees shall be borne by the other party
(not exempt from the payment of court fees), to the extent that the wining party succeeded in
the proceedings (Article 18). In the event of a settlement, the amount of court fees shall be
borne by the party that is not exempt from the payment of court fees, unless the parties agree
otherwise. In accordance with the law (Article 19), the court shall maintain a list of court fees
to be paid, and shall issue the order for the payment of fees upon completion of the
proceedings to the party who that obliged to pay court fees.

         When considering the exemption from payment of court fees in Croatia, it is
important to bear in mind that this mechanism is also possible on the basis of the granted free
legal aid. In Croatia, the exemption from payment of court fees and exemption from payment
of litigation costs are recognized as separate forms of free legal aid. Moreover, the approval



                                                                                              15 
of the secondary legal aid includes exemption from payment of court fees and exemption
from payment of litigation costs.



Montenegro


        Law on Court Fees20 of the Republic of Montenegro establishes the basic rules in this
field. As in other countries in the region, the revenues generated from court fees also
represent income of the state budget.

        The amount of fees for proceedings before a court in Montenegro is prescribed in a
range from 20 EUR up to 750 EUR, and 1,500 EUR before the commercial court.

        In accordance with Article 8, certain subjects are exempt from payment of court fees
ex lege:

        Republic, state bodies and public institutions;
        local self-government bodies;
        humanitarian organizations;
        persons involved in the process of exercising rights from labor, or civil servant
         relations;
        dependents in the process of legal support;
        plaintiffs in court proceedings for the recognition of motherhood and fatherhood;
        plaintiffs in disputes over preserving and educating children;
        spouse, child or parent of a missing person in the process of declaration of missing
         person deceased and proof of death.

        Foreign countries and citizens are exempt from paying court fees only if so provided
by international treaty or subject to reciprocity.

        In addition to the mandatory exemption from payment of court fees, under Article 9
the court may exempt a party from payment of court fees, if the payment of court fees would
significantly impair the resources for maintenance of that person and his/her family. The
provisions of the Civil Procedure Code on exemption from payment of the costs of the
proceedings apply with regard to the exemption from court fees. Hence, the law does not
prescribe precise rules but refers to the rules of civil proceedings. These rules are almost
identical to the rules in Serbian Law on Civil Procedure Code presented above. In this way,
citizens are not sufficiently informed in advance about the expected costs of the court
proceedings or method for exemption from payment of these costs.



20
  Law was published at the "Official Gazette RCG", no. 76/2005. See: Decision CC RCG no. 5/06, 8/06, 10/06,
19/06, 24/06, 39/06 and 110/06 - 39/2007-7. See: Art 7. Law - 40/2010-5
http://www.pravda.gov.me/biblioteka/zakoni?pagerIndex=2


                                                                                                         16 
         Similarly as in other countries in the region, a party claiming exemption must submit
a certificate of financial status, not older than six months. However, the Montenegrin law, as
well as Croatian, specifies that the certificate of financial status is issued by the
administration in charge of income in the place of residence of a party. Certificate on
financial status contains data on the amount of income of the party and members of his/her
household, as well as on other sources of income and general financial situation of the party.
The income does not include earnings from disability insurance, material security, education,
nutrition, social assistance and child allowance (Article 11 and 12). The court decide upon
the request (motion) for exemption from payment of court fees. Appeal is not allowed against
the decision granting the motion (Article 13).

        As in Serbia and Croatia, exemption from payment of court fees granted in civil, non-
contentious and criminal proceedings by private prosecution, as well as in administrative
dispute, applies in the process of enforcement of the decisions in these proceedings. Court
keeps a list of unpaid taxes that were supposed to be paid by persons exempted from paying
taxes. List of unpaid taxes is concluded with the completion of the proceedings, and a the
order for the payment of court fees is forwarded to the party bound to pay court fees
immediately upon completion of the proceedings.

        The Law on Court Fees previously stipulated that if the party did not pay the court fee
after an order and warning issued by the court, the submission would not be taken into
consideration (Article 4, paragraph 4) and that if the party did not pay the prescribed fee for
the court decision after an order and warning issued by the court, the verdict would not be
delivered to that party, without prior to presentation of the proof that the court fees have been
paid in full (Article 5 § 2). However, these provisions were challenged before the
Constitutional court of Montenegro and the Court found that such rules limit the principle of
Article 17 of the Constitution, which stipulates that everyone is entitled to equal protection of
his freedoms and rights in due process and that everyone is guaranteed the right to appeal.

        The cited provisions of the Constitution show that the Republic is solely authorized to
regulate the method of exercising the rights and freedoms, necessary for their
implementation, but is not authorized to restrict the constitutionally guaranteed rights by a
law. As the challenged provisions of the Law imposed a condition for the exercise of such
rights, providing that payment of the court fee represents a procedural precondition for the
court to take action, the Constitutional Court held that these provisions are not in conformity
with the Constitution of the Republic of Montenegro.

       Although there are many similarities in the legislative framework, it is necessary to
also bear in mind that the Law on Free Legal Aid is in full implementation in Montenegro.
Free legal aid can be granted in the form of exemption from payment of costs of the
proceedings before the courts, especially in the form of exemption from payment of court
fees. Moreover, the law in Montenegro specifies which earnings will not be counted as
income, thus additionally protecting the most vulnerable citizens. These differences represent
an additional guarantee of equal access to justice for citizens with lower income.



                                                                                              17 
Slovenia


        In the Republic of Slovenia, the field of court fees is regulated by the Law on Court
Fees21. There are different types of costs in the proceedings. Fixed costs for parties in civil
and criminal proceedings include: court fees, attorneys' fees (which depend on the number of
hearings), expert witness fees, fees for translators and interpreters, as well as travel expenses.
Court fees are usually paid on the initiation of proceedings. In some cases, fees are paid when
the court imposes a decision (e.g. disputes in the field of social protection at first instance,
land registry, proceedings concerning first instance decision on compensation for
damages).In inheritance proceedings, the fee is paid at the end of the process, when the
property is accurately determined. If the client requires the presentation of evidence (expert
or witness), or the services of an interpreter or translator, the costs are paid in advance.
Lawyer's fee is paid after the court issues an order on the costs of the proceedings, although
lawyers can request that a portion or the entire amount of the fee is paid in advance, which is
a common practice.
        However, it is worth noting that in Slovenia, unlike solutions in force in Serbia,
Montenegro and Croatia, the maximum amount of court fees in civil and some other types of
cases is not limited, and depends on the value of the dispute. Specific value is calculated
based on the value of the claim multiplied by certain coefficients, so, for example, in the case
of a dispute with a value of 30 million EUR, the court fee would be as much as 60,975 EUR22
(see the attached table of court fees in Slovenia, Annex 3).

       In criminal proceedings, court fees and other costs are usually paid after the court has
issued a final decision or after the court subsequently issued a separate decision on the costs
of the proceedings which cannot be appealed. Lawyer's fee is usually paid after the court
decision on the costs of the proceedings. In proceedings before the Constitutional Court there
are no court fees. Other expenses (such as attorney's fees and travel costs) constitute part of
each party's own expenses.

        The cost of the proceedings may be covered through free legal aid. Slovenia has
adopted and implements the Law on Free Legal Aid. The law stipulates eligible beneficiaries
who can be granted free legal aid and determines the precise criteria for potential
beneficiaries. The criteria include the financial resources of the applicant. Legal aid will be
granted to an applicant who, taking into account his financial position and financial position
of his family, cannot bear the costs of the proceedings without worsening his social status and
the status of his family. The law specifies what is considered a worsening of one's social
status. The district court president and president of the Administrative Court shall decide
upon the request for granting free legal aid.


21
     Law on Court Fees (Zаkоn о sоdnih tаksаh, Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia 37/2008)
22
     http://www.mp.gov.si/fileadmin/mp.gov.si/pageuploads/mp.gov.si/zakonodaja/Sodne_takse_16_clen.pdf

                                                                                                         18 
        However, exemption from payment of court fees is not covered by the law on free
legal aid. Outside the area of criminal law, the scope of free legal aid does not include
exemption from payment of court fees. Court fee waivers are possible in special cases, for
example in the field of labor law and/or social rights. Legal aid may include compensation of
a consultant or technical expert with required court expertise. At the same time, free legal aid
may be granted outside judicial proceedings in order to prevent proceedings before court
(alternative dispute resolution). According to the CEPEJ report 201423, Slovenia recorded a
decrease in revenue from court fees of approximately 8% (in terms of percentage of the court
budget), which is associated with a reduction of over 20% in the number of court cases in
2010 – 2012.




23
     CEPEJ 2014 http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/cooperation/cepej/evaluation/2014/Rapport_2014_en.pdf


                                                                                                  19 
Court fees & financial factors in the region

        A review of the provisions of the presented laws on court fees of the states in the
region indicates that there is a very similar approach in determining the amount of court fees.
Each of the laws includes a Tariff and almost identical methodology is utilized to specify the
amount of court fees by the type of the proceedings, value of the dispute, etc, as well as cases
when part of the fee is paid.

        Comparative review of these payment amounts indicates that the amounts of fees,
with some differences, are actually very similar. The parameters used are also nearly
identical, and usually depend on the value of the dispute.

       For example, in Serbia, for the civil and enforcement proceedings, under the Tariff
number 1, it is stipulated that for the claim and counterclaim submitted before a court of
general jurisdiction, court fee shall be paid in line with the value of the dispute:

- for the value up to 10,000 dinars (about 82 €) - 1,900 dinars (15 €);

- for the value of 10,000 to 100,000 dinars (from 82 to 812 €) - 1,900 dinars (15 €) plus 4% of
the value of the dispute;

 - for the value of 100,000 to 500,000 dinars (of 812 - 4,000 €) - 9,800 dinars (80 €) plus 2%
of the value of the dispute;

 - for the value over 500,000 to 1,000,000 (4,000- € 8,000) - 29,300 dinars (240 €) plus 1%
of the value of the dispute;

 - for the value over 1,000,000 (8000 €) - 48,800 dinars (€ 400) plus 0.5% of the value of the
dispute, and not more than 97,500 dinars (790 €).

       Similarly, in Montenegro, for the civil and enforcement proceedings, under Tariff
number 1, it is stipulated that for the claim and counterclaim court fee shall be paid in line
with the value of the dispute:

         - for the value up to 500 € - court fee 20 €;

         - for the value over 500 € to 5,000 € - court fee 20 € and 2% on the difference above
500 €;

       - for the value over 5,000 € - court fee 110 € and 1% on the difference above € 5,000
but not more than 750 € before a court of general jurisdiction, that is not more than 1,500 €
before commercial court.




                                                                                             20 
        In the Republic of Croatia, the Tariff provides that for the claim and counterclaim,
court fee shall be paid in line with the value of the dispute24:

from                               to                               court fee (in Croatian kuna)
 0.00                              3,000                            100
3,000                              6,000                            200
6,000                              9,000                            300
9,000                              12,000                           400
12,000                             15,000                           500
Over 15,000 kuna the fee shall be paid in the amount of 500 kuna plus 1% on the amount over 15,000
kuna, but not more than 5.000

        As already noted, from among all the surveyed countries, only in the Republic of
Slovenia the maximum level of court fees is not limited but depends entirely on the value of
the dispute25.

       All regulations in the countries included in the analysis provide that when the spouses
seek divorce by mutual agreement, only a single court fee shall be paid for the lawsuit.

       In Serbia, for the proposal to initiate proceedings in non-contentious matters not
covered by specific provisions on the payment of fees in certain types of non-contentious
proceedings, the court fee is 390 dinars (3 €). For an appeal against the decision of the first
instance court, court fee is 390 dinars (3 €). In Montenegro, initiation of proceedings in non-
contentious matters is 10 euros.

       For a court settlement, half of the prescribed fee is provided in Montenegro, Serbia,
Croatia, according to the value on which the parties have settled (half fee from the Tariff 1).

        In Serbia, for a lawsuit against an administrative act initiating the administrative
dispute, the court fee is 390 dinars (3 €), while in Croatia for the lawsuit in the first instance
administrative proceedings, if the value of the dispute is assessable, the court fee referred to
in Tariff no. 1 is paid, but not less than 200 kuna (3,309RSD / 26 €), and if the value of the
dispute cannot be assessed, court fee amounts to 500 kuna.

       In Serbia, for inheritance proceedings, Tariff number 7, stipulates that for the
proceedings in the first instance court fee is 1,000 to 75,000 dinars (8 € - 600 €). This fee is
payable only if the decision on inheritance is made. Court fee is paid when the inheritance
decision has become final, or within 15 days of the receipt of order for the payment of fees.
The Court determines the value relevant for determination of court fee at its discretion, based
on the statements of heirs and data submitted. The court fee is not paid for proposal to
conduct hearing and for other submissions during the inheritance proceedings.

        In Croatia, for inheritance proceedings, if the procedure is completed by a decision on
inheritance, lump-sum fee to be paid depends on the value of the legacy:

24
     100 kuna is 1654 RSD (13€), 3.000.000 kuna is 49.648 RSD, 6.000,00 kuna is99.297 RSD
25
     http://www.mp.gov.si/fileadmin/mp.gov.si/pageuploads/mp.gov.si/zakonodaja/Sodne_takse_16_clen.pdf

                                                                                                         21 
from                                 to                                 court fee (in Croatian kuna)
0                                    25,000                             100
25,000                               35,000                             150
35,000                               60,000                             200
If the value of inheritance is over 60,000 kuna, additional 200 kuna is paid plus 100 kuna on each
additional 10,000 kuna, but not more than 2,500 kuna

         In Montenegro, Tariff number 5, there is a fixed court fee for inheritance
proceedings according to the value of legacy:

- Up to 1,000 € - 20 €,

- More than 1,000 € to 5,000 € - 20 € and 1% on the difference above 1,000 €,

- Over 5,000 € - € 60 and € 0,5% on the difference above € 5,000 but not more than 300 €.

          In Serbia, the process of preparation and depositing a will in the court, Tariff
number 9, for the preparation of the court will and international will, as well as for keeping or
revoking the will before the court, the court fee is 980 dinars (8 €). The preparation and
deposit of court will in Montenegro, Tariff number 6, it is provided as follows: 1) for the
preparation of court will, the fee is 15 €; 2) for depositing the court will, the court fee is 10 €;
3) to revoke the court will the fee is 15 €.

        In Serbia, the process of verification of signatures, handwritings, transcription and
translation, Tariff number 13, for application, oral or written, requesting verification of
signatures, manuscripts and transcripts, court fee is 70 dinars (0.56 €); for: 1. verification of
signatures, and handwriting, 2. court interpreter certification of signatures on translations for
their use in the country, 3. verification of handwriting, for each page of manuscripts A4, 4.
verification of transcripts or copies of each page, court fee is 160 dinars (1.30 €); while court
fee is 490 dinars (4 €) for: 1. the verification of signatures on translations, court interpreter
for their use abroad, 2. the verification of signatures on the power of attorney. In Montenegro,
the equivalent actions cost 1 €, 2 € and 5 €.

       For criminal proceedings brought privately, the Tariff No. 26, for a private lawsuit
and countersuit in Serbia, court fee is 980 dinars (8 €), while a request for retrial amounts for
590 dinars (4.80€). For the same actions in Montenegro, court fee is 25€ in both cases, while
in Croatia for a private lawsuit and countersuit it is necessary to allocate 250.00 kuna (33 €).

        The presented data indicate that there are slight differences in the amount of court fees
among the states included in the analysis - while in some cases the amounts are almost
identical, sometimes there are significant differences. The Tariff in the Republic of Serbia in
some cases has lower amounts than other countries, while in other cases it is somewhat
higher. However, what is different is the level of precision of legal provisions. Thus, it
appears that Serbian law lacks sufficient clarity in terms of the amount of court fees, which
can create legal uncertainty, because citizens cannot know what to expect, or may leave a too



                                                                                                       22 
wide range of the amount of court fees (e.g. from 1,000 RSD to 75,000 RSD in the
inheritance proceedings).

In euro (€)             Serbia               Croatia            Montenegro            Slovenia

The lawsuit, an         15 - 790             13 - 660              20 - 750            Min: 17
appeal in civil
                       (economy                                   (economy             Max no
proceedings
                         3.200)                                     1.500)           limitations

Review                                                                                Min: 17
                         200%                 200%                  100%               Max no
                                                                                     limitations

Court settlement          50%            (not paid in first          50%              Min: 17
                                             instance
                                           proceedings)                                Max no
                                                                                     limitations
                                               50%

Administrative        Lawsuit - 3            26 - 660              25 - 65              146
dispute
                     Decision - 16

Inheritance             8 - 620              13 - 330              20 - 300              45
proceedings

Criminal
proceedings by
private action             8                    33                    25                120

Verifications             0.2                  0.66                  1-3                 0.2
                       (per page)           (per page)               (per            (per page)
                                                                 verification)



        When these amounts of certain court fees in the countries covered by this report are
analyzed, it is important to consider other economic indicators as well, in order to assess the
actual burden for citizens. Among the countries in the region, Croatia has the highest GDP
per capita in purchasing power standard, which is 58% of the EU average, while Montenegro
is in second place at the level of 41% of the EU average. Macedonia and Serbia are at the
level of 37% and 36% of the European average, Albania at 30%, while Bosnia and
Herzegovina at the level of 29% of the European average.

        According to data from the Statistics Institute of Montenegro, in 2015 the average net
salary was 480€. Monthly average users of financial support for 2015, according to the type
of support were:

   o material support was used by 11. 463 families and 36.986 family members

                                                                                               23 
     o the right to personal disability support was used by 2 033 persons

     o the right to care and help was used by 11.439 persons.



           Comparison shows that Montenegro with 620.000 inhabitants, has an
unemployment rate of 13.48 and average gross income of employees of 727€, net 480€, with
the minimum consumer basket of 808.6 EUR per month.26 Serbia, with the population of 11.7
million inhabitants, has an unemployment rate of 19.2% with an average gross income of
employees 564.71€, net 372 €, with a consumer basket of 558€. Recent data show that the
average net salary paid out in Serbia in March 2016 amounted to 45,870 dinars, or € 37227.
According to the abovementioned data of the Team for Social Inclusion and Poverty
Reduction of the Government of the Republic of Serbia, 628.000 people are considered poor,
while about 700,000 people receive social assistance.

            Croatia has 4,238,000 inhabitants, with a total of 1,342,000 employed, while the
registered unemployment rate in 2016 amounted to 14.4%. The average monthly net salary
per employee in legal entities of the Republic of Croatia in 2016 amounted to 5 633 kuna
(about 700 €). Data on the threshold of risk of poverty shows that 29.3% of people are at risk
of poverty or social exclusion.

             In Slovenia, with population of 2.062.874, in the period 2013–2015, the
employment rate increased from 68.2 % to 70.2 % and the unemployment rate decreased
from 9.4 % to 8.6 % 28. In August 2015, the number of registered unemployed decreased to
less than 90 000 (from the peak of 150 000 in 2009). The relative level and the number of
recipients of the minimum wage are decreasing. In 2015, the minimum gross wage for a full-
time worker amounted to EUR 790.73. In January 2016, the nominal minimum wage did not
increase. At the same time, the number of minimum wage recipients decreased substantially
in 2015. The number of people at risk of poverty and social exclusion stabilized in 2014 for
the first time after the crisis, despite a small increase in the poverty threshold. The rate
remained at 20.4 %, with income poverty risk (at risk of poverty rate) below the EU average
(24.4 %). The at risk of poverty rate decreased slightly for some of the most vulnerable
groups (unemployed and single households, aged over 65) partly due to the changes to social
legislation in 2013.

        These data show that the countries included in the analysis differ from Serbia in terms
of population, GDP, average wages and the number of unemployed persons and persons at
risk of poverty. At the same time, it shows that the amount of court fees does not vary
significantly, with certain exemptions in specific types of proceedings and maximum court
fees in Slovenia.

26
   http://www.vijesti.me/forum/realnost-crna-gora-vs-srbija-846865
27
   http://www.novosti.rs/vesti/naslovna/ekonomija/aktuelno.239.html:602328-Prosecna-zarada-u-Srbiji-u-martu-
45870-dinara
28
   http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/eu/countries/slovenia_en.htm


                                                                                                          24 
                         Serbia              Croatia            Montenegro            Slovenia
Population              7.110.000           4.238.000             620.000             2.062.874

GDP per capita 

                       5.720 EUR           12.600 EUR            6.390 EUR           20.960 EUR
Average income          372EUR               740 EUR              480 EUR            1.004 EUR
(2015)

Consumer basket           558€               820 EUR              770 EUR                  /

Population below         628.000              18.5%                 8.3%                14.5%
poverty line


Unemployment              19,2%               14,4%               13,50%                8,6%
rate



            However, what is important for this analysis is that these countries have clearly
prescribed legal provisions determining which persons can be exempt from payment of court
fees (vulnerable groups, the poorest segments of the population, etc.). In this sense, it can be
concluded that any reform of the system of court fees in Serbia does not need to concentrate
on amending the amounts of the prescribed fees, since they are generally consistent with the
amounts of fees prescribed in other similar countries in the region, but it is necessary to lay
down precise rules on the exemption from payment of court fees in order to ensure better
access to justice for all citizens. The recommendations are further elaborated in the last
chapter of this analysis.




                                                                                               25 
Implementation of the provisions on exemption from payment of
court fees in the Republic of Serbia
Problems identified in practice


        Although the legislative framework provides various possibilities for exemption from
court fees, there are a number of problems in practice. The lack of consolidated data on the
implementation of the court fee waiver rules further complicates the assessment of this
mechanism in practice. Except for the amount of court fees, the parties often point to unequal
treatment by the courts, and the lack of information as the key problems experienced29. When
deciding on the waiver requests in the proceedings, the court will assess all the circumstances
of the case, in particular taking into account the value of the dispute, number of persons
maintained by the party, income and assets of the party and the members of his/her family. If
a person applies for exemption from payment of court fees, it is necessary to submit a variety
of evidence (income level certificate, evidence of unemployment, evidence of property
ownership, payment of property taxes, number of under aged children, minimum wage, etc.),
and the court will assess all the circumstances of the present case. Also, absence of timely
information often creates problems regarding the deadline for submitting the request for
exemption. The parties are often not warned that they could seek exemption from court fees
and if the request is made too late the court usually rejects the waiver request. More details on
the practice of courts are presented in the analysis of the results of the questionnaire on court
practice when considering court fee waiver requests (see page 34, and Annex 1).

        The first Commissioner for the Protection of Equality, Nevena Petrusic, believes that
it is necessary to enable indigent citizens to be exempt from payment of court fees, prior
payment of costs for taking evidence, special expertise, translation costs and other costs that
are necessary for the exercise of legal protection. As Petrusic pointed out: "Essential equality
in access to justice implies, that proceedings before courts and other state bodies are simple,
transparent and affordable, that citizens have enough information on courts, judges, judicial
proceedings and decisions, on the location and methods to pursue and exercise the rights
guaranteed by the legal order"30.

        During the court proceedings, there are a number of expenses that may discourage
citizens from trying to protect their rights before court. In criminal proceedings, there are
costs for fees and necessary expenses of defense counsel, witnesses, expert witnesses,
interpreters, experts, site investigations, the costs of the defendant, the defendant's treatment
during the time spent in detention, the travel expenses of officials, etc. On the other hand, the
costs of litigation31 include attorneys’ fees and other persons to whom the law recognizes the

29
  CINS report, Available at: https://www.cins.rs/srpski/printer/article/227
30
  3/29/2016 Vreme - Milenijumskiciljeviposle 2015.: Pravda zasve http://www.vreme.com/cms/view.php?id=1267990&print=yes 2/3
31
  Whether it comes to divorce, debt repayment or dispute over the division of property, each party to the proceedings is faced with the
amounts to be paid, such as court fees, fees for lawyers, representation and drafting motions, as well as the presentation of evidence, ie, .
evidence and expert opinion

                                                                                                                                                26 
right to remuneration. The amounts that a party in the proceedings must pay depend on the
value of the dispute, including various submissions: claim, counterclaim, defense, proposal
for a provisional measure, decision on provisional measure, judgment, appeal, and a decision
on the appeal. Research shows that it often happens that citizens give up the proceedings,
bearing in mind that the total costs for the conduct of litigation exceed its value.32

       In addition to the Law on Court Fees, exemption from payment of court fees can be
based on other procedural laws.

        In civil proceedings, exemption from payment of the costs of the proceedings as well
as court fees is also possible, but in practice there are many problems in the implementation
of these provisions. Exemption from payment of litigation costs is regulated by Article 168 of
the Civil Procedure Code33. The court shall exempt the party from payment of the costs of
proceedings in case the party’s overall financial situation is such that he/she cannot able to
bear these costs. Exemption from payment of the costs of proceedings includes exemption
from payment of court fees and exemption from payment of the costs of witnesses, experts,
crime scene investigation and judicial announcements in advance. In doing so, the court may
exempt the party solely from payment of court fees in accordance with the special law. When
making a decision on the exemption from the payment of costs of the proceedings, the court
considers all the circumstances, particularly taking into account the value of the dispute, the
number of persons maintained by the party, the income and assets of the party and members
of her family.

        The Civil Procedure Code provides in Article 17034 that the court shall recognize the
right to free legal aid to the party when he/she is fully exempt from paying the costs of the
proceedings, if that is necessary to protect the rights of a party, or if it is prescribed by a
special law. Thus, the law links the recognition of the right to free legal aid to the outcome of
the decision on the exemption from the costs of proceedings, i.e. the right to free legal aid
receives a subsidiary character. This interpretation is also supported by arguments of
systemic interpretation of the provisions, given that free legal aid is located in another part of
the subchapter "Costs of proceedings", entitled "Exemption from payment of litigation costs”.
         The new Law on Mediation35, in force since January 1, 2015, stipulates in Article 31
that if a settlement in mediation is reached after the start of the court proceedings, but before
the end of the first main court hearing, the parties may be exempt from payment of court or
administrative fees, in accordance with the law determining court or administrative fees.
Although this provision was intended as an incentive for the parties to attempt out of court
settlement, so far there has not been a single recorded case of the exemption from the
payment of court fees, based on the settlement in mediation. Main reason for this is
inconformity of the Law on Court Fees with Article 31 of the Law on Mediation.
         The decision on the exemption from payment of the costs of proceedings is made by
the first instance court at the request (motion) of a party. However, the law does not prescribe
32
  CINS report, Available at: https://www.cins.rs/srpski/printer/article/227
33
  Civil Procedure Code, Official Gazette RS, no. 72/11 49/13 – CC, 74/13 – CC and 55/14, Art. 168.
34
  Civil Procedure Code, Official Gazette RS, no.72/11 49/13 – CC, 74/13 – CC and 55/14, Art.. 170.
35
     http://www.paragraf.rs/propisi/zakon_o_posredovanju_u_resavanju_sporova.html

                                                                                                     27 
the deadline within which the court shall decide on the motion for the exemption from the
costs of the proceedings. In this sense, there is a legal uncertainty for the party which has
submitted a proposal as to whether and when the party will be assigned free legal counsel
(and whether it will be exempt from the payment of costs). The character of this provision
prevents the party to obtain free legal representation at the time of filing a lawsuit, the quality
of which will largely influence the outcome of the proceedings. Also, the party is not
informed in advance within which deadline the court will issue a decision on the application
for exemption from payment of costs (and court fees), prolonging in this way the uncertainty
even after the submission of such a request.
        From the practice of functioning of the free legal aid system in civil proceedings, a
very few conclusions can be drawn, since this system still does not actually function in
practice. Earlier studies36 indicate that, for example, before the First basic court in Belgrade,
from the start of implementation of the Civil Procedure Code on 1 February 2012 until 2014
there was not a single request for assignment of free legal counsel. Bearing in mind that
socio-economic data illustrate that there is a great need for this kind of assistance, it seems
that it is not sufficiently known to the parties of the proceedings, or that its subsidiary
character contributed to the very seldom use of this opportunity. Also, the absence of clear
provisions as to whether the proposal for the assignment of a free legal counsel can be placed
simultaneously with the proposal for exemption from court costs, creates additional legal
uncertainty. Submitting proposals with two different motions seems logical, but uncertainty
arises from the legal solutions which prescribe no deadline for deciding upon the motion for
exemption of court costs (Article 169), while for the request to assign a free counsel there is a
deadline of 8 days for the decision of the court (Article 170).
        Similar problems exist in the criminal proceedings; except in cases of mandatory
defense, it is also possible to assign free legal counsel to a defendant who cannot pay the fees
and expenses of the defense counsel due to his financial status, at his request, only in criminal
proceedings for a criminal offense which is punishable by imprisonment of more than three
years or if it is required for reasons of fairness37. Ex officio lawyer may be appointed to
represent indigent citizens, but there are problems regarding the mechanisms by which they
are elected and the absence of any quality control. This feature is also very rarely used in
practice and there is no available data on the number of persons who were assigned free
defense counsel on the basis of Article 77 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
        Bearing in mind the presented solutions and practices in Serbia, it is inevitable
conclusion that there is a need for comprehensive amendments to the legal framework and the
court practice in this field. In this regard, it is important to note that the UN Commissioner
for Human Rights stated38 that "the imposition of court fees to the parties that would de facto
prevent their access to justice can lead to problems in the application of Article 14, Para 139.
In particular, solid legal obligation that the costs are to be borne by the party who wins the
dispute, without considering the implications of the such solution or without providing legal

36
 http://www.secons.net/admin/app/webroot/files/publications/Pristuppravdi.pdf
37
   Criminal Procedure Code, Official Gazette RS, no. 72/11, 101/11, 121/12, 32/13, 45/13 and 55/14, Art. 77
38
   UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 32 (n. 7), paragraph 11
39
   N.b. EU Convention on Human Rights

                                                                                                              28 
aid, may have the effect of deterring persons from seeking protection of their rights under the
Covenant in proceedings available to them”. Similarly, the European Court of Human Rights
has taken the view that court fees to be paid before initiation of the proceedings should not
constitute such a financial burden which essentially prevents or discourages individuals from
exercising their right to a remedy40. However, the imposition of high court fees and high legal
costs will not necessarily lead to a finding of a violation of the right to a fair trial (Article 6 of
the European Convention), but the overall assessment depends on the specific circumstances
of the case.

         Functional Review41, performed by the World Bank, indicates that the financial
accessibility of judicial services is one of the most serious barriers to access to courts in
Serbia. Solving even the simplest case is financially inaccessible to many. According to the
analysis: "Citizens do their best to avoid the courts: almost 63% of the general population say
that if they have a dispute they believe should be resolved in court, they will still try to avoid
the court; fear of the cost entails one of the most common obstacles. More than half of
interviewed users of court services deemed that legal costs in their case were excessive42”.

        Analyses of socio-economic status of citizens indicate that there is a large number of
poor people and those at risk of poverty. According to data from the last publication of the
Team for Social Inclusion and Poverty Reduction43, the poverty rate in Serbia in 2014 was
8.9%, which means that the consumption of such per cent of the population was below the
poverty line (11,340 dinars per month for the equivalent adult). The above 8.9% means that
628.000 people are considered poor. In the total number of poor citizens, the younger
generation (under 24 years) accounted for 31.8% and 68.2% of the elderly. Such low
participation of the younger generation, where the poverty rate is higher, is explained by the
unfavorable demographic processes in Serbia. In 2014, poverty has remained at
approximately the same level as the previous year - 8.9% versus 8.6% (similar the data can be
expected for 2015).

        According to the Household Budget Survey conducted by the Team for Social
Inclusion and Poverty Reduction, there were a total of 627.000 poor citizens in Serbia, and
the most affected by poverty were members of larger households, the unemployed, the
inactive (excluding pensioners) and unskilled citizens and residents of the East/South East
Serbia. Poverty data can be viewed by the geographical factors, where particular attention
needs to be paid to the socio-economic situation in certain municipalities which are classified
in the III and IV group of underdeveloped municipalities in accordance with the provisions of
the Law on Regional Development. Along with this data, different vulnerable/marginalized
groups, socially excluded citizens and particularly vulnerable groups should also be taken
into account, which additionally indicates the degree of poverty.

40
   ECtHR, Scordino v. Italy, No. 36813/97, 29 March 2006, paragraph 201. In this context, see also ECtHR,
Perdigão v. Portugal, No. 24768/06, 16 November 2010, in which it was held by the ECtHR Grand Chamber
that forcing the applicant to pay court fees that were higher than the compensation awarded breached
Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the ECHR
41
   Functional Review http://www.mdtfjss.org.rs/sr/srbija-funkcionalna-analiza-pravosudja#.VxiOFdR97cs
42
   Id
43
   Team for Social Inclusion and Poverty Reduction, Poverty in Serbia in 2014“

                                                                                                            29 
Table: Poverty per regions in Serbia, 2014.

                                            Number of
                                               poor,            Degree of poverty, in %
                                              in 000
 Serbia                                         627                          8,9
 Vojvodina                                      149                          7,8
 Belgrade                                       77                           4,7
 Central Serbia without
                                                 402                         11,4
 Belgrade
 Šumadija, west Serbia                           154                         7,6
 South East Serbia, East
                                                 248                         16,4
 Serbia

Source: SIPRU report 2014, based on data of the Republic Statistics Institute


        In fact, taking into account this data, as well as the average salary in Serbia, the level
of court fees and fees for lawyers seem unattainable for a large number of citizens. For
example, in the Tariff which forms an integral part of the Law on Court Fees, it is stipulated
that the value of the dispute used to calculate court fees for disputes on determination of the
validity of marriage, annulment of marriage or divorce, the court fee is 19,000 dinars (154
euro). In case such a dispute also involves the exercise of parental rights (which is usually the
case), only a single court fee is paid. In this case, the fee for the lawsuit and the judgment of
divorce is 2,660 RSD (22 euro), in total 5.320 RSD (43euro).

        However, these are not the only costs that may arise in the context of these
proceedings, given that parties often hire lawyers. If the cost of a lawyer is added to this
amount in line with the Bar Association Tariff44, the preparation of submissions for divorce
will cost 16,500 RSD (134 euro), while access to the hearings in case of amicable divorce is
18,000 RSD (146 euro). When it is not a consensual divorce, additional hearings, delayed
hearings, reviewing records and the like should also be added. If the need for protection from
domestic violence is taken into account, the costs increase further; while according to the
Autonomous Women's Center, most of their clients cannot bear these costs. Hiring an
attorney for drafting submissions for protective measures is 7,500 RSD (61euro), while for a
hearing on protection measures it is necessary to allocate 8,750 RSD (71 euro). Furthermore,
according to the Bar Tariff, submission/brief for the exercise of parental rights costs
11,250RSD (92euro), hearing is 12,750RSD (104 euro), postponed hearing 7.125RSD (58
euro) and appeal is 22,500RSD (167euro). It is similar in other cases, so for services of a
lawyer in disputes on obstruction of possession, invaluable labor disputes, other offenses,
land registry - priceless objects, administrative proceedings (Law on Administrative
Procedure or the Family Law), for entry into the Business Registry, it is necessary to allocate
16,500RSD (134 euro) for submission, 18,000RSD (146 euro) for the hearing, postponed
hearing 9,750 RSD (80 euro) and 33,000 RSD (268 euro) for an appeal.
44
     Bar Association Tariff, table of fees with each hour, on force as of March 6 2014.

                                                                                               30 
        In fairness, it should be noted that a general reduction in the buying power of citizens
brings into question such income of the lawyers and in practice, in most cases lawyers accept
significantly lower amounts for actions taken in the proceedings than those prescribed by the
Bar Tariff. However, in accordance with the rule that the winner in court proceedings is
entitled to recover the costs from the other side, the amounts anticipated in the Bar Tariff are
regularly taken into account in calculating the cost at the end of the proceedings.

        In addition to the poorest citizens, who receive social assistance, it is clear that other
citizens also have a rather difficult access to court, if one takes into account the above Bar
Tariff and court fees. Also, it is necessary to take into account those citizens who do not fall
into the category of the most poor, but who would jeopardize their own maintenance or
support of family members if they would bear the costs of the proceedings. At the same time,
Functional Review45 states that the manner of presentation of the amount of court fees and
fees for lawyers is very complex, and the court users have difficulty to estimate the expected
costs. The fees of lawyers are determined on the basis of the Bar Tariff, which also contains
relatively high amounts for certain actions. As noted above, in practice it is known that the
lawyers' fees are largely unrealistic (although Tariff prohibits reduction for more than 50%),
and that lawyers often charge less than the prescribed minimum; however, the parties do not
have enough information, nor they can expect with certainly that in the particular case they
would pay reduced amount. Given that prescribing mandatory minimum tariffs is not in line
with European practice46, it is expected that within the EU accession process (through
changes under Chapter 3), Serbia will change the regulatory framework and eliminate this
practice.

        Although the amount of court fees and other costs, as noted, impairs access to justice
for many citizens, it should be noted that there is simultaneously an illogical limit of the
amount of court fees for cases of great value. Thus, the Tariff, in the tariff number 1 provides
that for a submission of a lawsuit and legal action in a dispute over the value of 1.000,000
RSD, the maximum court fee is 97,500 RSD. In other words, the maximum court fee applies
for dispute with a value of 80,000 €, as well as for the dispute with a value of 300.000 €, or
even 10 million EUR, or more, before a court of general jurisdiction. This implies a simple,
but rather difficult to understand, conclusion, hat the level of prescribed court fees actually
hinders access to justice for citizens who have disputes of a relatively small value, while
effectively encouraging litigation in cases that significantly the "average" value.
Unfortunately, this system is not favorable for the citizens of poor financial status, and rather
"subsidizes" litigation in high value cases. To be specific, similar restrictions in the maximum
amount of court fees also exist in Croatia and Montenegro, but not in Slovenia, where the
maximum amount of court fees depends on the value of the dispute (For Slovenia, see the
table in Annex 3).

       In that regard, it would be interesting to compare tha amount of court fees in Slovenia
and Serbia according to the value of the claim. As the following table shows, it is clear that
45
  Functional Review http://www.mdtfjss.org.rs/sr/srbija-funkcionalna-analiza-pravosudja#.VxiOFdR97cs
46
 The European Court of Justice found that mandatory minimum charge is a violation of the EU Treaty. Free
negotiations between lawyers and clients are possible in 42 of the 47 countries covered in the CEPEJ report

                                                                                                              31 
the court fees in Serbia are much higher in civil cases up to the value of 80,000 EUR , while
it is more expensive to litigate in high value cases in Slovenia.


                 Court fees per value of the claim
             Value of the claim (€)                Slovenia                         Serbia
                       300                             17                             27
                     1.200                             38                             104 
                     5.000                             80                             288
                     10.000                           125                             446
                     40.000                           265                             596
                     80.000                           439                             790
                    160.000                           800                             790
                    350.000                          1.475                            790
                    700.000                          2.375                            790
                   2.000.000                         4.975                            790
                  10.000.000                        20.975                            790
                  30.000.000                        60.975                            790



         As mentioned above, although the exemption from payment of court fees is possible,
it is inconsistent in practice, as it is applied differently from case to case. A small number of
citizens are informed about this possibility, often the information is inaccurate, and there is
no obligation of the court to familiarize parties with this right. As identified in the Functional
Review, the lack of guidelines, monitoring and standardized forms that would be used by
judges in case of exemption from payment of court fees47, result in limited awareness about
the availability of this option and inconsistent implementation of the right to access to justice
for indigent citizens.

        Bearing in mind the difficulties presented, there is a need for the collection of relevant
data on the implementation of this mechanism in practice, as well as activities aimed at
raising citizens' awareness of the availability of the possibilities for exemption from payment
of court fees (through brochures, provision of information in the courts, public campaigns,
etc.). Therefore, there is a need to improve practices, such as specifying the rules regarding
the possibility of exemption from payment of court fees, the availability of free legal advice
and pro bono services, the introduction of simplified procedures in which there is no
requirement of representation by a lawyer, as well as development and the general
availability of alternative, non-judicial means of dispute settlement, while ensuring that these
funds represent only a supplement to, not a substitute for adequate legal aid system, and that
there are appropriate safeguards to guarantee the protection of rights and effective
47
     Functional Review http://www.mdtfjss.org.rs/sr/srbija-funkcionalna-analiza-pravosudja#.VxiOFdR97cs

                                                                                                          32 
participation in the proceedings. Finally, it is essential for effective access to justice that there
is availability of accurate and sufficiently precise information. Bearing in mind the
possibilities of technology nowadays, it is possible, through free public service, to provide the
citizens information concerning laws, procedures, forms, documents on the official websites
of the courts48.

        In addition to adequate information, improvement of practices and effective
implementation of existing mechanisms, it seems that there is also a need to improve the
legislative framework. Thus, in order to overcome a part of the problems identified in the
current system of court fees, in the end of 2015, amendments to the Law on court fees were
adopted49. Most changes refer to court fees in the process of enforcement, as well as the
harmonization of the existence of the public notary.

        It is interesting that these changes acknowledge that there is an unjustified burden of
parties in enforcement proceedings. More specifically, according to the law that was in force
until amendments and supplements, it was scheduled to pay "double" court fee:

             o for the proposal for initiating enforcement proceedings (for the proposal for
               enforcement on the basis of enforcement/authentic instrument), and
             o for the decision to be taken on that proposal (enforcement decision on the
               basis of enforcement/authentic instrument, or decision rejecting or refusing
               enforcement proposal)


       As the legislator stated in the explanation of amendments to the law: "The payment of
both court fees is not justified, since there are practically no court actions undertaken
between the receipt of a proposal for enforcement (on the basis of enforcement or authentic
document) and decisions on the proposed actions, that would justify a fee for the court
decision”

       As it has been acknowledged that this solution generates undue costs for the party, the
payment of court fees for court decision on the proposal for enforcement on the basis of the
enforcement or the authentic instrument (enforcement decision on the basis of enforcement or
authentic document, or decision rejecting or refusing proposal for enforcement) was
abolished. Also, it was noted that the adoption of these decisions does not require special
material costs or intellectual activities. Thus, in accordance with Article 10, the fee shall not
be paid in the future for decisions brought by the court for enforcement on the basis of
enforcement or authentic document. In addition, the party pays an advance to the bailiff to
carry out the enforcement, which was also an unfair burden for the party in the previous legal
provisions. So, as the role of the court solely refers to making a decision on the proposal for
enforcement (on the basis of enforcement or authentic documents) and deciding on the legal

48
   Information may be available within the Ministry of Justice, Parliament, the Official Gazette, the portal of the
courts, etc.
49
   Law on Court Fees, Official Gazette RS, no. 28/94, 53/95, 16/97, 34/2001 –oth.law, 9/02, 29/04, 61/05, 116/08
–oth.law, 31/09, 101/11, 93/12, 93/14 and 106/15


                                                                                                                33 
remedies related to decisions brought by the court, while concurrently increasing the role of
bailiffs, such a solution required a reduction of court fees.

        Similarly, the legislator took into account the presence of the public notary system,
exempting the parties from a former “double” fee through amendments to the Law. Up to
these changes, the party was paying:

               o court fees (for actions that are entrusted to a notary public, which are therefore
                 not undertaken by the court), and simultaneously,
               o fee for a notary public.


       In accordance with the amendments to the Law, the parties in non-contentious
proceedings are exempted from payment of fees for the acts and actions entrusted to the
notary public by the court. In this way, costs of the proceedings are reduced and cost
duplication is prevented.

         However, it should also be noted, that the amendments to the Law on Court Fees
failed to recognize the existence of mediators, in addition to public notaries and enforcers,
hence the provision of the aforementioned Article 31 of the Law on Mediation, that the
parties may be exempt for the payment of court fees on the basis of a mediated agreement,
has still not been implemented in practice.

        In terms of other novelties, Article 1 of the Law changed the amount of value for
which the fee can be paid with revenue stamps of 1,000 dinars (according to the previously
applicable law) to 5,000 dinars. A rule is prescribed that up to 5,000 dinars the fee may, but
need not, be paid in the revenue stamps, while over 5,000 dinars it can be paid exclusively in
cash. The procedure of authorization of persons to sell revenue stamps has also changed, as
well as the procedure in which the authority is revoked (Article 7). Namely, according to the
previous solution, retail of revenue stamps was carried out by companies and other legal
entities; whereas the new solution stipulates that the future authorization for the sale of
revenue stamps shall be given by the Government on the proposal of the Minister of Justice.

        Apparently, there is a willingness of the legislator to correspond to the needs for
amendments to the legal framework dictated by reality. The above shows that it is necessary
to accurately identify the current problems that citizens face which arise from the existing
legislative framework and practices, in order to define concrete proposals for necessary
changes which would improve access to justice for citizens.

Analysis of the questionnaire on courts practice regarding the court fee
waiver requests50
       In order to collect concrete information on the implementation of the provisions on
exemption from payment of court fees in the Republic of Serbia, the survey was conducted
through a questionnaire in order to prepare a proposal for the reform of the court fee waiver

50
     Annex 1

                                                                                                34 
system. The questionnaire was delivered to the courts, judges and lawyers, as direct actors in
the court proceedings. The questionnaire was delivered to a total of 100 respondents, and
answers were received from the basic courts in Belgrade, Novi Sad, Kragujevac, Subotica,
Uzice, Zajecar, Sabac and Mladenovac, as well as lawyers from Belgrade, Nis and Novi Sad.
Based on the analysis of 63 received completed questionnaires, the following results have
been identified:

1. With regard to the question which categories of persons are usually exempt from
payment of court fees, the respondents provided the following answers: persons without
income or with low income, unemployed, beneficiaries of social welfare, pensioners, single
parents, persons without property

2. With regard to the question in which types of disputes the parties usually submit a
request for exemption from payment of court fees, the respondents provided the following
answers: labor disputes, family disputes, property disputes, payment claims, damages,
disturbance of possession, property rights disputes, disputes in criminal matters

3. With regard to the question what percentage of requests for exemption from payment
of court fees is approved by the court, the respondents provided the following answers
(other respondents did not answer this question)

                              10% - 15%           14 respondents

                                 20%                     3

                                 30%                     5

                                 40%                     6

                                 50%                    17

                                 60%                     4

                                 70%                     3

                                 80%                     1



4. With regard to the question what is the average amount of income of persons whose
requests for exemption from payment of court fees are approved, 18 respondents said
that this amount varies from 10,000 to 30,000 RSD, while 36 of respondents stated that these
are persons who have no income or at least do not have a steady income.

5. With regard to the question what were the criteria most frequently used by courts in
deciding upon request, the respondents provided the following answers: assets of a person
(whether an applicant has any assets), income, whether the income is permanent or



                                                                                           35 
temporary, what is the general financial situation of the applicant, how many dependents are
supported by the applicant, the age of the applicant.

6.  With regard to the question whether the persons belonging to vulnerable social groups
are automatically exempte from paying court fees, the respondents provided the following
answers: 36 respondents said that there is no automatic waiver, and 18 of them explicitly
stated categories, including the following groups of persons: minors, unemployed, dependent
persons, war veterans and children seeking child support, social welfare beneficiaries.

7. With regard to the question whether the parties are regularly informed of the
possibility of exemption from payment of court fees and whether such information is
provided by the courts or lawyers, the respondents provided a variety of different answers,
which implies that there is no clear and consistent practice by which judges act in this case.
The 20 respondents said that the court never informs the parties about the possibility of
exemption because there is no legal obligation to do so, 3 respondents stated that such notice
is given only in "justified" cases (?), whereas 15 responded stated that courts regularly
provides such information. 20 respondents stated that they have no knowledge. All lawyers
who completed the questionnaire claimed they regularly inform their clients about this right.




Chart 1: Are the parties regularly informed of the possibility of exemption from payment of
court fees?

8. With regard to the question which facts are taken into account when determining the
amount of court fee, the respondents provided the following answers: the value of the
dispute, the type of dispute, and the fee tariff prescribed by the Law on Court Fees, achieved
success in the litigation.

 9.Whether persons requesting exemption from payment of court fees are concurrently
free legal aid beneficiaries, from among the total number of respondents who completed the
questionnaire, the response YES was provided by 57 respondents.




                                                                                           36 
10. With regard to the question what amount of revenue from court fees was collected in
2015 and which percentage of revenue remained for the court, the respondents provided
the following answers: 33 respondents said that they have no information about these data, 15
of the respondents stated that according to their knowledge court does not keep any revenues
collected on this basis, whereas 5 respondents estimates that the overall amount of revenues
is about 20% to 40%. Basic Court in Kragujevac stated thatthe revenues collected fromcourt
fees in 2015 were 120.466.326,24RSD.


11. With regard to the question which state bodies usually providea certificate of financial
status to the parties, the respondents gave the following answers: Real Estate Cadaster,
National Employment Agency, Tax Administration, Republic Geodetic Institute, Center for
Social Work, the PIO (pension) Fund.


12.With regard to the question whether the provisions on exemption from payment of
court fees have an impact on access to court, the largest number of judges (35) responded
that they consider that such provisions have no impact or that they have no knowledge about
it. Those who have given affirmative answer to this question concurrently explained that the
amount of court fees and an obligations that they are paid, discourages many parties to
address the court and seek the protection of their rights.
         

       In the questionnaire, as well as during the presentation of the draft Analysis on 6
September 2016 in the Ministry of Justice, the participants provided additional information
and feedback highlighted below:

- Judges are of the opinion that more and more requests for exemption from court fees are
being filed, primarily in labor disputes, while one of the judges claimed that in every other
case one of the parties request exemption;

- At the same time some of the judges believe that not more than 10% of these requests is
actually approved; some judges feel that the motive for such low percentage is monitoring of
the collection of court fees by the Ministry of Justice, while others state that the Ministry
controls collection of fees in cases where there was no exeption;

                                                                                          37 
- Judges also state that the biggest obstacle for the parties is large number of documents that
the parties have to collect from different institutions, and for that reason they often fail to
obtain the exemption; furthermore, most of these documents carry their own fee, which
creates additional difficulties to indigent parties;

- Big problem for the court is absence of unified data bases; for example, litigants can bring a
certificate that he does not own any real estate property from one municipality, but he may
well own real property in another;

- In terms of the distribution of the collected from court fees, most of the participants stated
that they have no information or awareness if these funds are distributed according to the
40:20:40 formula;

- At the presentation of the draft Analysis, the participants supported the recommendation to
abolish limitation of court fees for the high value cases, as these additional funds could be
used for the fee exemption for indigent citizens;

- Answers from the questionnaire, as well as the feedback obtained during the presentation of
the draft Analysis, discussed the absence of consolidated and credible data about the revenue
collected from court fees; judges claimed that the fee goes directly to the budget, whereas the
court has to rely on the paper payment receipts, provided by the parties; hence, only the
accounting department can collect this information from the bank statements, while the total
amount of the collected court fees must be obtained manually, from case to case; some data
may be ascertained from the court annual reports submitted to the Supreme Court of
Cassation.




                                                                                             38 
Conclusions and recommendations


       Most of the EU countries and countries in the region use court fees to cover a part of
the operating costs of the courts. Revenue from court fees constitutes a revenue of the state
budget, which is further allocated within a particular country in many ways - whether
exclusively as a revenue of the state budget or in part as revenue for the budget of the court,
while some income exceeds the basic purposes and generates a surplus.

        As the countries in the region included in this analysis are of particular importance for
drawing conclusions and making recommendations to improve the system in the Republic of
Serbia, given the similar legal tradition and many common elements of the legal system, as
well as similar financial circumstances, the analysis of the regulations in these countries are
shown in more detail earlier in the text.

        Differences in the amount of court fees in the countries in the region arise from
differences in the financial situation of these countries and the income of citizens. However,
since the courts fees should not represent an obstacle to the access to justice, it is necessary to
align their rate with real possibilities and average income of citizens.



Preconditions for the reform of the system of court fees in the Republic of
Serbia


        Keeping the above facts in mind, when making decisions about the direction of the
reform of the system of court fees in the Republic of Serbia, it would be necessary to take the
following steps, and determine the information that may be of importance when deciding on a
strategy to reform the system of court fees:

      Determine precise data on the existing revenues generated from court fees

      Collect data on the average number of citizens who can fulfill the conditions for
       exemption from court fees

      Determine the amount required for the efficient functioning of courts, and if such
       income could otherwise be generated (for example, the introduction of court fees for
       groundless litigation, or removal of maximum amount of court fees)

      Assess the impact of the new Law on Free Legal Aid



                                                                                                39 
       The last precondition is of particular importance, given that it is necessary to
harmonize the conditions for exercising the right to free legal aid with the conditions for
exemption from payment of court fees. If a citizen realizes the right to free legal aid, it is
necessary to include in this right the exemption from payment of court fees as well. Impact
assessment of the implementation of this new law may provide useful information on the
average number of citizens who may qualify for the free legal aid and request exemption
from paying court fees. At the same time, some citizens may not be eligible for free legal aid,
due to a slightly better economic position, but they also could be covered by exemption from
payment of court fees, if that would facilitate their easier access to the court system.



Recommendations for the reform of the system of court fees in the
Republic of Serbia:


         Compared to countries in the region, Serbia has similar procedures when it comes to
the rules of exemption from payment of court fees. However, in terms of equal access to
justice, a more detailed analysis indicates that there are certain differences which may be
critical for the exercise of the right to access to justice for indigent citizens or other sensitive
(vulnerable) groups. Therefore, with an aim to improve the situation in this field, it is
necessary to undertake the following measures and steps:

    • The law should precisely regulate the conditions/criteria for exemption from
       payment of court fees and be aligned with the Law on Free Legal Aid

         Of particular importance for the analysis of the impact of court fees and potential
exemption from payment of court fees is the fact that states in the region have a developed
system of free legal aid. The availability of free legal aid greatly facilitates the position of
individuals if they want to protect their rights in court proceedings. In some states, exemption
from payment of court fees is one of the forms of free legal aid (Croatia, Montenegro), while
in others it entails an additional form of support (Slovenia). Moreover, it is possible to obtain
partial exemption from payment of costs of proceedings and/or court fees. This approach is
very much different from the current normative framework in the Republic of Serbia, in
terms of provision of support to various groups of citizens in their access to court. Therefore,
it is necessary to consider how Serbian legislation and practice could be improved in order to
create a wider range of options for facilitating access to justice, through the total or partial
exemption from payment of court fees.

   • Conditions for exemption from payment of court fees must be known in advance to
       the citizens (improve the website of the courts, enable access to information through
       the portal of courts, distribute brochures);

The availability of information is also an important factor. The review of the legislative
framework in the Republic of Serbia indicates that citizens have very limited access to
information before the start of the proceedings, and must rely on the advice of an attorney (if

                                                                                                 40 
they have the funds to hire one). Courts in the Republic of Serbia have not sufficiently
developed the system of providing information in a comprehensive manner, through which
the citizens would be able to inform themselves in advance about the expected costs of the
proceedings and options for exemption from court fees, conditions and practice. Although the
tariff represents a part of the law on court fees, clients can hardly understand what the total
amount that awaits them is. It is necessary that citizens know in advance the expected amount
of fees, as opposed to the court’s free assessment and the wide range of amounts of courts
fees.

    • Sensitive (vulnerable) social groups must be exhaustively listed in the law, as a
       category for ex lege exemption from payment of court fees

The analysis shows that countries in the region have determined a much wider category of
persons that may be exempted from paying court fees. This is also true in the case of ex lege
exemption and exemption upon request. The differences in ex lege exemption are of
particular importance, given that countries in the region (Croatia in the most comprehensive
way) clearly specify numerous sensitive (vulnerable) social groups, ensuring equal access to
justice for all citizens. In this context, the Republic of Serbia is currently implementing
National Judicial Reform Strategy, in order to, inter alia, increase the efficiency of the
proceedings. One of the measures of the accompanying Action Plan, also refers to the
"Defining and establishing criteria for determining the circle of persons who should be
exempted or pay reduced court fees and fines in misdemeanor and criminal cases due to their
difficult financial situation “.

     Align the rules on exemption from payment of court fees and costs of proceedings
      in Civil Procedure Code and other regulations

As mentioned above, this particularly refers to the subsidiary character of the right to free
legal aid arising from the Article 170 of the CPC, as well as to the absence of a deadline for
the courts’ decision upon proposal for exemption from the costs of proceedings. Also, Law
on Court Fees should be a aligned with Article 31 of the Law on Mediation.

     Introduce the obligation of the court to inform the parties of the possibility to
      demand exemption from payment of court fees (in the framework of the Letter of
      Rights, which will be produced and distributed in accordance with the Action plan for
      Chapter 23)

One of the main shortcomings of the system is the fact that the court is not obliged to inform
the party about the possibility of exemption from payment of court fees. As the factors taken
into account in the exemption from payment of court fees vary from case to case, the court
determines the total amount of taxes in each particular case in relation to a number of factors
(the value of the dispute, whether the party maintains minors, the income of the party, etc.), it
is very difficult to estimate the expected total amount. At the same time, the parties do not
know in advance whether they will be exempted from paying court fees, even if they obtain
all the necessary evidence on financial status, given that there are no binding guidelines, but
decision is made in each specific case.

                                                                                              41 
     Develop guidelines for the courts for the purpose of uniform application of the rules
      for exemption from payment of court fees

The responses obtained through the Questionnaire, as well as the results of the analysis,
indicate that the courts make decisions on exemption from payment of court fees on a case-
by-case basis, hence there is no clear practice which could be used to conclude with a higher
degree of certainty which costs should be expected and whether a party will be able to be
exempted. The so-called "special conditions" under which one will be exempted from
payment of court fees include the evaluation of the court in each case. It is therefore
necessary to determine precise guidelines and criteria unifying the practice of courts in the
field of exemption from payment of court fees.

     Consider the possibility of removing the maximum amount of court fees for high
      value cases

The maximum amount of court fees in Serbia (97,5000 RSD in courts of general jurisdiction)
does not enable easier access to justices for the most citizens, particularly those from
marginalized and vulnerable groups. On the contrary, it effectively encourages unreasonable
and unfounded litigation for high value disputes. Removal of this limitation would achieve
several results: Equal and fair distribution of financial burden through proportional payment
of court fees, discouragement of frivolous litigation in higher value cases, increase of judicial
efficiency through better allocation of court resources, support to development of alternative
methods of dispute resolution, and finally increased revenue in the court and state budget (in
case these cases are eventually heard in courts), that could be used for the wider use of the
court fee waivers among the indigent citizens.

     Precisely determine the authority competent for issuing the certificate of financial
      status

In the majority of countries included in the analysis, it is clearly stated which specific body
issues a certificate on financial status, while the Serbian Law solely mentions a "competent"
authority, implying a range of different administrative procedures by more competent
authorities. In this way, access to justice is additionally hindered for the citizens.
Furthermore, although in most countries covered by the analysis there is a similar rule of
periodical confirmation of the financial status, which requires updating of the certificate on 6
months or annual basis, the duration of the proceedings in the Republic of Serbia should also
be taken into account when determining this condition.

     Establish monitoring and control mechanism over the implementation of the rules
      on the exemption from court fees (annual report on the number of requests, approved
      request, etc.)

The monitoring over the implementation of the rules on the exemption from court fees is also
interesting. With a view to making recommendations, it is important to consider which body
would be responsible for the monitoring and control of the system. However, as the
appropriate ICT system is still under development in the Republic of Serbia, it is necessary to

                                                                                              42 
concurrently take into account that processing of this information in a comprehensive and
coherent manner cannot be simple, given the different databases and indicators in existing
information systems used by the courts. For example, the court AVP program for automated
case processing, has no possibility to monitor collection of court fees, or cases where the fee
is waived. It is also not possible to generate report on the total amount of fees
collected/exempt in any given court, hence this question should also be carefully considered
in the future.



       There is a clear need to improve the legal framework, as well as to specify the
conditions required for the exemption from payment of court fees. To achieve this, the
existence of relevant statistical data on the implementation of this mechanism in practice are
necessary, as well as undertaking activities aimed at strengthening citizens' awareness of the
availability of possibilities for waiver of court fees (through brochures, the provision of
information in the courts, public campaigns, etc.).

        This also implies a need for the availability of free legal advice and pro bono services,
the introduction of simplified procedures in which there is no requirement of legal
representation, as well as the development and wider availability of alternative, non-judicial
means of dispute settlement, for the citizens, always ensuring that these possibilities
represent a supplement, and not a substitute for adequate legal aid system, and that there are
adequate safeguards to guarantee the protection of citizens rights and effective participation
in the proceedings. Finally, the availability of accurate and sufficiently precise information is
essential for effective access to justice. Bearing in mind the possibilities of technology today,
through free public service it is possible to provide the citizens information concerning laws,
procedures, forms, documents on the official websites of the courts.

       This analysis, recommendations, and the basic guidelines for the reform of the system
of court fees are provided with the aim of assisting the achievement of strategic objectives
and priorities for improving efficiency and access to justice, through the exemption from
payment of court fees and the expected adoption of the new Law on Free Legal Aid. The
findings of this Analysis will be made available to the professional and general public, and
we welcome every question, comment, or suggestions that will contribute to the
improvement of the text and implementation of the conclusions, suggestions and
recommendations in practice. 




                                                                                              43 
Annexes
Questionnaire

  1. Can you specify the categories of persons who are usually exempted from paying
     court fees?

  2. In what types of cases the parties usually submit a request for exemption from
     payment of court fees?

  3. What percentage of requests for exemption from payment of court fees is, according
     to your judgment, is adopted by the court in which you work / before which you act?

  4. Can you indicate / estimate the average income of persons whose requestsfor
     exemption from payment of court fees are usually adopted?

  5. What are the key guidelines used by the court when deciding on the request for
     exemption from payment of court fees?

  6. Are there any categories of persons belonging to vulnerable (sensitive) social groups
     which are automatically exempted from paying court fees? If yes, please explain

  7. Are parties regularly informed of the possibility of exemption from payment of court
     fees? Do the lawyers or the court inform the parties about the possibility of exemption
     from payment of court fees?

  8. Which facts are taken into accountwhen determining the amount of the court fees?

  9. Do persons submitting the request for exemption from payment of court fees also
     have free legal aid?

  10. What percentage of revenue from court fees remains for the court?

  11. Which state bodies are mostly used by the parties to obtain a certificate of financial
      status?

  12. Do the provisions on exemption from payment of court fees have an impact on the
      parties' access to court? Please explain




                                                                                               44 
References

   The Constitution of the Republic of Serbia, Official Gazette of RS, no.98/06

   The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
    http://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Convention_BOS.pdf

   The Charter of Fundamental Rights http://www.europarl.europa.eu/charter/pdf/text_en.pdf

   European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights , Annual Report 2014, p. 13-15
    http://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra-annual-report-2014_en.pdf


   CEPEJ Evaluation Report, 2014. (based on 2012 data). Available at:
    http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/cooperation/cepej/evaluation/2014/Rapport_2014_en.pdf

   EC           Progress         Report         on        Serbia,          Available         at
    http://www.seio.gov.rs/upload/documents/eu_dokumenta/godisnji_izvestaji_ek_o_napretku/godin
    ji_izvestaj_15_final.pdf

   Law on court fees, Official Gazette RS, no. 28/94, 53/95, 16/97, 34/2001 –oth.law, 9/02, 29/04,
    61/05, 116/08 –oth.law, 31/09, 101/11, 93/12, 93/14 and 106/15

   CINS report, Available at: https://www.cins.rs/srpski/printer/article/227

   Vreme - Milenijumskiciljeviposle2015.: Pravda zasve
    http://www.vreme.com/cms/view.php?id=1267990&print=yes 2/3

   Law on court fees, Croatia, NN 74/95, 57/96, 137/02, (26/03), 125/11, 112/12,157/13, 110/15

   Law on court fees Montenegro, " Official Gazette RCG", no 76/2005, Decision CC RCG U. no.
    5/06, 8/06, 10/06, 19/06, 24/06, 39/06 and 110/06 - 39/2007-7. Art. 7. Of the Law - 40/2010-
    5.http://www.pravda.gov.me/biblioteka/zakoni?pagerIndex=2

   Law on court fees (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia 37/2008)

   Civil Procedure Code, Official Gazette RS, no. 72/11 49/13 – CC, 74/13 – CC and 55/14.

   Criminal Procedure Code, Official Gazette RS, no.. 72/11, 101/11, 121/12, 32/13, 45/13 i 55/14

   Law on Mediation, Official Gazette RS no. 55/2014

   UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 32 (n. 7), paragraph 11

   ECtHR, Scordino v. Italy, No. 36813/97, 29 March 2006, paragraph 201.

   Functional Review http://www.mdtfjss.org.rs/sr/srbija‐funkcionalna‐analiza‐
    pravosudja#.VxiOFdR97cs

   Team for Social Inclusion and Poverty Reduction, Poverty in Serbia in 2014



                                                                                                     45 
   Bar Association Tariff, table of fees with each hour, on force as of March 6, 2014.

   Cost and fee allocation in civil procedure Dutch report Prof. dr. M.B.M. Loos (University of
    Amsterdam), Available at: http://www-
    personal.umich.edu/~purzel/national_reports/Netherlands.pdf

   Legal Aid in the Netherlands - a broad outline 2015, Legal Aid Board, dostupno na:
    http://www.rvr.org/binaries/content/assets/rvrorg/informatie-over-de-raad/legalaid-
    brochure_online--2015.pdf
 

 

 

 

 

 

 




                                                                                                   46 
Table of court fees in the Republic of Slovenia
Value     Court   Value       Court   Value       Court   Value       Court    Value       Court    Value        Court    Value        Court    Value        Court
          fee                 fee                 fee                 fee                  fee                   fee                   fee                   fee
300       17      380.000     1.575   2.400.000   5.775   4.500.000   9.975    6.600.000   14.175   8.700.000    18.375   10.800.000   22.575   12.900.000   26.775
600       24      410.000     1.675   2.450.000   5.875   4.550.000   10.075   6.650.000   14.275   8.750.000    18.475   10.850.000   22.675   12.950.000   26.875
900       31      440.000     1.775   2.500.000   5.975   4.600.000   10.175   6.700.000   14.375   8.800.000    18.575   10.900.000   22.775   13.000.000   26.975
1.200     38      470.000     1.875   2.550.000   6.075   4.650.000   10.275   6.750.000   14.475   8.850.000    18.675   10.950.000   22.875   13.050.000   27.075
1.500     45      500.000     1.975   2.600.000   6.175   4.700.000   10.375   6.800.000   14.575   8.900.000    18.775   11.000.000   22.975   13.100.000   27.175
2.000     50      550.000     2.075   2.650.000   6.275   4.750.000   10.475   6.850.000   14.675   8.950.000    18.875   11.050.000   23.075   13.150.000   27.275
2.500     55      600.000     2.175   2.700.000   6.375   4.800.000   10.575   6.900.000   14.775   9.000.000    18.975   11.100.000   23.175   13.200.000   27.375
3.000     60      650.000     2.275   2.750.000   6.475   4.850.000   10.675   6.950.000   14.875   9.050.000    19.075   11.150.000   23.275   13.250.000   27.475
3.500     65      700.000     2.375   2.800.000   6.575   4.900.000   10.775   7.000.000   14.975   9.100.000    19.175   11.200.000   23.375   13.300.000   27.575
4.000     70      750.000     2.475   2.850.000   6.675   4.950.000   10.875   7.050.000   15.075   9.150.000    19.275   11.250.000   23.475   13.350.000   27.675
4.500     75      800.000     2.575   2.900.000   6.775   5.000.000   10.975   7.100.000   15.175   9.200.000    19.375   11.300.000   23.575   13.400.000   27.775
5.000     80      850.000     2.675   2.950.000   6.875   5.050.000   11.075   7.150.000   15.275   9.250.000    19.475   11.350.000   23.675   13.450.000   27.875
6.000     89      900.000     2.775   3.000.000   6.975   5.100.000   11.175   7.200.000   15.375   9.300.000    19.575   11.400.000   23.775   13.500.000   27.975
7.000     98      950.000     2.875   3.050.000   7.075   5.150.000   11.275   7.250.000   15.475   9.350.000    19.675   11.450.000   23.875   13.550.000   28.075
8.000     107     1.000.000   2.975   3.100.000   7.175   5.200.000   11.375   7.300.000   15.575   9.400.000    19.775   11.500.000   23.975   13.600.000   28.175
9.000     116     1.050.000   3.075   3.150.000   7.275   5.250.000   11.475   7.350.000   15.675   9.450.000    19.875   11.550.000   24.075   13.650.000   28.275
10.000    125     1.100.000   3.175   3.200.000   7.375   5.300.000   11.575   7.400.000   15.775   9.500.000    19.975   11.600.000   24.175   13.700.000   28.375
13.000    141     1.150.000   3.275   3.250.000   7.475   5.350.000   11.675   7.450.000   15.875   9.550.000    20.075   11.650.000   24.275   13.750.000   28.475
16.000    157     1.200.000   3.375   3.300.000   7.575   5.400.000   11.775   7.500.000   15.975   9.600.000    20.175   11.700.000   24.375   13.800.000   28.575
19.000    173     1.250.000   3.475   3.350.000   7.675   5.450.000   11.875   7.550.000   16.075   9.650.000    20.275   11.750.000   24.475   13.850.000   28.675
22.000    189     1.300.000   3.575   3.400.000   7.775   5.500.000   11.975   7.600.000   16.175   9.700.000    20.375   11.800.000   24.575   13.900.000   28.775
25.000    205     1.350.000   3.675   3.450.000   7.875   5.550.000   12.075   7.650.000   16.275   9.750.000    20.475   11.850.000   24.675   13.950.000   28.875
30.000    225     1.400.000   3.775   3.500.000   7.975   5.600.000   12.175   7.700.000   16.375   9.800.000    20.575   11.900.000   24.775   14.000.000   28.975
35.000    245     1.450.000   3.875   3.550.000   8.075   5.650.000   12.275   7.750.000   16.475   9.850.000    20.675   11.950.000   24.875   14.050.000   29.075
40.000    265     1.500.000   3.975   3.600.000   8.175   5.700.000   12.375   7.800.000   16.575   9.900.000    20.775   12.000.000   24.975   14.100.000   29.175
45.000    285     1.550.000   4.075   3.650.000   8.275   5.750.000   12.475   7.850.000   16.675   9.950.000    20.875   12.050.000   25.075   14.150.000   29.275
50.000    305     1.600.000   4.175   3.700.000   8.375   5.800.000   12.575   7.900.000   16.775   10.000.000   20.975   12.100.000   25.175   14.200.000   29.375
65.000    372     1.650.000   4.275   3.750.000   8.475   5.850.000   12.675   7.950.000   16.875   10.050.000   21.075   12.150.000   25.275   14.250.000   29.475
80.000    439     1.700.000   4.375   3.800.000   8.575   5.900.000   12.775   8.000.000   16.975   10.100.000   21.175   12.200.000   25.375   14.300.000   29.575
95.000    506     1.750.000   4.475   3.850.000   8.675   5.950.000   12.875   8.050.000   17.075   10.150.000   21.275   12.250.000   25.475   14.350.000   29.675
110.000   573     1.800.000   4.575   3.900.000   8.775   6.000.000   12.975   8.100.000   17.175   10.200.000   21.375   12.300.000   25.575   14.400.000   29.775
125.000   640     1.850.000   4.675   3.950.000   8.875   6.050.000   13.075   8.150.000   17.275   10.250.000   21.475   12.350.000   25.675   14.450.000   29.875
140.000   707     1.900.000   4.775   4.000.000   8.975   6.100.000   13.175   8.200.000   17.375   10.300.000   21.575   12.400.000   25.775   14.500.000   29.975
155.000   774     1.950.000   4.875   4.050.000   9.075   6.150.000   13.275   8.250.000   17.475   10.350.000   21.675   12.450.000   25.875   14.550.000   30.075
170.000   841     2.000.000   4.975   4.100.000   9.175   6.200.000   13.375   8.300.000   17.575   10.400.000   21.775   12.500.000   25.975   14.600.000   30.175
185.000   908     2.050.000   5.075   4.150.000   9.275   6.250.000   13.475   8.350.000   17.675   10.450.000   21.875   12.550.000   26.075   14.650.000   30.275
200.000   975     2.100.000   5.175   4.200.000   9.375   6.300.000   13.575   8.400.000   17.775   10.500.000   21.975   12.600.000   26.175   14.700.000   30.375
230.000   1.075   2.150.000   5.275   4.250.000   9.475   6.350.000   13.675   8.450.000   17.875   10.550.000   22.075   12.650.000   26.275   14.750.000   30.475
260.000   1.175   2.200.000   5.375   4.300.000   9.575   6.400.000   13.775   8.500.000   17.975   10.600.000   22.175   12.700.000   26.375   14.800.000   30.575
290.000   1.275   2.250.000   5.475   4.350.000   9.675   6.450.000   13.875   8.550.000   18.075   10.650.000   22.275   12.750.000   26.475   14.850.000   30.675
320.000   1.375   2.300.000   5.575   4.400.000   9.775   6.500.000   13.975   8.600.000   18.175   10.700.000   22.375   12.800.000   26.575   14.900.000   30.775
350.000   1.475   2.350.000   5.675   4.450.000   9.875   6.550.000   14.075   8.650.000   18.275   10.750.000   22.475   12.850.000   26.675   14.950.000   30.875



                                                                                                                                                             47 
Value        Court    Value        Court    Value        Court    Value        Court    Value        Court    Value        Court    Value        Court    Value        Court
             fee                   fee                   fee                   fee                   fee                   fee                   fee                   fee
15.000.000   30.975   17.100.000   35.175   19.200.000   39.375   21.300.000   43.575   23.400.000   47.775   25.500.000   51.975   27.600.000   56.175   29.700.000   60.375
15.050.000   31.075   17.150.000   35.275   19.250.000   39.475   21.350.000   43.675   23.450.000   47.875   25.550.000   52.075   27.650.000   56.275   29.750.000   60.475
15.100.000   31.175   17.200.000   35.375   19.300.000   39.575   21.400.000   43.775   23.500.000   47.975   25.600.000   52.175   27.700.000   56.375   29.800.000   60.575
15.150.000   31.275   17.250.000   35.475   19.350.000   39.675   21.450.000   43.875   23.550.000   48.075   25.650.000   52.275   27.750.000   56.475   29.850.000   60.675
15.200.000   31.375   17.300.000   35.575   19.400.000   39.775   21.500.000   43.975   23.600.000   48.175   25.700.000   52.375   27.800.000   56.575   29.900.000   60.775
15.250.000   31.475   17.350.000   35.675   19.450.000   39.875   21.550.000   44.075   23.650.000   48.275   25.750.000   52.475   27.850.000   56.675   29.950.000   60.875
15.300.000   31.575   17.400.000   35.775   19.500.000   39.975   21.600.000   44.175   23.700.000   48.375   25.800.000   52.575   27.900.000   56.775   30.000.000   60.975
15.350.000   31.675   17.450.000   35.875   19.550.000   40.075   21.650.000   44.275   23.750.000   48.475   25.850.000   52.675   27.950.000   56.875
15.400.000   31.775   17.500.000   35.975   19.600.000   40.175   21.700.000   44.375   23.800.000   48.575   25.900.000   52.775   28.000.000   56.975
15.450.000   31.875   17.550.000   36.075   19.650.000   40.275   21.750.000   44.475   23.850.000   48.675   25.950.000   52.875   28.050.000   57.075
15.500.000   31.975   17.600.000   36.175   19.700.000   40.375   21.800.000   44.575   23.900.000   48.775   26.000.000   52.975   28.100.000   57.175
15.550.000   32.075   17.650.000   36.275   19.750.000   40.475   21.850.000   44.675   23.950.000   48.875   26.050.000   53.075   28.150.000   57.275
15.600.000   32.175   17.700.000   36.375   19.800.000   40.575   21.900.000   44.775   24.000.000   48.975   26.100.000   53.175   28.200.000   57.375
15.650.000   32.275   17.750.000   36.475   19.850.000   40.675   21.950.000   44.875   24.050.000   49.075   26.150.000   53.275   28.250.000   57.475
15.700.000   32.375   17.800.000   36.575   19.900.000   40.775   22.000.000   44.975   24.100.000   49.175   26.200.000   53.375   28.300.000   57.575
15.750.000   32.475   17.850.000   36.675   19.950.000   40.875   22.050.000   45.075   24.150.000   49.275   26.250.000   53.475   28.350.000   57.675
15.800.000   32.575   17.900.000   36.775   20.000.000   40.975   22.100.000   45.175   24.200.000   49.375   26.300.000   53.575   28.400.000   57.775
15.850.000   32.675   17.950.000   36.875   20.050.000   41.075   22.150.000   45.275   24.250.000   49.475   26.350.000   53.675   28.450.000   57.875
15.900.000   32.775   18.000.000   36.975   20.100.000   41.175   22.200.000   45.375   24.300.000   49.575   26.400.000   53.775   28.500.000   57.975
15.950.000   32.875   18.050.000   37.075   20.150.000   41.275   22.250.000   45.475   24.350.000   49.675   26.450.000   53.875   28.550.000   58.075
16.000.000   32.975   18.100.000   37.175   20.200.000   41.375   22.300.000   45.575   24.400.000   49.775   26.500.000   53.975   28.600.000   58.175
16.050.000   33.075   18.150.000   37.275   20.250.000   41.475   22.350.000   45.675   24.450.000   49.875   26.550.000   54.075   28.650.000   58.275
16.100.000   33.175   18.200.000   37.375   20.300.000   41.575   22.400.000   45.775   24.500.000   49.975   26.600.000   54.175   28.700.000   58.375
16.150.000   33.275   18.250.000   37.475   20.350.000   41.675   22.450.000   45.875   24.550.000   50.075   26.650.000   54.275   28.750.000   58.475
16.200.000   33.375   18.300.000   37.575   20.400.000   41.775   22.500.000   45.975   24.600.000   50.175   26.700.000   54.375   28.800.000   58.575
16.250.000   33.475   18.350.000   37.675   20.450.000   41.875   22.550.000   46.075   24.650.000   50.275   26.750.000   54.475   28.850.000   58.675
16.300.000   33.575   18.400.000   37.775   20.500.000   41.975   22.600.000   46.175   24.700.000   50.375   26.800.000   54.575   28.900.000   58.775
16.350.000   33.675   18.450.000   37.875   20.550.000   42.075   22.650.000   46.275   24.750.000   50.475   26.850.000   54.675   28.950.000   58.875
16.400.000   33.775   18.500.000   37.975   20.600.000   42.175   22.700.000   46.375   24.800.000   50.575   26.900.000   54.775   29.000.000   58.975
16.450.000   33.875   18.550.000   38.075   20.650.000   42.275   22.750.000   46.475   24.850.000   50.675   26.950.000   54.875   29.050.000   59.075
16.500.000   33.975   18.600.000   38.175   20.700.000   42.375   22.800.000   46.575   24.900.000   50.775   27.000.000   54.975   29.100.000   59.175
16.550.000   34.075   18.650.000   38.275   20.750.000   42.475   22.850.000   46.675   24.950.000   50.875   27.050.000   55.075   29.150.000   59.275
16.600.000   34.175   18.700.000   38.375   20.800.000   42.575   22.900.000   46.775   25.000.000   50.975   27.100.000   55.175   29.200.000   59.375
16.650.000   34.275   18.750.000   38.475   20.850.000   42.675   22.950.000   46.875   25.050.000   51.075   27.150.000   55.275   29.250.000   59.475
16.700.000   34.375   18.800.000   38.575   20.900.000   42.775   23.000.000   46.975   25.100.000   51.175   27.200.000   55.375   29.300.000   59.575
16.750.000   34.475   18.850.000   38.675   20.950.000   42.875   23.050.000   47.075   25.150.000   51.275   27.250.000   55.475   29.350.000   59.675
16.800.000   34.575   18.900.000   38.775   21.000.000   42.975   23.100.000   47.175   25.200.000   51.375   27.300.000   55.575   29.400.000   59.775
16.850.000   34.675   18.950.000   38.875   21.050.000   43.075   23.150.000   47.275   25.250.000   51.475   27.350.000   55.675   29.450.000   59.875
16.900.000   34.775   19.000.000   38.975   21.100.000   43.175   23.200.000   47.375   25.300.000   51.575   27.400.000   55.775   29.500.000   59.975
16.950.000   34.875   19.050.000   39.075   21.150.000   43.275   23.250.000   47.475   25.350.000   51.675   27.450.000   55.875   29.550.000   60.075
17.000.000   34.975   19.100.000   39.175   21.200.000   43.375   23.300.000   47.575   25.400.000   51.775   27.500.000   55.975   29.600.000   60.175
17.050.000   35.075   19.150.000   39.275   21.250.000   43.475   23.350.000   47.675   25.450.000   51.875   27.550.000   56.075   29.650.000   60.275




                                                                                                                                                                       48 
