     CASE STUDY OF AN EXCELLENT TVET INSTITUTION1:

                                            Agricultural TVET Schools, China



                                                                     By


                                                                   Han Xu




                                                                September 2016




																																																													
1
 	This	case	study	has	been	conducted	with	the	support	of	the	Korea-World	Bank	Partnership	Facility	Grant	to	
promote	job	creation	and	skills	development	in	the	East	Asia	region.	It	aims	to	provide	an	example	of	an	
excellent	TVET	facility,	as	a	model	for	TVET	reforms	in	the	EAP	region.	
                                                                                                                                         	
                                                                       Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                                      Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                                                 	
                                                                                                                                                              	




	

                                                           Table of Contents

Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 3	
              ........................................................................................................................................	3	
    Background	
    Literature Review	..............................................................................................................................	3	
    Research Method	...............................................................................................................................	3	
Chinese Education System and Economic Development................................................................... 5	
    Chinese Education System	................................................................................................................	5	
    Expansion of Chinese Education and Industrialization	.....................................................................	5	
    Industry Development and Employment	...........................................................................................	6	
Agriculture Industry and Vocational Education in China................................................................ 6	
    Agriculture Industry in China	............................................................................................................	6	
                                    ....................................................................................................	7	
    Agricultural Employment in China	
                                              ......................................................................................	7	
    Agricultural Vocational Education in China	
Case Study Analysis .............................................................................................................................. 7	
    About the Schools	..............................................................................................................................	7	
    The Target of Questionnaire Survey	..................................................................................................	9	
    School Outputs	..................................................................................................................................	9	
    Material Resources	..........................................................................................................................	11	
            ...........................................................................................................................................	11	
    Teachers	
    Curriculum and Educational Resources	...........................................................................................	12	
    Management	....................................................................................................................................	13	
    Cooperation with Enterprises	..........................................................................................................	13	
    School’s Career Development System	............................................................................................	14	
                                   ...................................................................................................	14	
    The Impact of Government Policy	
The Problems and Lessons Learned from the Excellent Agricultural Vocational Schools ......... 15	
    Lessons Learned	..............................................................................................................................	15	
    Problems	..........................................................................................................................................	16	
Suggestions on Promoting the Development of Agricultural Vocational Education .................... 17	
                                           ....................................................................................	17	
    Develop the Modern Agricultural Economy	
                                                        ....................................................................	17	
    Enhance the Attraction of Agriculture Related Majors	
    Improve the Ability of a Vocational School to Serve the Regional Economy	.................................	17	
    Leverage Government Policy	..........................................................................................................	18	




                                                                                                                                          Page	2	of	18	
                                                                                                                	
                                              Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                          Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                                  	




	

                                     Introduction

Background
Over the last several decades, economic growth in East Asian and Pacific countries (EAP)
has been highly dependent on investment and export. In order to upgrade their economic
structures, the East Asian countries are actively adjusting their long-term development
policies to accelerate the pace of economic transformation and industrial upgrading.
The restructuring of the EAP economy needs support from all types of talents. A large
number of innovative, scientific and technical workers are needed for production and in order
to bring about this transformation. The need for restructuring has imposed challenges on
vocational education across EAP. In order to promote the reform and development of
vocational education to meet changing economic and industrial demands, the World Bank has
organized a team of experts to conduct case studies of outstanding TVET schools in select
EAP countries. This report summarizes the successful experience of three Chinese
agricultural TVET schools (one secondary vocational school and two tertiary vocational
schools), analyses the problems they have encountered in their operation, and provides
lessons learned to improve vocational education. The research is part of “Excellent TVET
Institutions in East Asia and Pacific (EAP),” a larger study commissioned by the World
Bank.


Literature Review
Generally, education output includes overall school quality, the employment rate of
graduates, the satisfaction rate of enterprises, etc. Many scholars assert that the level of
educational output is related to teacher, curriculum, management, school-enterprise
cooperation and so on. According to Yan Li (2008), a teacher’s education, knowledge, and
teaching experience and method affect the quality of teaching. In addition, many cases of
curriculum reform in the vocational schools also show that curriculum is closely related to
educational output. For example, the finance major of Zhejiang Wanli University has carried
out a series of curriculum reforms by combining and reorganizing the major courses. These
reforms have improved both the learning capacity of students and the employment rate of
graduates. In regard to the influence of school leadership, the scholars Jian Sun and Junqing
Ren researched education in Ningbo Polytechnic, and analysed the positive role of the
principal’s leadership in setting the school goal, forming the development strategy, and
implementing the initiative. Some scholars (Qin Shuwen and Xiao Guiyun, 2012) also
believe that school-enterprise cooperation can improve the training course, and further
promote graduate employment opportunities.


Research Method
Basic Assumption
Case studies were conducted to verify that:


                                                                                                  Page	3	of	18	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                          Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                               	




	
(1) Graduates of excellent TVET schools have high levels of enterprise recognition,
employment rates and employment quality.
(2) Excellent TVET schools have a strong ability to serve the community.
(3) Excellent TVET schools have high-quality teachers, better teaching conditions, courses
that meet the needs of enterprises, effective management, and strong school-enterprise
cooperation.
If the above assumptions can be verified, we can conclude: by improving the factors of
teacher quality, teaching conditions, curriculum, school management and school-enterprise
cooperation, we can enhance the quality of a school.


Research Method
In order to verify the above assumptions, we have adopted the research methods of
questionnaire and interview.
Questionnaire survey method
a. Objective
The case study of three outstanding Chinese agricultural TVET schools will (1) clarify the
connotation and standard of excellent TVET schools; (2) analyse the output of outstanding
TVET schools such as the employment rate of their graduates and their ability to serve the
community; (3) examine the current status of the outstanding TVET schools from the aspects
of teacher, teaching facility, curriculum, school management and school-enterprise
cooperation, and summarize their experience as well as the areas that need to be improved;
and (4) based on the research conclusions, offer suggestions to promote development of
agricultural TVET schools.
The research can provide an empirical basis for policy makers to formulate vocational
education policy and guidance for a school to reform and develop their education system.
b. Case Selection
The basis of case selection is (1) to choose TVET schools in the major agricultural provinces
that contribute to the development of the regional economy; (2) due to the different economic
development and environment of Chinese regions, select schools across the different regions;
and (3) select schools that are recognized as model vocational schools that have the strongest
influence in the industry.
In accordance with the above criteria, we have selected Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational
Technical College from the major agricultural province of Western China, Nan Gong
Vocational and Technical Education Centre from Eastern China, and Heilongjiang Nongken
Vocational College from the Northeastern China. Both Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational
Technical College and Nan Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre are the model
schools for the “National Vocational Education Reform and Development”, while
Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College is the leading school of “Heilongjiang Vocational
Education Reform and Development.”

                                                                                               Page	4	of	18	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                           Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                               	
                                                                                                               	




	
c. Design of Questionnaire
A total of five questionnaires were designed for the study: 1) a school, 2) its departments, 3)
teachers, 4) students and 5) enterprises. The first set of questionnaires for a school and its
departments cover its basic status, educational output, and other related information
including its funding and expenditure; the questionnaires for the teachers and students survey
their perspectives on the school facility and equipment, teacher quality, curriculum, school
management, school-enterprise cooperation, etc.; and the final questionnaire for enterprises
involves their evaluation on the quality of school graduates and cooperation with schools.


Interview and field research
The interviews and field research were conducted to understand the elements that affect
school quality; summarize the successful experience of school operation; discover problems
encountered in the operation process; understand the opinions of teachers, students and
enterprises in regards to the schools; and provide suggestions for the improvement of
education quality and operational efficiency.
The team visited three TVET schools to conduct the interviews, and held seminars for
teachers, students, and the enterprises. Interviews with the school leaders were also
conducted to understand the school operation. These interviews have provided the factual
evidence for this case study.



       Chinese Education System and Economic Development

Chinese Education System
The Chinese education system consists of five parts, namely, preschool, primary, secondary,
higher and continuing education. Secondary education consists of two stages: middle school
and high school. Their education periods are 3 years respectively, of which middle school is
divided into ordinary middle school and vocational middle school. High school is also
divided into ordinary high school and secondary vocational school (including vocational high
school, technical school and specialized secondary school). Higher education includes
technical education, undergraduate education and graduate education. Technical education is
for 2-3 years, while undergraduate education is for 4 years. Continuing education includes
literacy education, adult primary/secondary/higher education, adult vocational education,
community education and so on.


Expansion of Chinese Education and Industrialization
In China, the expansion of education is closely related to its industrialization, economic
growth and labour market demands. Economic policy plays an especially important guiding
role in the formation of education policy.




                                                                                               Page	5	of	18	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                          Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                               	




	
In the 1990s, China’s economy changed from a planned economy to a market economy. The
state has vigorously popularized compulsory education, while continuing to develop both
vocational education and higher education to meet the needs of economic development.
Since 2010, the promotion of national strategy, such as "Made in China 2025," has provided a
new direction of Chinese economy to industrialization, urbanization, informatization and self-
dependent innovation. The long-term and rapid development of the Chinese economy has
promoted stable and high-quality education at all stages.
After expanding higher education enrolment since 1999, the gross higher education
enrolment rate increased from 10.5% in 1999 to 37.5% in 2014. With the challenge of new
technology development, China will need not only industrial restructuring, but also to train
the human capital needed for a new round of growth.


Industry Development and Employment
Since its economic reform, China has gradually expanded the proportion of the secondary
(manufacturing) and tertiary (service) industries. Between 1995 and 2014, the share of the
primary industry's contribution to GDP was consistently below 10%. On the other hand, the
contribution rate of the tertiary industry to GDP showed steady growth, and has risen from
28.5% in 1995 to 47.9% in 2014. The change of the economic structure had a great influence
on China's job market. The number of employees in the primary industry (collection of
natural resources, i.e. farming, fishing) has been decreasing every year, while the number in
the secondary and tertiary industries showed an increasing trend. From the long-term trend,
the changing industrial structure has directly influenced labour demand, and is also closely
linked to the employment issues of the agriculture sector.



      Agriculture Industry and Vocational Education in China

Agriculture Industry in China
China’s agriculture industry is experiencing a rapid change in structure, as the proportion of
planting has been shrinking, but that of stock farming, fishery and forestry have been
continuously increasing. The emergence of "company + farmer," "cooperative + farmer" and
other organizational forms have diversified the sector’s management model. In addition,
advancements in agricultural science and technology have been continued, mainly reflected
in the development of biotechnology, mechanization, pest control, and livestock breeding.
Although the contribution rate of Chinese scientific and technological development to the
agriculture sector has increased from 27% in the late 1970s to 43% in 2016, compared to the
advanced economies’ average of above 60% there is still a gap in its contribution.




                                                                                               Page	6	of	18	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                           Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                               	




	
Agricultural Employment in China
Over the last 30 years, the agricultural labour force has decreased by 200 million as they have
left the land to work in cities and towns. The remaining farmers, mostly working in
traditional farming, are unfamiliar with the new agricultural technology and knowledge.
However, development of agricultural technology, agricultural product brands, and rural land
development have promoted training for all kinds of skills to meet the needs of modern
agricultural development. It is estimated that by 2020 China will need 18 million agricultural
talents in the areas of (1) family farm management and chain business management, (2)
agricultural technology research and food safety management, (3) international trade and
marketing, and (4) rural cooperatives management and enterprise management.
	
Agricultural Vocational Education in China
As an important component of the education system, agricultural vocational education aims
to train technical personnel, managers and skilled agricultural workers. Agricultural
vocational education in China consists of secondary vocational education, higher vocational
education and various formats of adult vocational education and training.
Higher agricultural vocational education is mainly implemented by agricultural vocational
colleges and some local agricultural universities. In recent years, the scale of agricultural
vocational education at the college level is relatively stable, but its overall size is small.
Secondary agricultural vocational education is mainly implemented by secondary agricultural
vocational schools and county-level vocational education centres. In recent years, the overall
scale of secondary vocational education has been shrinking.
Adult agricultural vocational education includes village-level classes to teach agricultural
knowledge, production techniques and operational skills. The Central Agricultural
Broadcasting School under the Ministry of Agriculture also provides training for farmers.
Overall, the scale of adult agricultural vocational education has been decreasing every year.



                                  Case Study Analysis

About the Schools
Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College
Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College is a full-time higher education institute
for vocational education. Founded in 1958, it is under the leadership of the Agricultural
Department of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region. In December 2006, it was selected
as one of the key institutions for the “Construction Plan of National Demonstrative Higher
Vocational Schools” by the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Finance.
The school has 13 branch institutes, and 60 majors which mainly focus on the agricultural
sector but cover the areas of humanities, economy, trade, management, engineering and

                                                                                               Page	7	of	18	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                           Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                               	




	
Information Technology (IT). It has more than 12,000 full-time students and more than 800
staff members. The school also carries out joint education with countries like Malaysia and
Kyrgyzstan.
The College of Animal Science, College of Biotechnology, and College of Horticultural
Science are the main agricultural institutes of Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical
College. In this study, the three institutes were selected as the research targets, and both
questionnaires and field research were conducted.
Nan Gong Vocational and Technical Education Center
Nan Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre is one of the first national model
secondary vocational schools for Vocational Education Reform and Development. It provides
programs of academic education, short-term training, skill appraisal and technology
promotion. It has 20 majors in the areas of agriculture and forestry, processing and
manufacturing, etc. The school has 380 teachers, 4,200 students for academic education and
more than 6,000 students for short-term training.

The school has 2 majors related to agriculture: (1) modern agriculture and (2) animal
husbandry and veterinary medicine, recruiting 30 to 40 students for each major every year.
The school has also been active in serving farmers and the rural community. It has
contributed to the development of the local economy by making use of the school’s
educational resources to train the local workforce for farming.
Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College
Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College is a full-time public vocational college with a
history of more than 50 years. It is one of the model vocational schools of the Construction
Plan of Vocational Schools in Heilongjiang and also the Chair of the Teaching Committee for
Food Majors in Heilongjiang. The school provides excellent equipment and facilities for
training. There are 220 training rooms in the school and 224 training centres outside the
school, and they have teaching and research equipment worth more than RMB 58 million.
The school has six branch institutes encompassing the areas of food engineering,
pharmaceutical engineering, nursing, etc. It also has the majors of green food production,
architectural engineering, and computer network technology, among others.
The employment rate of school graduates is more than 98%, with an employer satisfaction
rate of 98%. The school also provides joint-training with foreign schools including those in
South Korea, Singapore and Thailand. The school conducts an exchange program for teachers
and students, and it shares advanced educational resources with those schools.
The food engineering major of the school employs a "2+1" model of training, under which
the students learn on campus for 2 years, and train through an internship for 1 year. Graduates
are mainly employed in technical management positions of medium and large-sized food
enterprises such as Yili, Wandashan Dairy and Mengniu Dairy.


	




                                                                                               Page	8	of	18	
                                                                                                                                  	
                                                                Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                                Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                                                           	
                                                                                                                                    	




	
The Target of Questionnaire Survey
Teachers
In terms of gender, female teachers are in the majority for both Nan Gong Vocational and
Technical Education Centre and Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College, whereas
Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College has a similar ratio of both male and
female teachers. All three schools mainly have young and middle-aged teachers, and most of
the teachers have both an undergraduate and master's degree with significant work experience
in a company.
Students
Both Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College and Nan Gong Vocational and
Technical Education Centre have similar proportions of male to female students, whereas
Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College has a significantly higher number of female
students (83.27%). In addition, all three schools have a balanced distribution of students in
each grade.
Enterprises
Private enterprise accounts for the majority of enterprises in all three schools. With regards to
scale, medium-sized enterprises account for more than half of enterprises in both Xinjiang
Agricultural Vocational Technical College and Nan Gong Vocational and Technical
Education Centre, followed by the small-sized enterprise. For Heilongjiang Nongken
Vocational College, 61.11% of their cooperating enterprises are medium-sized and 27.78%
are large enterprises.


School Outputs
Social Recognition of Graduates
Social recognition of graduates is an important criterion for an excellent vocational school.
The main indicators of graduates’ recognition are a high employment rate, excellent quality
of employment and recognition by enterprises.
In terms of employment rate, the overall employment rate of agriculture majors in all three
schools from 2012 to 2015 was above 90%. The average starting salary, which is an indicator
of the quality of employment, increased from 2010 to 2015 at Xinjiang Agricultural
Vocational Technical College. For the evaluation of the quality of graduates, enterprises
indicated that they were “relatively satisfied” with the graduates of both Xinjiang
Agricultural Vocational Technical College and Nan Gong Vocational and Technical
Education Centre. 2 ” Especially in the category of graduates’ “responsibility” and
“compliance with industry and enterprise standards,” both schools received the highest
evaluation. For Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College, the enterprises regarded the

																																																													
2
 	The	scale	level	of	this	questionnaire	includes:	1.	Very	dissatisfied,	2.	Not	very	satisfied,	3.	General,	4.	
Relatively	satisfied,	5.	Very	Satisfied.	


                                                                                                                    Page	9	of	18	
                                                                                                                                  	
                                                                Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                                Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                                                           	
                                                                                                                                    	




	
quality of graduates as “very strong3” compared to graduates of other vocational schools,
indicating high recognition of the school by the enterprises.
The Ability of a School to Benefit Enterprises
The ability of a school to benefit enterprises is mainly reflected in the training of high-quality
graduates for enterprises, providing training for employees in enterprises, helping enterprises
to solve technical problems and supporting technical research of enterprises.
As evidenced in both the surveys and interviews, the teachers in Xinjiang Agricultural
Vocational Technical College and Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College believe that the
schools have strong abilities in “training high-quality graduates for enterprises” and
“providing training for employees in enterprises.” However, they find that the schools have
limited ability in both “helping enterprises to solve technical problems” and “supporting
technical research of enterprises.” On the other hand, the teachers in Nan Gong Vocational
and Technical Education Centre believe that in addition to the training of high-quality
personnel, the school can solve the technical problems encountered by the enterprises.

The Ability of a School to Benefit Community
The ability of a school to benefit community is another indicator to determine an outstanding
vocational school.
Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College regards serving the local community,
solving problems for local government, and promoting regional economic development as
important school tasks. By dispatching management teams and teachers, the school manages
several county-level vocational schools. In addition, the students and teachers in the
agriculture major help farmers during the harvest season, and those in the veterinary major
often provide guidance in epidemic prevention among farm animals. The Nan Gong
Vocational and Technical Education Centre also supports the process of fertilizer selection,
sales and food processing for local farmers. In addition, Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational
College has participated in designing and training for the “Construction Plan of the Pilot Area
for the Agricultural Vocational Education Reform.”
The Influence of the School
The influence of the school is mainly reflected in its impact on vocational education, industry
and students.
All three schools have been widely recognized by industry since they have been selected as
model schools for national vocational education. In the survey of Xinjiang Agricultural
Vocational Technical College, we found that the school has a strong influence in the local
agricultural industry. The majority of managers from the industry are graduates of the school,
and the school graduates are in high demand from the labour market. In addition, a majority
of the teachers in both Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College and Nan Gong
Vocational and Technical Education Centre showed their satisfaction with the ability of
schools to attract high-quality students. However, the teachers in Heilongjiang Nongken
																																																													
3
 	The	scale	level	of	this	questionnaire	includes:	1.	Very	weak,	2.	Relatively	weak,	3.	Similar,	4.	Relatively	strong,	
5.	Very	strong.	


                                                                                                                   Page	10	of	18	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                           Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                               	




	
Vocational College regarded the influence of the school in recruiting outstanding students as
average.


Material Resources
Financial Resources
Regarding income from both Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College and Nan
Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre from 2012 to 2015, public finance from the
provincial governments has grown due to their increased investment in vocational education.
However, tuition income has steadily declined resulting from a reduction in the total number
of students and tuition exemption for some students.
For Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College, the teachers believe that the school provides
sufficient financial support to students, and it plays an important role in attracting high-
quality students who have financial difficulties. However, from the survey we found that the
students were not satisfied with their financial support, and it needs to be more centralized
and increased.
For school expenditures, both Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College and Nan
Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre mainly disburse on staff wages and
benefits. On the other hand, we found that the expense to improve school equipment and
teacher training is insufficient. The interview from Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational
Technical College showed that the school's overall operation needs more funding, and the
current funding level can only maintain its basic operation.
Facility and Equipment
From the survey, the Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College teachers’
evaluation on the school facility and equipment was not high. Besides the evaluation of the
school meals averaging "relatively satisfied," the evaluation of other items was in between
"average" and "relatively satisfied" and more towards “average.” The teachers believe that
the condition of student life and learning needs more improvement. The students also agree
that the school should improve their housing, classroom and entertainment facility.
On the other hand, for both Nan Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre and
Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College, the teachers provided the highest evaluation on
"the training facility of the school." The students also agree with the teachers’ opinion, but
they think school housing still needs more improvement.


Teachers
Teacher Quality
From the survey of students on the "evaluation of teacher quality,” students in all three
schools had a high evaluation of their teachers' quality. There was little difference in scores
between the criteria of quality, and most of them are close to the "satisfied" level. The
criteria for ateacher’s quality include: "teacher’s professional knowledge," "the relationship



                                                                                              Page	11	of	18	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                            Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                	




	
between teachers and students," "teaching ability," and "cooperation between teachers and
other teachers."
Teacher Training
According to the survey on teachers’ on-the-job training, most of the teachers responded that
they had received training, and they are attending training for more than 20 hours every year.
However, more than half of the teachers did not have training from the company that has
signed the cooperation agreement with the school, and this makes it difficult for teachers to
introduce the company culture to the students and provide targeted guidance for employment.
Criteria for Recruiting Teachers
Most teachers believe that teachers in vocational schools should have specific industry
experience in addition to teaching experience, emphasizing the difference between vocational
education and general education. With specific industry experience, teachers can better guide
students toward employment and help them adapt to the work environment.


Curriculum and Educational Resources
Curriculum
Most teachers in all three schools regard the school curriculum as competitive, and students
are also satisfied with their programs. However, despite their high evaluation, we found that
students still need to receive additional training outside the school, and there is a gap between
curricula and enterprises’ needs.
Practical Course and Skill Development
A majority of the students believe that the schools provide sufficient training to prepare for a
job. More than half of the students receive less than 10 hours of practical training every week,
and one-third of students receive 11-15 hours of training. We also found that there is a
significant difference in training hours among the grades.
Internship
A majority of students in both Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College and Nan
Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre responded as having participated in an
internship program before, while only 39.44% of Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College
students participated in the program. Their main reasons of not attending the internship were
because it is difficult to find an enterprise and time. From the interviews with students, we
found that the schools do not offer an internship opportunity for first-year students.
In regard to the size of enterprises for student internship, more than one-third of the students
in both Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College and Heilongjiang Nongken
Vocational College have worked in enterprises with 50-100 employees. On the other hand,
77.94% of students in Nan Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre have worked in
enterprises with less than 50 employees. Among the students, more than 75% of students in
both Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College and Heilongjiang Nongken
Vocational College received a salary for the internship, at the corresponding wage level of


                                                                                               Page	12	of	18	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                           Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                               	




	
the labour market. However, 67.65% of students in Nan Gong Vocational and Technical
Education Centre were not able to receive a salary, reflecting the lack of a student internship
remuneration system in the school.
Despite more than half of the students expressing their satisfaction with the correlation
between internships and school learning, there is still a gap that needs to be resolved. This
gap arises from the school curriculum failing to reflect the actual needs of enterprises, while
enterprises therefore do not provide positions that adequately reflect student majors.
Regarding student satisfaction with the overall internship, students had high satisfaction on
“training directors of an enterprise, ” “level of responsibility and work,” and “the working
environment.” Students were mostly satisfied with all aspects of the internship program,
believed that the schools were looking for internships that were well-suited to individual
students, and that they are partnering closely with the enterprises. However, since the
students’ evaluation on “remuneration and benefit” was relatively low, the schools need to
further discuss with the enterprises to improve student remuneration and benefits during the
internship.


Management
Teachers in both Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College and Nan Gong
Vocational and Technical Education Centre provided a high evaluation of school
management. The criteria that received the highest scores are "school leaders can prepare for
the future and continue to innovate” and “school leaders have clear principles of
management.” On the other hand, the teachers of Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College
believe that school leaders need to encourage more cooperation among teachers and
appreciate teachers’ contribution to the school.


Cooperation with Enterprises
Partnership with Enterprises
Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College partners with various types of enterprises,
and its main partners are small and medium-sized private companies. In regard to the job
profile of graduates accepted by these companies, the graduates who are working in the
technical guidance position of a production line account for the most (43.68%). The survey
showed that most of the school graduates are favoured by the enterprises in employment
decisions.
The teachers in all three schools believe that factors which hinder the partnership between
school and enterprise are “a school wants to cooperate with an enterprise, but it lacks the
ability" and "an enterprise is not interested in the cooperation.” They believe that a school
loses its appeal in cooperation when it cannot provide a benefit to an enterprise.
Enterprise Participation in Student Training
The main way in which an enterprise participates in student training is to provide an
internship program. Information from both Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical
College and Nan Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre demonstrated that the

                                                                                              Page	13	of	18	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                           Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                	




	
participation of an enterprise in curriculum development is lacking. However, if an enterprise
does not directly participate in curriculum development, the school curriculum cannot reflect
the actual needs of enterprises. The interview also revealed that most enterprises have neither
the resources nor ability to undertake curriculum development, and they lack enthusiasm for
participation, which may have resulted from the compensation provided by the school.
According to the survey of enterprises, 89.36% of enterprises regarded the internship students
as their apprentices, and helped them to participate in production under the guidance of
directors. However, we also found that there are many situations where students are only used
as simple manual workers after undemanding training.
Enterprise Evaluation of the School-Enterprise Cooperation
According to the survey, the enterprises’ evaluation on all aspects of school-enterprise
cooperation was very high. The criteria of the evaluation included "communication and
coordination between the school and enterprise," "cooperative education conducted by both
school and enterprise" and “the school provides staff training for the enterprise.” Overall, the
enterprises were satisfied with their cooperation with all three schools.


School’s Career Development System
From the survey, the teachers in both Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College
and Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College evaluated the school’s career support system
as average, whereas the teachers in Nan Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre
evaluated the system as an important tool for a student’s career planning. For the students,
more than half of them were satisfied with the career counselling service offered by the
school, and more than 90% of students think career counselling contributes to their life
planning.
With respect to continuing education, more than 60% of students want to pursue a higher
degree. The majority of teachers in all three schools believe that the academic courses of
schools can support their students to further their studies.


The Impact of Government Policy
From the survey question on "how much does the government's vocational education policy
affect the school governance and policy?" the teachers believe that the government's policy
affects the school governance to a certain extent. Most of them think that the national leaders
have consistent vocational education policy and they think the government has an effective
school-enterprise cooperation policy, quality assurance framework and financial mechanism,
which promote improvement of school quality.




                                                                                               Page	14	of	18	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                           Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                               	




	

        The Problems and Lessons Learned from the Excellent
                  Agricultural Vocational Schools

Lessons Learned
From the case study of the three vocational schools, we have learned that the excellent
agricultural vocational schools persist in serving the rural community, strengthening school-
enterprise cooperation, and innovating the talent training model.
Serving the Rural Community
One of the common traits of the three schools is service to the rural community and farmers.
Nan Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre has been making full use of school
resources to support the 12 agricultural model villages including Wangtun, Xiezhai and
Xiaochang. Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College also worked with Ulan Wusu
town to promote the development of local economy. The school has dispatched teachers to
train farmers in cultivation, pest control and preservation. The training has promoted the
popularization of new agricultural technology and production methods, and optimized
planting approaches throughout the entire town where the school is located. In addition,
Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College has actively participated in construction of the
pilot areas for the Agricultural Vocational Education Reform. Since 2012, it has supported
the construction and management of pilot areas including Nehe City, Wudalianchi City and
Fuyu County.
Strengthening the School-Enterprise Cooperation
School-enterprise cooperation is one of the key factors that affect the quality of talent
training. Nan Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre and partner enterprises have
jointly built 9 farms, 2 training centres, 3 research laboratories on campus and 10 training
centres outside the school. Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College and partner
enterprises have been cooperated on various fronts. For example, they have built a training
centre for both seed production and management majors, and developed eight training
courses reflecting seed production companies’ work. In addition, Heilongjiang Nongken
Vocational College established a province level school-enterprise cooperation group for food
majors. The group provided consultation and research and development (R&D) to the
companies. For example, it offered food safety and quality system training to the companies
including Mengniu, Yili, Wandashan. It has also conducted the R&D on the preservation of
mashed potato for a company in Qiqihar.
Innovating the Talent Training Model
Innovating the talent training model to improve the quality of training is another common
trait of excellent agricultural vocational schools. Nan Gong Vocational and Technical
Education Centre used the rotation training model to help students to find employment and
positions suited for them. For the training of the animal husbandry major for example, the
school has divided three teaching districts in Nan Gong according to their specialized areas of
farming, and helped students to select one of them for their career development. The students
can experience training from all three districts, with different positions offered by an
enterprise in each district. The training model has provided the students an opportunity to

                                                                                              Page	15	of	18	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                           Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                               	




	
experience the different areas of farming based on the characteristics of regional agricultural
economies.
Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College has also implemented the various forms
of work-integrated learning to meet the needs of high-quality personnel training. For
Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College, its training focuses on the student’s sense of
cooperation, sharing, and quality assurance. In addition, the teachers designed the education
content and methods to stimulate the student’s interest in self-learning.


Problems
Although all three schools have accumulated successful experience in their operations, there
are still areas that need to be improved, mainly reflected in:
Decline in Agriculture Related Majors
Nowadays, the students studying in agriculture related majors are decreasing every year,
causing a shrinkage of the size of the majors. So the schools began to expand the majors
related to the secondary and tertiary industries. This phenomenon is more evident in the
secondary vocational schools. One of the main reasons is that due to the low social
recognition of the agricultural profession, most parents are not willing to let their children
study in the agriculture related majors. In addition, the level of economic development in
rural areas is comparatively low, so there is no attraction for graduates to work at the rural
area. From the field research of Nan Gong Vocational and Technical Education Centre, we
found that most graduates want to work in a big city in Hebei, and are reluctant to stay in Nan
Gong for local employment.
Limitation in School-Enterprise Cooperation
The surveys showed that most enterprises working with the schools are small enterprises, and
their main reason for cooperation is to solve their labour shortage problems. At Nan Gong
Vocational and Technical Education it was found that because of the enterprises’ size and
low level of technical capacity, it is difficult for the students to learn new technology from
them, and the enterprises can only offer lower quality jobs. The students in Xinjiang
Agricultural Vocational Technical College also expressed that since their internship program
was not administered with a clear plan and content, they were mainly used as a simple
manual workforce. For Heilongjiang Nongken Vocational College, school-enterprise
cooperation has been heavily reliant upon personal relationships, preventing the
establishment of a formal system of cooperation.
Shortage in School Resources
Although the three schools are the national model vocational schools, their resources still can
not fully meet the teaching requirements. First of all, their training facilities need to be
improved and the schools must invest in the equipment of the newly opened majors. For
example, if there was no assistance from enterprises, “the horse industry major” of Xinjiang
Agricultural Vocational Technical College would have never met the needs of high-quality
training. Secondly, the schools need more IT resources to provide on-line courses for
students. Thirdly, student living conditions require improvement. We have found that


                                                                                              Page	16	of	18	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                            Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                	




	
Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College students have poor accommodations, and
the school should meet the students’ demand for better living conditions. Lastly, the teaching
capability of teachers needs to be enhanced. A large number of teachers do not have work
experience in an enterprise, and due to their heavy workload, they do not have time to
participate in training to improve their practical teaching. So the schools need to provide the
incentive and support for teachers to participate in practical training.
The Frequent Reform of Curriculum in Vocational Education
With the frequent reform of curricula, many educational plans have to be changed before
their full implementation. Frequent reform also makes it difficult for teachers to understand
and apply them in a short period of time.



     Suggestions on Promoting the Development of Agricultural
                       Vocational Education

Develop the Modern Agricultural Economy
Vocational education is closely linked to the development of regional economies in China. To
support the country’s economic development goals, the government must continue to pursue
agricultural modernization, which in turn will promote further development of agricultural
vocational education . In order to do so, the structure of agricultural industry must be adjusted
to promote green and creative agricultural production. Second, the processing industry of
local agricultural products should be further developed to increase its added value. Third, the
agricultural cooperative model to support the farmers throughout the production process
could be better developed. Lastly, the online market of agricultural products must be further
developed to promote their production, sales, branding and other related activities.


Enhance the Attraction of Agriculture Related Majors
China needs to raise awareness of the developing agriculture sector. Currently, the
development of the agriculture industry is far beyond the traditional planting, and this new
development requires a large number of excellent skilled workers. Therefore, efforts are
needed to publicize its development and technology through media to raise awareness and
attract highly skilled professionals. The agricultural vocational schools also need to
strengthen their publicity activities to attract more students and attention. Through the media
and regular visits to high schools, they can provide potential students with more information
about the school and encourage them to apply.


Improve the Ability of a Vocational School to Serve the Regional Economy
In order to train high-quality professionals for the development of modern agriculture and the
regional economy, a school needs to adjust its majors to incorporate content related to new
agricultural trends and technology. In addition, it needs to further strengthen its
infrastructure, teaching staff and school-enterprise cooperation to improve the quality of


                                                                                               Page	17	of	18	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                          Chinese	Agricultural	TVET	Schools	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                               	




	
education and training. In this way, a school can make full use of its resources to contribute
to regional economic development.


Leverage Government Policy
The government can reduce or exempt the tuition of students from agriculture related majors
to attract more high-quality students. It also needs to increase public finance to improve
learning conditions within agricultural vocational schools and between the schools and
enterprises. The increase in teacher welfare and training will also do much to further
development of agricultural vocational education.




                                                                                              Page	18	of	18	
