     CASE STUDY OF AN EXCELLENT TVET INSTITUTION1:

                                                            Yeungjin School, Korea



                                                                     By


                                                                   Lan Joo




                                                                September 2016




																																																													
1
 	This	case	study	has	been	conducted	with	the	support	of	the	Korea-World	Bank	Partnership	Facility	Grant	to	
promote	job	creation	and	skills	development	in	the	East	Asia	region.	It	aims	to	provide	an	example	of	an	
excellent	TVET	facility,	as	a	model	for	TVET	reforms	in	the	EAP	region.	
                                                                                                                                          	
                                                                        Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                                                     Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                                                  	
                                                                                                                                                                 	




	

                                                            Table of Contents

Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 2	
              ........................................................................................................................................	2	
    Background	
    Literature Review	..............................................................................................................................	3	
    Premised Four Factors Contributing to School Outcomes	.................................................................	3	
    Research Design and Method	............................................................................................................	3	
About Yeungjin ..................................................................................................................................... 4	
    Educational Purpose, Goals and Strategic Plan	.................................................................................	4	
    Outcomes	...........................................................................................................................................	5	
Findings .................................................................................................................................................. 6	
    Factor 1: Adequate Financial and Human Resources	........................................................................	6	
    Factor 2: Relevant Program	...............................................................................................................	8	
    Factor 3: Effective Management System	.........................................................................................	11	
    Factor 4: School-Industry Linkages	.................................................................................................	13	
Conclusion............................................................................................................................................ 14	



                                                               Introduction

Background

East Asian countries are among the fastest growing economies in the world over the last
decade. However, as growth continues, the countries in East Asia are faced with a skills
shortage and mismatching that has limited their economic growth. To tackle this issue,
regional governments are currently restructuring their respective Technical and Vocational
Education and Training (TVET) systems to guide schools towards demand-driven education
and training.

In this context, the World Bank’s East Asia Education team has embarked on an in-depth
study of “Excellent Institutions” by selecting particularly outstanding cases in select countries
of East Asia to research (a) which factors contribute to a particular school’s successful
outcomes; (b) how the school developed its demand-driven system; and (c) how the school
utilizes finite resources to enhance school performance. The purpose of this study is to
provide policy makers with empirical evidence that will be used to develop new policies to
direct schools towards more market-responsive and demand-driven approaches. Specifically,
it aims to; (1) offer guidance for individual institutions to develop innovative methods to
improve the internal and external efficiency of their programs and determine resource
priorities; (2) provide the World Bank with empirical evidence to guide the knowledge
services it offers client countries regarding TVET policies and practices; and (3) engender a
productive dialogue on the improvement of TVET relevance within the EAP region.

                                                                                                                                             Page	2	of	16	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                     Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                               	




	


This report summarizes the successful experience of Korea’s Yeungjin School, analysing the
problems it has encountered in its operation and providing lessons learned to improve
vocational education. This research is part of the “Excellent TVET Institutions in East Asia
and Pacific (EAP)” study commissioned by the World Bank.


Literature Review
Definition

The definition of excellent is measured by the school’s internal and external efficiency.
Internal efficiency refers to the relationship between the inputs and outputs and focuses on
what occurs within the educational and training processes. Then, what happens to the outputs
of the training process in relation to economic and social requirement is defined as external
efficiency, which is also referred to as relevance of the program (Johanson and Adams,
2004). Therefore, the excellent TVET institutions produce the best training outcomes by
retaining high internal efficiency.


Premised Four Factors Contributing to School Outcomes
Based on the literature review, the study premises that a school becomes excellent when it (1)
conserves adequate resources; (2) delivers relevant programs; (3) develops an effective
management system; and (4) establishes linkages with enterprise in the three previously
discussed areas. Additionally, there are external factors impacting the success of schools,
called “ecosystem factors” (Altbach and Salmi, 2011).


Research Design and Method

Research Design

By conducting an in-depth analysis, this study seeks to find (1) whether or not the above
premise factors impact school outcomes; and if so, then, (2) which of these factors is the
determining factor that contributes most to the enhancement of school performance and in
what context (various settings and time periods within respective countries); and (3) how this
factor can be strengthened based on suggestions from teachers/instructors and school
administrators. Korea’s BMT was selected because it meets all three criteria.

Research Method

The study collected data from multiple sources (archived information, quantitative measures,
a survey, and interviews) to increase validity.

The Survey
The survey is designed to directly address whether or not the schools retain each factor
(resources, teaching, management, and linkage with industry) and these factors’ impact on
school outcomes. It was conducted with the students and professors of three majors directly

                                                                                               Page	3	of	16	
                                                                                                                  	
                                                Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                          Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                                	
                                                                                                                    	




	
related to the manufacturing sector [School of Mechanical Engineering, School of Electronic
and Info-Communication, and School of Electronic Engineering] and the President of
Yeungjin. Six hundred ninety-three students out of the total number of 1,400 responded to
the survey. Among faculty members, 23 professors of the aforementioned majors responded
to the survey.

The Interview
The interview investigates the association between the premise factors and the factor most
effective in enhancing school outcomes and how this identified factor can be improved. To
conduct an in-depth analysis, we interviewed 10 students, 10 professors, and the President.



                                       About Yeungjin

Educational Purpose, Goals and Strategic Plan

Yeungjin’s educational purpose is to cultivate creative and highly proficient professional
technicians by strengthening specialized skills via a demand-driven program. Specifically, it
aims to, 1) cultivate professional technicians who can be 21st century leaders; 2) educate
students to become professional technicians with clear vocational goals; 3) develop and
provide a customized education to students; 4) help students prepare for globalization by
providing information technology and foreign languages; and 5) help students develop
socioemotional (SE) skills (e.g. ethics, diligence and consideration for others). To achieve
these goals, Yeungjin has developed the following integrated strategy.

Table 1: Strategy

Establishment of a Top-Class Education System
Admissions Competitiveness     Increase the quality of applicants by strengthening the admission process

Diversification of Academic    Improve education quality by further developing instructors’ program
Programs                       competencies

                               Cultivate highly skilled workers to meet industrial demands by strengthening
Customized Education
                               customized education

Industry-College               Increase graduate employment rates and the quality of job placement by
Cooperation                    strengthening school-industry cooperation
Innovation of Administrative and Financial Structure
                               Cope with rapid changes in educational circumstances by reforming the
Management System
                               management system

                               Provide student-focused administrative services by retaining competent
Administration
                               employees

Diversification of Resources   Lower dependence on tuition and fees by finding other resources
Construction of Future-oriented Educational Infrastructure
Industry-College    Centered   Play a vital role in local economic growth by facilitating an industry-college


                                                                                                    Page	4	of	16	
                                                                                                                                           	
                                                                         Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                                                   Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                                                           	
                                                                                                                                             	




	

Techno Valley                                            cooperation

                                                         Become a Life Long Learning hub by providing training services to SMEs for
Education-Centered LLL Hub
                                                         their employees
To Foster International Competitiveness
Internationally-associated                               Meet demands from oversea Korean companies by expanding customized
Customized Education                                     education

Support       System                         for         Institute a system that supports international students by providing Korean
International Students                                   language, student life, study guides, career counseling, etc.

                                                         Cultivate global leaders by developing programs that aim to improve
Global Education Programs
                                                         international work skills

Global         Education             Support             Create an educational environment that caters to international students by
System                                                   meeting international tertiary education standards

http://www.yjc.ac.kr/CmsHome/MainDefault.jsp


Outcomes

Employment Rate

The College Sustainability Index2 evaluates performance in five areas: education, research,
job placement, management, and convenience / fairness/ communication among 132 Korean
colleges nationwide. In 2012, Yeungjin received the highest score (777.3 points) among 132
colleges, ranking first in job placement, second in management, and third in education.
According to the Ministry of Education’s (MoE) “Job Placement Statistics of Higher
Education Institution Graduates 2012,” Yeungjin ranked at the top in job placement among
colleges retaining more than two thousand graduates with 79.3% of its graduates employed.
In 2011 the MoE, whose aim is to cultivate Korea’s best technology masters in colleges,
nominated Yeungjin as one of seven World Class Colleges (WCCs). This is a meaningful
award as a WCC is a comprehensive evaluation that assesses college infrastructure,
educational performance, financial integrity and the satisfaction rate of industries with
education. As the graduate employment rate is an outcome indicator in this study, Yeungjin is
assumed to be an excellent school. Next, we will reversely examine whether or not the
school possesses all of the premise factors before determining whether or not these premise
factors are likely to impact employment rates, and in what direction.




																																																													
2
 	The	Index	is	jointly developed by the Kyunghyang Newspaper Economic Research Institute for Sustainable Society
(ERISS), World with No Worries on Private Education, Samjong KPMG, LLC, Hyundai Research and Young Entrepreneurs
for Sustainable Society.	



                                                                                                                             Page	5	of	16	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                      Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                	




	

                                         Findings

Factor 1: Adequate Financial and Human Resources

To determine whether or not Yeungjin has adequate financial and human resources to
enhance student employability, we conducted a survey and interview with teachers and
students.

The Teachers’ Perception

During the survey, teachers were asked to assess three areas, a) the school’s financial
resources and facilities; b) teachers’ recruitment standards and in-service training; and c) the
support system for employment. Results show that Yeungjin retains adequate financial and
human resources. All surveyed teachers believe the school provides adequate financial
support to students, and 96% responded that providing financial support plays a primary role
in attracting talented students. Regarding school facilities, 65% of teachers answered
“excellent,” while 57% answered “excellent” for equipment maintenance, and 56% answered
“excellent” for retaining full and updated equipment.
	
In the area of human resources, teachers were asked about teacher recruitment and in-service
training. For teacher recruitment, teachers were asked to identify which is most important, 1)
minimum academic qualifications; 2) minimum years of industry or work experience; 3)
minimum years of teaching experience; or 4) other. Thirty-five percent responded that
“minimum years of industry or work experience” is the most important criteria. Ninety-one
percent responded that Yeungjin’s recruitment standards for teachers/instructors are adequate
enough to provide students with state-of-the-art skills. All of the teachers believe themselves
to be competent teachers with the required skill set for teaching. Ninety-one percent of
Yeungjin teachers had completed in-service training as of April 2015 and the majority (67%)
had taken a formal type of in-service training, such as mentoring or leadership coaching.

Teachers were also asked to assess Yeungjin’s support system for student employment.
Ninety-one percent answered that the school has a support system to assist students with their
career plans and provides various employment services, such as a job service center. In
addition, all teachers said that they have guided their students in developing career plans.

Regarding facilities and equipment, teachers pointed out the benefits of participating in
government projects that support SMEs. The school has been nominated as a learning and
skill hub in the region for several government projects that support SMEs in boosting the
local economy. Through this SME consortium, Yeungjin provides SMEs access to its
facilities and faculty in exchange for the SME’s providing expensive machines and
equipment. The teachers said that through this process, the school was able to upgrade its
training facilities and secure the best equipment in the region.

Regarding human resources three key themes emerge from the study, 1) teachers with
industry experience are recruited, 2) advisors work closely with students, and 3) a virtuous
circle is maintained. First, teachers pointed out that Yeungjin recruits teachers from industry,
particularly those who hold middle or high level positions at large companies, via public


                                                                                                Page	6	of	16	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                      Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                	




	
contest. The goal is to secure faculty members who are able to develop demand-driven
programs as well as strengthen school-industry cooperation. Selected instructors are able to
develop relevant curriculum and training materials, as they know the types of skills and
knowledge demanded by the current labor market. Additionally, they respond to market
changes by continually updating training materials and, if necessary, changing out entire
courses. All teachers agreed that hiring instructors from industry has a direct impact on
increasing the graduate employment rate. Based on their industry experience, instructors are
able to inform students of the types of certificates and courses needed to attain employment
in their chosen industry and, ideally, at their dream company. Teachers are further able to
help students gain employment by leveraging their own networks.

Second, in Yeungjin, there is an advisor for each class who is responsible for aproximately 30
students. Via one-on-one meetings, each advisor works closely with their respective student
on developing their career plans, providing company employment information and job
opportunities. Advisors teach job ethics classes to help students prepare for work, provide
career counseling, and support students in developing their academic skills.

Third, teachers pointed out that the school is in a virtuous circle, similar to that described by
the teachers of Busan Meister High School. Because the school retains adequate resources,
excellent facilities and faculty members, it produces high graduate employment rates,
particularly with high quality jobs. Then, based on good assessment results, the school
receives more financial support from the MoE and is able to participate in the government-
supported SME consortium. This in turn helps the school retain excellent facilities and
strengthens school-industry cooperation. Then, the school is able to secure competent
students and teachers and, in this manner, continually produces the best outcomes.

The Students’ Perception

During the survey, the students were also asked their perception of the school’s resources.
Eighty-three percent reported receiving at least some level of financial support to cover
course fees, residential costs, academic materials, etc. Sixty-seven percent are satisfied with
classroom conditions. Regarding teacher competence, 71% said they are satisfied. Regard
career support system, 63% had received career counseling, and among these, 92% said that
the counseling helped them navigate their career plans in order to secure a job. In general,
66% of the students are satisfied with school life.

In addition to interviewing teachers and staff, we conducted an in-depth interview with ten
students. Those interviewed agreed that enough machines and equipment are available to
them for their practical training. They are impressed with Yeungjin’s training facilities,
because some of the expensive machines they have access to are not available in other
universities and they notice no shortage of machines or equipment.

All interviewed students agreed that their teachers are competent. According to the students,
based on their work experience with large companies, their teachers are able to design
demand-driven, customized programs, teach the most relevant skills, and develop useful
training materials. Interviewed students mentioned that based on their experience, the
teachers continually give students tips for employment preparation, guide students in
developing career plans, and provide company-specific information. The students said their


                                                                                                Page	7	of	16	
                                                                                                               	
                                             Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                       Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                                 	




	
teachers directly assist in connecting students with companies within their respective
networks. Furthermore, interviewed students said Yeungjin’s teachers continually update
knowledge and skills in their fields while maintaining relationships with companies.
Teachers are able to freely develop and update training materials for the classes they teach.
One student mentioned that some employed graduates still use school training materials to do
their current job.

Students said that the one-on-one meetings with an advisor are very helpful in solidifying
their career plans because advisors provide them with company specific information and
inform them of certificates necessary for applying to a particular company.

Interviewed students agreed that most teachers not only teach but also emphasize individual
student job placements. They continually provide tips for job preparation during classes and
directly help students obtain jobs by matching company requests with students’ skills to
identify ideal candidates. By utilizing their own network, teachers find places for in-
company training and even jobs for students. Most importantly, students said that their
teachers care about them, for example, supporting late learners by using personal time after
class and on weekends to help them catch up. All interviewed students agreed that their
teachers are available anytime they need help outside of class and many provide special
weekend lectures and lectures during vacation.
	
Factor 2: Relevant Program

Program Structure

Yeungjinn has three departments:

The School of Mechanical Engineering

This department includes three sub-majors:

    1. CAD/Mechanical Design Course provides knowledge and skills for CAD needed to
       design machines like semiconductor equipment, automobiles, and ships.

    2. Mold/Tooling Course provides knowledge of Mold and Tooling and skills for
       Mold/CAM by using 3D CAD. The students also obtain skills for CAM engineering,
       precision machining, precision measurement, machining technology, mechanical
       drawing, and mold and die structure.

    3. Robot and Automation System Course provides knowledge and skills for controlling
       advanced hybrid systems: Mechatronics is the combination of mechanical and
       electronic engineering, especially offered to students with practical knowledge and
       skills relating to Automation, Robotics, and CAM technologies.

The department operates seven customized classes based on an agreement with companies,
including LG Display Class, Refrigeration and Air-conditioning Class, Japanese Automobile
Design Class, and Shipbuilding and Ship Engineering Class, etc.


                                                                                                 Page	8	of	16	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                      Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                	




	
School of Electronic and Info-Communication

The department includes three sub-majors:

    1. Electronic Information Course provides students with theoretical and practical
       knowledge on electronic technology, control systems using computers,
       microprocessor applications, semiconductor technology, embedded systems, display
       technology, and electronic equipment and applications.

    2. Solar Semiconductor Course fosters professionals in the field of solar cell and
       semiconductor manufacturing technology such as semiconductor processing, solar
       cell processing, LED application, optical components application, green energy, etc.

    3. Info-Communication Course provides students with theoretical and practical
       knowledge on mobile communication systems, high-speed info-communication
       systems, embedded systems, info-communication equipment, mobile communication
       equipment, and mobile internet.

Graduates of this major can obtain certificates in the areas of Radio station equipment,
Electronics industry, Radio electronic industry, Information and Communication, Information
processing, Electronic circuit design, Semiconductor Design, Digital control, etc. Affiliate
companies include Samsung Electronics, Samsung Display, LG Display, LG Chem, Ltd. SK
Telecom, Korea Telecom, POSCO, etc.

School of Electrical Engineering

The department includes two sub-majors:

    1. Renewable Energy Course cultivates professionals in the field of the new and
       renewable energy industry concerning low carbon and green growth as well as
       development of alternative energy sources. Course topics cover solar cell process, PV
       system, power conversion technology, etc.

    2. Digital Electricity Course provides practical and theoretical knowledge in the field of
       electrical technology. Course topics include automation facilities, electrical facility
       design, operation and maintenance through computerized technology.

Graduates of this major can obtain certificates in Electronic Power, Electrical Machine,
Industrial Safety Management, Industrial Instrumentation, Railway Signaling, Power
Engineer, Electrical Engineer, etc. Affiliate companies include Samsung Electronics,
Samsung Electro-mechanics Co., Ltd, Samsung LED, Samsung Display, LG Electronics, LG
Display, LG Chem, Ltd., SK Hynix, POSCO, Hyundai Heavy Industries Co., Ltd, and Korea
Electric Power Corporation.

The Teachers’ Perception

The teacher survey investigated three areas: a) program relevance, b) students competencies,
and c) articulation between the two. In regard to the relevance of the program, 61% of the


                                                                                                Page	9	of	16	
                                                                                                                                  	
                                                                Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                                          Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                                                           	
                                                                                                                                    	




	
teachers strongly agree that the school curriculum (both academic and practical) reflects
current industry demands. Also 57% of the teachers strongly agree that the school offers high
quality programs. However, 57% of the teachers responded that their students need to take
additional outside training in order to secure employment.

Eighty-three percent of teachers believe their students are competent and 52% strongly agree
with the fact that the school is attracting highly competent students. Overall, 87% of the
teachers believe that the school provides relevant teaching programs (including practical
training) to produce competitive school outcomes. Eighty-three percent of teachers believe
that the school offers academic programs to students who want to continue their
education/pursue an advanced degree, and all teachers think that Yeungjin’s program helps
students advance to higher education.

The interview followed, and three program-related themes emerged, the importance of 1)
developing a demand-driven program, 2) having a flexible curriculum, and 3) balancing
theory and practical training. First, the teachers agreed that Yeungjin’s programs meet
industrial needs by pointing out its demand-driven programs. Each year, teachers and
representatives from companies of each sub-major design curricula together via an annual
committee meeting, updating the curriculum based on company needs. Teachers mentioned
Yeungjin’s customized classes. Each department has several customized classes created
upon request from a specific company3. Accordingly, students obtain more specific skills
than transferable skills, enabling them to immediately work for specific companies upon
graduation. A second, related advantage

The strength of Yeungjin’s program lies in its flexibility; teachers continually review and
update programs in response to rapid industry changes. Even customized classes can be
closed if there is low demand, and new customized classes are created if there is high
demand. Teachers also mentioned that feedback from alumni who are currently working at
prospective companies is useful for updating the program.

Third, teachers pointed out the importance of balancing theory and practical training. Ideally,
training schools might provide theory and basic knowledge of each field as well as the SE
skills needed to succeed in the world of work. At the same time, the school needs to provide
enough practical training to help students prepare for future, hands-on jobs. One teacher
shared his own experience upon graduation from a top ranking university saying, “I had
difficulty working at Samsung right after joining the company, because I mainly studied
theory and did not have much practice while studying at school.” Therefore, he believes that
Yeungjin should emphasize practical, hands-on training, in addition to theory. In general,
teachers agreed that provision of relevant knowledge and skills directly increases graduate
employment rates because the knowledge and skills obtained in school are also tested during
the hiring process. In Korea, the hiring process includes a Document Screening Process,
Aptitude Test, and Interview, and during the interview, companies test applicant knowledge
in their chosen field.


																																																													
3
 	The School of Mechanical Engineering has seven customized classes, the School of Electronic and Info-Communication
has 13 customized classes, and the School of Electron Engineering has 11 customized classes.	



                                                                                                                   Page	10	of	16	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                      Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                	




	
The Students’ Perception

According to the survey, only 9% of students pursue further education, while 91% want to be
employed upon graduation. Among those who are looking for a job, 60% expect to obtain a
mid-level skilled position and 71% expect to receive more than USD 20,000 in annual
income. Fifty-nine percent of students hold certifications. Fifty-four percent of surveyed
Yeungjin students said they are satisfied with the program. About half said that they receive
more than 10 hours of practical training per week, while the other half indicated that they
take less than 10 hours. Thirty-eight percent receive additional out-of-school training, and
46% are planning to receive additional training from another institute after graduation.
Nevertheless, 69% believe that Younjin is adequately preparing them to find a job upon
graduation.

All ten of the interviewed students agreed that the curriclum is designed well enough to help
them acqire a range of information from basic knowledge and theory to specialized
knowledge and hands-on skills. During the first year, all students study common subjects,
then they are dividied into sub-majors based on their interests and levels of competence.
During the 2nd year, the students obtain in-depth knowledge and skills in their relevant fields.
The students reported that they are satisfied with this balance of theory and practical training.
Like the teachers, they said that the program should include theory, because the college is not
a training institute whose program is mainly designed to help trainees obtain certificates. The
students also believe that their practical training is adequate preparation for employment
opportunities. However, considering the importance of possessing particular certificates for
certain job applications, aside from the regular courses, they feel it is necessary to take
additional courses to obtain these certificates. Finally, students reported improved creativity
after taking the Capstone course. During the class, the students organize into groups, select a
topic, develop an idea based on open debates and discussions, present their ideas, produce a
product, conduct a survey for market value, and present their final product during graduation.
The teachers support them in finding necessary materials and share sound advice. According
to them, during the Capstone process, their ideas are developed, and most importantly, their
self-confidence increases.
	
Factor 3: Effective Management System

Yeungjin’s uniqueness in terms of school organization is its emphasis on the school-industry
linkage by instituting a separate “Industry-College Cooperation Corp” division. Four
departments comprise this division, a) Industry-College HRD Center, b) Office of Industry-
College Convergence, c) Daegu Techno-Park Yeungjin Branch Office and, d) the Business
Support Center.

Teachers’ Perception

During the survey, the teachers assessed Yeungjin’s leadership and the management system.
Fifty-six percent strongly agreed that the school leaders execute the school’s guiding
principles with clarity, and 48% said that the school has shared its vision with its faculty
members. Furthermore, 57% of teachers strongly agree that their school leaders are
consistent with their words and actions.         Regarding leadership’s consideration for


                                                                                               Page	11	of	16	
                                                                                                               	
                                             Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                       Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                               	
                                                                                                                 	




	
employees, 52% of the teachers reponded that their school leaders encourage collaboration by
building trust among faculty members; 52% strongly agreed that their leaders encourage self-
determination and teacher competency development while the same percent agreed that their
school leaders recognize their contribution by showing appreciation. Sixty-one percent of the
teachers strongly agreed that leaders envisage the future and consistently look for new and
innovative products/processes and 65% responded that the school has the capacity to deal
with both anticipated and unexpected challenges/risks. Regarding relationships with the
leaders as well as with other teachers, 48% said their relationship with the President of
Yeungjin is excellent, and 39% said their relationship with other teachers is excellent.

Interviewed teachers pointed out management’s contribution to Yeungjin’s high graduate
employment rate. According to them, under strong leadership, Yeungjin’s management
system coordinates the efforts of all faculty members to accomplish the school’s single
objective of increasing the graduate employment rate by utilizing financial and human
resources efficiently and effectively. First, the teachers all agree that leadership is key to not
only the school’s outcomes but also the school’s survival. According to them, 2-year
colleges were founded based on the country’s economic needs during the mid-1970s. Until
the early 1970s, Korea did not have 2-year TVET colleges, because the government
emphasized expanding TVET high schools and 4 -year universities to supply urgently needed
skilled workers to fast growing industries; however, as industry became more complicated,
companies also began requiring mid-level skilled workers to fill the gap between low and
high skilled workers. Due to resource constraints, the government encouraged the private
sector to establish 2-year colleges to produce these mid-level technicians by providing more
relaxed regulations to school openings. Yeungjin was one such 2-year school established
during this period.

Since the mid-1980s however, 2-year colleges have faced the major issue of declining
demand. The factors contributing to low student demand for 2-year college include shifts in
the economic structure demanding more higher skilled workers, the change in the
government’s higher education policy allowing 4-year universities to accept more students,
establishment of in-house universities at large companies that provide specific skills, and
increasing social demands for a 4-year diploma. As a result, the training market became
more competitive, and 2-year colleges lost competitiveness against 4-year and in-house
universities. Like other 2-year colleges, Yeungjin has faced the challenge of maintaining
adequate numbers of students. According to the teachers interviewed, the main contributing
factor to school survival during this time has been strong leadership and management: the
President supports teachers and has helped them feel a sense of ownership of and belonging
to the school.

Under this strong leadership, Yeungjin has reformed its entire school system. First, it changed
the management system to coordinate the efforts of all faculty members to accomplish the
school’s single objectives of maintaining adequate student number by utilizing financial and
human resources efficiently and effectively. Next, teacher recruitment policy was changed in
order to replace academic based teachers with industry-experienced teachers. Via public
contest, the school started recruiting new teachers who held middle to high positions at large
companies. Next, with this manpower, the school reformed the curriculum from supply to
demand-driven. In order to develop a demand-driven curriculum, teachers conducted a series
of surveys and interviews with specialists of companies in each major and created


                                                                                                Page	12	of	16	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                     Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                               	




	
competency-based programs based on their responses. Finally, management knew that
providing a demand-driven program was key to success in the training market as most
schools then provided supply-driven courses and failed to meet industrial demands.
Accordingly, the school strengthened school-industry cooperation by utilizing teachers’
networks and participating in government projects that support SMEs. For the latter, the
participation in government projects that support SMEs in the region will not only enable the
school to secure the best facilities but also strengthen school-industry cooperation to secure
in-company training places and employment for the students.

Even after entering this “new normal” stage, Yeungjin’s leaders continually prepare for the
next challenge, for example Yeungjin was the first college to advertise itself in 1995. In
addition, it began accepting younger students to offset the impacts of Korea’s aging
population.

Teachers agree that strong teacher commitment is another key to success; in other words,
teachers share their visions and communicate with each other as well as with their leaders.
By doing so, teachers feel a strong sense of ownership and belonging. The teachers said that
during difficult times, strong leadership support enabled them to develop ideas to reform the
program, increase their sense of ownership, and make tremendous efforts towards mutually
achieving school goals. For example, they visited high schools to attract students, developed
the customized program and training materials, and created MoUs with companies.

Third, regarding resource management, the teachers agreed that the school utilizes its
financial and human resources efficiently. In terms of human resources, the teachers pointed
out the school’s performance-based payment and incentives.          The teachers’ work on
developing a specific customized course, strengthening school-industry cooperation by
establishing MoUs, and conducting administrative work is reflected in the teacher’s
assessment that is linked with immediate rewards. In fact, the most important element of the
teacher assessment is their students’ employment. Incentives have also played a role;
according to teachers, the school changed its teacher wage policy from seniority to
performance-based payment. Teachers agree that these measures encourage teachers to
produce better outcomes.


Factor 4: School-Industry Linkages

Customized Education

Yeungjin has successfully built a customized education system via strengthening school-
industry cooperation. Customized education means that the school receives requests from
select companies to supply a certain number of skilled workers and then develops courses and
curricula to meet their requests. Then, the students are expected to be hired by these
companies upon graduation since they have acquired company-specific skills in addition to
transferable, basic technical skills. Currently, Yeungjin is requested by 285 companies -
large and SMEs, domestic and overseas - to supply 4,493 technicians.

By participating in several government projects, Yeungjin has strengthened industry
cooperation. The first example is the industry-college convergence zone development

                                                                                              Page	13	of	16	
                                                                                                             	
                                           Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                     Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                               	




	
project, Quality of Working Life (QWL), which is managed by the Ministry of Knowledge
Economy. Both the MKE and private sector fund the project with a total of USD 450
million. The purpose of QWL is to produce skilled workers by strengthening school-industry
cooperation that connects education, R&D, and employment. The project required a college
campus with adequate training facilities, and Yeungjin met this criteria. The projected
number of skilled workers that Yeungjin will train for the next five years will be 3,000 and
the school plans to bring in 200 SME-sized enterprise research institutes. By participating in
this project, Yeungjin expects to strengthen its relationships with the SMEs, as well as
contribute to local economic growth by supplying adequately skilled workers to the SMEs.

Teachers’ Perception

All surveyed teachers believe that a school should build a formal partnership with companies
and that Yeungjin has built a successful partnership with companies, enhancing school
outcomes (e.g. graduate employment rate). The companies provide resources (e.g.)
scholarships, in-company training for students, instructors and special lectures. As a hub of
the SMEs consortium in the region funded by the government, Yeungjin provides SMEs with
facilities and human resources. For example, Younjin teachers provide technical assistance to
the SMEs. At the same time, teachers obtain information on employment, industrial demand,
and company-specific information from these companies.

For the program, the teachers of each major and representatives from ten relevant companies
hold a meeting twice a year to develop curriculum and training materials together. During
that meeting, the school receives the companies’ demanded skills in the relevant fields.
Particularly, for the customized classes that are created based upon the company’s request,
the teachers and the representatives from that specific company develop curricula together,
and 60% of the program is required by the company.




                                       Conclusion

This paper reversely examined the relationship between outcomes and premise factors by
selecting a high-performance school (the high graduate employment rate) and the impact of
the premise factors on school outcomes. The logic is that if this high-performance school
demonstrates that it possesses these factors and that they have close relationships with the
outcomes, then we can conclude that these premise factors are likely to raise employment
rates.

The first research question is whether or not the school possesses these factors. The findings
strongly support that Yeungjin has adequate resources, relevant programs, excellent
management, and well-established school-industry linkages. The second question is whether
or not the above premise factors impact school outcomes. Findings suggest that these factors
both directly and indirectly influence Yeungjin’s graduate employment rate. According to
the survey and interview these four factors all increase student employability, making
graduates more likely to land a job. The third question is which of these factors is the


                                                                                              Page	14	of	16	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                      Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                	




	
determining factor that contributes most to enhancement of school performance, in what
context, and how can this factor be strengthened.

In Korea’s case, industrialization, education, economic growth, and the labor market are
closely related. Economic policy continues to guide educational policy based on the
assumption that education, although not sufficient, is a necessary factor contributing to the
country’s economic growth by providing adequately skilled workers to industry. 	
During the 1970s, because the country shifted from a lighter to a heavier manufacturing
industry, it required a different type of labor force, including skilled technicians and experts.
Accordingly, the government expanded technical and vocational education to meet demand
for skilled workers in the heavier manufacturing industry (Zang, 2009; Kim, 2000; Lee et al,
2012). During this decade vocational schools grew by 24.5%. 	

Since the late 1970s, Korea’s strategic industry has shifted to more skill-intensive industries,
such as the electronic and car industries. To meet this demand, higher education (both 2-year
college and 4-year university) was greatly expanded to train skilled workers for this new type
of industry (Zang, 2009; Kim, 2000). The expansion of secondary and higher education is
illustrated in Graph 1 (Lee, 2011; Lee, 1993; Kim, 2000). Then, between 1985 and 2007,
there was sudden and rapid expansion of 4-year universities. This is because as technological
development changed the industrial structure, demand for highly skilled workers (e.g.
managers and experts) who had completed higher education increased (Lee, 1993).
	
Graph	1	Gross	School	Enrolment	Ratio:	Secondary	and	Higher	Education	




                                                          Seconary	EducaTon		

                                                          Higher	EducaTon		




                                                                                    	
Zang,	p.	113,	2009;	KEDI	
	
In addition to the economic change, expansion of 4-year universities was also influenced by a
strong demand for higher education from the new middle class who had accumulated their
wealth during industrialization (Lee, 2011). A 1991 survey conducted by KEDI showed that
41.7% of parents believed that people who do not attend university “are not respected in our
society.” Twenty-one percent of parents thought that “these people have limited options in
choosing their occupation” while 12.5% believed that “these people are paid less than higher
education graduates” (Kim, 2000).

However, most teachers in Yeungjin agreed that regardless of these economic and social
changes throughout time, the most important factor contributing to the school’s success is
well-established management and leadership, because it directs all resources, including
human resources, towards achieving the goal of enhancing school performance. Some
teachers pointed out a leader who supports the teachers, while others pointed out the teachers’

                                                                                               Page	15	of	16	
                                                                                                            	
                                          Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                    Korea’s	Yeungjin	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                              	




	
ownership as being the most important factor for success. Both indicate that well-established
management is based on everyone working together to achieve a shared vision. When
Yeungjin faced outside challenges, the President and faculty members united to overcome
them. The leader strongly supported the teachers’ suggestions on transforming the program
from supply-driven to demand-driven, and the teachers made efforts to establish school-
industry connections.

Under circumstances of rapid labor market shifts, the management system emerges as the
most important factor not only contributing to high graduate employment rates but also
impacting the more fundamental issue of Yeungjin’s survival in the training market. The
school’s flexible management system enables it to reform its system in response to changes,
including reorganizing structure, altering curriculum, changing teacher recruitment and
payment policies, and strengthening school-industry cooperation. Also, an efficient
management system enables the school to optimize resource use. Teachers recommended
that leadership is central to a well-established management system. Under leadership that
provides an overall direction, management utilizes all resources efficiently to achieve goals
and support faculty members in working at their maximum level with a strong sense of
ownership. Accordingly, management emerges as the key factor in increasing Yeungjin’s
internal and external efficiencies and therefore producing the best outcomes, including high
graduate employment rates.




                                                                                             Page	16	of	16	
