SINGAPORE 1


1. Overview

The Singapore education system under the Ministry of Education (MOE) aims to help students discover
their own talents, make the best of these talents, realize their full potential, and develop a passion for
learning that lasts throughout life. The education system covers pre-school, primary, secondary, post-
secondary and university level education. The Desired Outcomes of Education (DOE) are that the
person schooled in the Singapore Education system is:

          a confident person who has a strong sense of right and wrong, is adaptable and resilient,
           knows him or herself, is discerning in judgment, thinks independently and critically, and
           communicates effectively;
          a self-directed learner who takes responsibility for his/her own learning, who questions,
           reflects and perseveres in the pursuit of learning;
          an active contributor who is able to work effectively in teams, exercises initiative, takes
           calculated risks, is innovative and strives for excellence; and
          a concerned citizen who is rooted to Singapore, has a strong civic consciousness, is informed,
           and takes an active role in bettering the lives of those around him/her.




The MOE also delivers continuing education and training (CET) through the Institute of Technical
Education (ITE), and polytechnics.

1
    This overview is based on the Singapore Report on Standards and Qualifications (2015) prepared by Mr. Thomas Yeo
(Managing Director, CET Global Pte Ltd) with support from the World Bank. The Report and its overview are based on
information collected from the survey developed for the East Asia Summit Vocational Education and Training Quality
Assurance Framework Project managed by Australia Commonwealth Government in 2012.


                                                                                                                       1
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                              Singapore | NQF | 2015



Each of the formal education institutions (5 autonomous universities, 5 polytechnics and ITE) has an
Act that spells out the establishment and functions of the institutions etc., including the powers to
award qualifications. (Source: http://www.moe.gov.sg/ )

For the private education sector, the Council for Private Education (CPE) oversees and regulates
private education institutions (PEIs), under the Private Education Act. In addition to its role as the
sectoral regulator of PEIs, the CPE facilitates capability development efforts to uplift standards in the
local private education industry. The Enhanced Registration Framework (ERF), as set out under the
Private Education Act and the Private Education Regulations, spells out the mandatory registration
requirements and legislative obligations which all private education institutions, operating in and from
Singapore, must meet. The ERF broadly encompasses the following:

    • Registration
    • Corporate Governance
    • Quality of Provisions
    • Enhanced Information Transparency
(Source: http://www.cpe.gov.sg )

The Singapore Workforce Skills Qualifications (WSQ) is a national credentialing system, based on
national standards developed by the Singapore Workforce Development Agency (WDA) in
collaboration with various industries comprising industry sectoral frameworks, which serve to:

       Professionalise the industry, particularly where recognition of Continuing Education and
        Training (CET) qualifications are lacking; and
       Improve labour mobility - allowing companies in growing industries to easily recruit workers
        with the necessary skills whilst improving opportunities for workers to enter these industries.

WSQ trains, develops, assesses and recognizes individuals for the key competencies that companies
look for in potential employees. It is designed to be a practical, accessible and affordable launching
pad for individuals to take charge of their own careers and advancement. It is also a powerful business
tool for employers to access and maintain a skilled workforce as it enhances their competitive edge
and advances their business.

The Singapore Workforce Development Agency Act spells out the establishment and functions of the
WDA etc., including the power to award qualifications. WDA is also supported by the Skills
Development Levy Act that requires employers to pay a skills development levy and the establishment
of the Skills Development Fund (SDF) to use the money collected from the levy for purposes of
promotion, development and upgrading of skills and expertise of persons preparing to join the
workforce, persons in the workforce and persons rejoining the workforce, the retraining of retrenched
persons, and the provision of financial assistance by grants and loans. (Source:
http://www.wda.gov.sg)




                                                                                                        2
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                              Singapore | NQF | 2015




2. National Qualifications Framework

2.0 Framework overview

The WSQ is a sectorial skills qualifications framework for the continuing education and training of the
workforce. Roughly 34 industry frameworks have been developed to date. Each WSQ framework is
created in consultation with industry stakeholders. The WSQ frameworks address workforce skills in
two aspects:

    1. Foundational and cross-industry skills - Comprise a range of skills, knowledge and attributes
       that help every individual improve his/her employability. These skills enable workers to better
       adapt to new job demands and a changing work environment. Foundational skills are portable
       across all industries.
    2. Industry specific and occupation specific competencies - Cover skills that equip individuals
       with the know-how to perform specific jobs well.

Industry players, training institutions and unions work together in the Industry Skills and Training
Councils (ISTC) to identify the skills required in the industry and to develop the industry-specific WSQ.
The ISTC also reviews learning outcomes in relation to labor market needs to ensure the framework
remains current and relevant.


2.1 Framework purpose

The main policy objectives of the WSQ system are:
     At the national level, to meet the needs of existing and emerging sectors by ensuring that all
       workers are equipped with relevant and portable competencies that support lifelong
       employability.
     At the sectoral/industry level, to strengthen the expertise of industries, professionalize their
       workforce and enhance the productivity of their workers.
     At the individual worker level, to support the training needs and aspirations of all workers
       through WSQ programmes that lead to industry recognized qualifications.

The WSQ frameworks address workforce skills in two aspects:
    1. Foundational and cross-industry skills - Comprise a range of skills, knowledge and attributes
       that help every individual improve his/her employability. These skills enable workers to better
       adapt to new job demands and a changing work environment. Foundational skills are portable
       across all industries.
    2. Industry-specific and occupation-specific competencies - Cover skills that equip individuals
       with the know-how to perform specific jobs well.

WSQ frameworks can benefit employers in the following ways:
  • Benchmark best practices
  • Guide development of job descriptions
  • Improve performance management systems and training programmes
  • Establish employees' career paths
  • Guide training needs analysis




                                                                                                        3
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                              Singapore | NQF | 2015


    •   Facilitate recruitment of competent staff equipped with required occupational and industry
        capabilities
    •   Strengthen in-house training capabilities


2.2 Framework architecture
The WSQ system has 6 levels of qualifications:




Each WSQ level and qualification has its level descriptors described in learning outcomes determined
by:
    • The level of knowledge and skills involved,
    • The level the knowledge and skills are applied to,
    • The level of accountability, independence, self organisation or organisation of others that is
       required to solve problems or complete tasks, and
    • The occupational levels and range and depth of the knowledge and skills required by the jobs
       that the qualifications relate to.

Three fundamental principles guide the design of all WSQ qualifications:
    • Relevance - qualifications are designed based on the industry and occupational needs and are
        endorsed by industry.
    • Flexibility – qualifications can comprise core units that industry identified as mandatory
        and/or elective or specialisation units to meet the occupational and candidates’ needs.
    • Consistency – qualifications are designed in alignment to the WSQ qualifications levels and
        should comply with the design rules and parameters established by WDA.

The WSQ credits system describes the credits of a competency unit is an indication of the relative
magnitude of the learning effort expressed as Recommended Learning Hours (RLH). The RLH is defined
as the number of hours which a typical trainee is expected to undergo, on average, in order to
accomplish the specified learning outcomes of a competency unit, regardless of the methods of
training and assessment adopted (i.e. directed learning). The WSQ credits system adopts a currency
of 1 credit = 10 RLH; 1 credit is the lowest denomination. The credits of a qualification are the sum of
credits of the requisite competency units leading to the qualification.
Individuals have the option to pursue either a modular WSQ training programme or a full qualification
attainment. This is to meet targeted occupational, business and industry needs as well as the needs
of the candidates.




                                                                                                        4
                                            Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                               Singapore | NQF | 2015



2.3 Framework governance

The design, development and implementation of the WSQ frameworks are facilitated by WDA, in
consultation with the industry. Industry players, training institutions and unions work together in the
Industry Skills and Training Councils (ISTC) to identify the skills required in the industry and to develop
the industry-specific WSQ. The ISTC also reviews the learning outcomes to ensure the framework
remains current and relevant.

There is no legislation governing the design, development and implementation of WSQ frameworks,
however some industries adopted the WSQ frameworks to support their industry legislative
requirements, e.g. the Occupational Hygiene Professionals WSQ was jointly developed by the
Singapore Workforce Development Agency (WDA), the Ministry of Manpower (MOM) and the
Workplace Safety and Health Council (WSH) to support the National Workplace Health Framework
(WH), which assists stakeholders in taking proactive measures to improve their management of WH
hazards and raise WH standards; and to train and develop competent and motivated Occupational
Hygiene (OH) Professionals who can assist employers, occupiers, and other stakeholders in the
anticipation, recognition, evaluation, and control of WH risks at the workplace.

2.4 Framework processes
WDA establishes a set of rules and parameters governing the design of qualifications, such as measure
of the volume of learning required, made up of core competency units, elective competency units and
any other relevant competency units, named and coded in a way which is distinct and does not cause
confusion with other qualifications etc.

Credit transfer and/or recognition of prior learning between WSQ and non-WSQ qualifications, and
between education sectors is established at institution and/or qualification level only. For example:
   • Mutual Recognition Arrangement between Institute of Technical Education (ITE) and WSQ
        (since 2008): Individuals with ITE and/or WSQ qualifications would be able to access and
        pursue skills upgrading under either system with credit exemption.
   • Recognition of WSQ Qualifications for admission into part-time Polytechnic Diploma
        programmes: Selected WSQ qualifications and Workplace Literacy and Numeracy (WPLN)
        qualifications can be used for admission into part-time polytechnic Diploma programmes.

Evaluating the complexity and quantity (volume) of a non-WSQ qualification for credit recognition or
articulation into WSQ qualification is undertaken by WDA, where the broad parameters for evaluation
are:
     • There is significant market demand for credit recognition or articulation.
     • Qualifications are from established and credible institutions.
     • Qualifications are required for the broadening and deepening of skills within a sector.

2.5 Framework links
Establishment of the linkages between WSQ and other education system are driven by needs of the
industry.
    1. Mutual Recognition Arrangement between Institute of Technical Education (ITE) and WSQ
        (since 2008)
            a. Individuals with ITE and/or WSQ qualifications would be able to access and pursue
                skills upgrading under either system with credit exemption.
    2. Recognition of WSQ Qualifications for admission into part-time Polytechnic Diploma
        programmes.
    3. WSQ-aligned Industrial Attachment (IA) for polytechnics students.


                                                                                                         5
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                              Singapore | NQF | 2015


    4. Articulation Arrangement for WSQ Certifications to Higher Learning Systems
           a. WSQ certifications and qualifications will be considered for entry.
           b. Individuals who are successfully admitted into these institutes can also receive
               credit/module exemptions.

Assessing and recognizing qualifications from other economies is not actively or proactively
undertaken by WDA. Focus of WDA is to upskill the local workforce. The various Ministries and
government agencies in Singapore have their own evaluation criteria for determining how to assess
and recognize overseas qualifications for their own policy requirements.

3. Quality assurance mechanisms

3.1 Accreditation (Approval) of qualifications

Approval
Only organizations / institutions that have legislative Acts are empowered to award qualifications.
Each of the polytechnics, ITE, IHLs and WDA do not accredit qualifications. They award qualifications
within the powers of their respective Acts. For WSQ qualifications, WDA approves training
organization to be their Approved Training Organization (ATO) first, before they are allowed to deliver
the WSQ training.

Assessment
The Singapore Examinations and Assessment Board (SEAB) was established on 1 April 2004 as a
statutory board, to develop and conduct national examinations in Singapore, and to provide other
examination and assessment services and products, locally as well as overseas. SEAB collaborates with
MOE on all national examinations from Primary School Leaving Exam, GCE(N), (O) and (A) level Exams.
Students who passed these exams will be issued the corresponding certificate by the Ministry of
Education.
Each of the polytechnics, ITE, IHLs and WDA has their own examination / assessment requirements.
Students / learners who passed these exams / assessments will be issued the corresponding certificate
by the respective institutions.

Relationship to standards
Only WDA and ITE use competency standards in their curriculum design and development. The
competency standards list the skills, knowledge and attitudes needed to perform a job task and
describe the acceptable levels of performance. WDA competency standards are developed and
validated by industry for their uses. WSQ Approved Training Organisations (ATOs) use the competency
standards in design, development, training and assessment of WSQ training programmes, whereas ITE
competency standards are developed for and validated by industry, but only used within the ITE
setting.

WDA ‘s notion of competence is the acquisition of skills, knowledge and attitudes to perform a task
effectively according to acceptable levels of performance.




                                                                                                        6
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                              Singapore | NQF | 2015




Foundational skills comprise a range of skills, knowledge and attributes that help every individual
improve his/her employability. These skills enable workers to better adapt to new job demands and a
changing work environment. Foundational skills are portable across all industries. Industry and
occupation skills cover skills that equip individuals with the know-how to perform specific jobs well in
the industry.

There    are   34    Singapore   Workforce    Skills  Qualifications            (WSQ)      frameworks.
[http://www.wda.gov.sg/content/wdawebsite/L101-ForIndividuals/L201-
012WSQforIndividuals.html]

Employability skills, generic skills or capability type competencies are taught and/or assessed
separately.

For each WSQ framework, an Industry Skills and Training Council drives the development and
validation of skills standards, assessment strategies and training curriculum for the industry. Each
council is represented by key industry partners, including employers, industry associations, training
organisations and unions.

WDA oversees the quality of WSQ competency frameworks, competency maps, standards, courses,
and assessment plans. There are guidelines and templates for the development of these standards.
The     competency     standards    are     maintained     at    the    portal    ‘SkillsConnect’.
https://www.skillsconnect.gov.sg/web/guest/home

Do these standards inform:
                                                   No     Yes. Please Explain.
  Program design                                          These are developed based on competency
  Learning program                                        standards.

  Work-based learning program
  Educational standards (refer to definitions)      x
                                                           These are developed based on competency
  Assessment standards (refer to definitions)             standards.


                                                                                                        7
                                              Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                                 Singapore | NQF | 2015


  Validation standards (refer to definitions)           x
                                                                These are developed based on competency
  Certification standards (refer to definitions)               standards.
  Curriculum or Curriculum Standards (refer to
  definitions)                                          x
  Qualifications                                                These are developed based on competency
  Licensing requirements                                       standards.

OR are your standards informed by:
                                                       No      Yes. Please Explain.
  Program design                                               Competency standards are derived from
  Learning program                                             Occupational and Functional Analysis, and
                                                               also include other information as listed from
  Work-based learning program
                                                               the left.
  Educational standards (refer to definitions).
  Assessment standards (refer to definitions).
  Validation standards (refer to definitions).
  Certification standards (refer to definitions).
  Curriculum or Curriculum Standards (refer to
  definitions).
  Qualifications
  Licensing requirements

WSQ ATOs design and develop the WSQ training programmes based on the competency standards.
Only when there is a critical need for ensuring consistency in quality and speed to implementing the
training, will WDA develop national curriculum for industry use. All WSQ courseware require WDA’s
accreditation before implementation.

Benefits to Users of WSQ:
Individuals                           Employers                             Training Providers

Career path planning and              Benchmark best practices              Articulate clear training outcomes
assistance for entry into a new
industry

Skills upgrading and career           Improve and develop job               Develop and deliver training
advancement through clear             descriptions                          programmes to meet industry
progression pathways                                                        needs

Present more clearly defined skills   Improve performance management        Receive endorsement on quality
sets to potential employers via new   systems and training programmes       training programmes
qualifications and certifications

Obtain portable credentials for       Establish clearly defined career      Gain capability development from
existing skills                       paths for employees                   WDA

Assess and benchmark individual       Guide training needs analysis
capabilities against industry-
established work standards

Support and promote best practices Facilitate recruiting competent staff
in the workplace                   who are equipped with industry-
                                   specific capabilities and job-specific
                                   requirements




                                                                                                                 8
                                              Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                                 Singapore | NQF | 2015


                                      Strengthen in-house training
                                      capabilities


Who uses the standards and for what purpose?
 Stakeholder                     Explain how used and for what purpose
 Individual                      For self-evaluation so as to ascertain if he / she is ready for a particular
                                      job and for identification of own development needs. Receive subsidised
                                      quality training and development. Obtain nationally recognised
                                      credentials.
 Education and training               For development and implementation of CET interventions. To design
                                      training and assessment programmes that best develop trainees’
 providers                            abilities according to skills sets stated in competency standards and to
                                      help trainees progress according to different levels of competency.
                                      Receive national endorsement in training delivery and assessment.
 Employers                            For recruitment, selection, development, performance management and
                                      talent management.
                                      An employer can use competency standards to decide and design tools
                                      that will place, develop and promote staff for maximum performance to
                                      achieve business needs. Assured of quality training of staff by providers.
 Industry peak bodies
 Government departments               For management and planning of industry manpower requirements. To
                                      determine skills level of key occupational groups with the aims of
                                      improving the quality and productivity of particular industry. Some
                                      agencies use the competency standards to facilitate the legislation and
                                      licensing of skilled occupations. Examples include NEA, SIRD, STB,
                                      MOM.
 Approval bodies (accreditation       For awarding of qualifications and certifications. WDA is the awarding
                                      body of WSQ, utilises the competency standards to design, quality
 or registration)                     assure and award qualifications and certifications.
 Curriculum bodies                    For awarding of qualifications and certifications. WDA is the awarding
                                      body of WSQ, utilises the competency standards to design, quality
                                      assure and award qualifications and certifications.



3.2 Registration (Approval) of education and training providers/awarding
bodies

Any training organisation that wishes to offer WSQ courses must meet the organization accreditation
criteria established by the Singapore Workforce Development Agency (WDA). Upon approval as a WSQ
ATO, ATO can proceed to submit a course to WDA for accreditation before implementation. Every ATO
is expected to maintain and upkeep the standard of delivery in training and assessment. WDA will
periodically validate the WSQ internal quality assurance system and capability of ATO under the
Continuous Improvement Review (CIR) audits.
The requirements and criteria for organization and course accreditation, and CIR can be found at
(http://www.wda.gov.sg/content/wdawebsite/L225-ForTrainingProviders/L325A-001TP-ATO.html).

A summary of details are found in the section below.
For private education institutions, they are subjected to the Private Education Act (PE Act, overseen
by the Council of Private Education. The PE Act specifies the registration and renewal requirements
for private education institutions.
https://www.cpe.gov.sg/
https://www.cpe.gov.sg/for-peis/enhanced-registration-framework-erf/registration-requirements

3.3 Training providers
Quality assurance of WSQ training providers and courseware covers three stages:



                                                                                                                   9
                                         Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                            Singapore | NQF | 2015


   1. Organisation Accreditation
         a. Legal entity
         b. Defined roles and responsibilities
         c. Sound financial health
         d. Sufficient line-up of adult educators
         e. Adequate facilities and equipment
         f. Systems and capabilities in place to support fulfilment of the roles and responsibilities
             of an ATO
         g. 2-year business plan
         h. Any other requirements from specific industry sectors

   2. Course Accreditation
         a. Course Design and Development; Assessment Design; Adult Educator (AE)
             requirements; Facilities and Equipment;

   3. License Renewal
          a. Course quality assurance system
          b. Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) System
          c. Outcome evaluation system
          d. Adult educator management system
          e. WSQ related administrative system
          f. Viability of organisation
          g. Free from breach of terms and conditions
          h. System-evidence-outcome (SEO) approach in the evaluation of the criteria

WSQ training providers are audited on an 18-month cycle. An audit report will be produced for the
training providers only. Those who do not meet the renewal requirements may be suspended from
operations or terminated.

WDA      maintains   a    list  of   WSQ      training    providers    on     its    website.
http://www.wda.gov.sg/content/wdawebsite/L101-ForIndividuals/L220A-004CETFullList.html

For private education institutions, please refer to the URL:
https://www.cpe.gov.sg/for-peis/enhanced-registration-framework-erf/registration-requirements


3.4 Educator requirements

Quality assurance for WSQ adult educators

Pedagogy Qualifications Requirements for WSQ Adult Educators:
 Role of Adult Educators          For Public Training Providers      For In-company Training
                                                                     Organisations

 WSQ Trainer and/or Assessor      WSQ Advanced Certificate in        WSQ Workplace Trainer
                                  Training and Assessment (ACTA)     Programme (WTP)

 WSQ Curriculum / Course          WSQ Diploma in Adult and           WSQ Advanced Certificate in
 Developer                        Continuing Education (DACE)        Training and Assessment (ACTA)




                                                                                                      10
                                            Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                               Singapore | NQF | 2015


In addition, Adult Educators should possess relevant industry/vocational qualifications and/or formal
academic qualifications, and work experience. Specific details on the Adult Educators requirements
for each WSQ Qualifications are specified in the Curriculum, Training and Assessment Guide (CTAG),
and ATOs are required to ensure that the Adult Educators meet these. WDA will also conduct checks
on the Adult Educators before they can be deployed to conduct training.

For private education institutions, please refer to the URL:
 https://www.cpe.gov.sg/for-peis/enhanced-registration-framework-erf/registration-requirements


3.5 Transnational/cross border education

What strategies do you have in place to address transitional/cross border education?
   Do you allow your providers to deliver in other nations? No.
   How do you assess and recognise incoming providers? Not applicable.
   Are your qualifications recognised in other countries? This depends on G2G arrangement, but
       largely WDA do not proactively arrange for qualifications recognition by other countries.
   Do your quality standards/requirements apply to transnational delivery? If not how is the
       quality of training and assessment conducted offshore managed? Not applicable.
   How do you recognise overseas qualifications in your country? This is on a case-to-case basis,
       but largely, the overseas qualifications should be awarded by a nationally recognised
       public/government awarding bodies, and/or reputable professional/international
       organisations.

3.6 Quality indicators/data

What type of data do you collect for monitoring the quality of your education and training system?

 Data                                                              Higher        TVET        Schools
                                                                   Education
 Student Background Characteristics (e.g. in terms of ethnicity,   Yes           Yes         Yes
 age, gender, disabilities, prior qualifications)
 Type and range of pathways into your programs, including uptake   Yes           Yes         Yes
 rates
 Patterns of student enrolments.                                   Yes           Yes         Yes
 Recognition of prior learning/credit transfer arrangements and    Yes           Yes         No.
 outcomes
 Relationship between program offerings and labour market          Yes           Yes         Yes
 demands
 Proportion of funds invested in:
       Supporting student learning, including those with          Yes           Yes         Yes
          disabilities
       Staff professional development/in-service training
 Process for program design, accreditation and review              Yes           Yes         Yes
 Qualifications, experience and expertise of teaching staff        Yes           Yes         Yes
 Stakeholder satisfaction (e.g. employers, students) with the      Yes           Yes         Yes
 delivery and outcomes of the course
 Retention and completion rates and patterns                       Yes           Yes         Yes
 Graduate destinations                                             Yes           Yes         Yes
 Other: specify




                                                                                                       11
                                            Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                               Singapore | NQF | 2015



4. Barriers and obstacles

Singapore recently embarked on a new journey known as ‘SkillsFuture.’ SkillsFuture is a national
movement to provide Singaporeans with opportunities to develop to their fullest potential throughout
life, regardless of their starting points. Through this movement, the skills, passion and contributions
of every individual will drive Singapore's next phase of development towards an advanced economy
and inclusive society. It is envisaged that no matter where the person is in life – schooling years, early
career, mid-career or silver years – he/she will find a variety of resources to help him/her attain
mastery of skills. Skills mastery is more than having the right paper qualifications and being good at
what the person currently does; it is a mindset of continually striving towards greater excellence
through knowledge, application and experience. With the help of the SkillsFuture Council, education
and training providers, employers, and unions – the person can own a better future with skills mastery
and lifelong learning.

5. Additional comments
Include any other comments.

6. Additional information
Provide names (and role and organization) of person involved in the development of this overview.

 Name                               Role                               Organisation
 Thomas Yeo                         Principal TVET Consultant          CET Global Pte Ltd




                                                                                                       12
