CAMBODIA (KINGDOM OF) 1


Education System

The Cambodia Education and Training System

The education system in Cambodia embraces formal and non-formal education. The formal pre-tertiary
education structure, under the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport (MoEYS), consists of three years of
pre-school education, six years of primary school (grades 1-6), three years of lower-secondary school
(grades 7-9), and three years of upper secondary school (grades 10-12).

The Education Law adopted in 2007 highlights two other approaches to learning, besides the formal: non-
formal and informal. Lifelong education is encouraged.

The formal Higher Education consists of one year of pre-university (foundation year), two years of
Associate Degree, with an additional two years for a four-year Bachelor Degree, two years of Master
Degree and three years of Doctoral Degree. The Directorate General of Higher Education of MoEYS is the
regulatory entity for state universities and oversee the registration of private universities.

MoEYS- Directorate General of Higher Education, with block funding and some regulatory function of state
universities and a registration function with private sector universities.

The Directorate General of TVET of the Ministry of Labour and Vocational Training (MoLVT), manages the
national TVET system. The National Training Board (NTB), with representation from all 14 ministries with
training institutions, is responsible for policy direction and coordination. The formal TVET System is
comprised of 38 TVET institutions. There are 23 Provincial Training Centres, 8 Polytechnics/Institutes, 1
specialised Institute, namely Secondary School of Japan Vocational Centre, and 6 other institutions which
offer community based short courses to improve household income.

The courses currently offered by MoLVT are the short courses in basic skills (3-5 months duration), the
certificate courses at 3 levels, requiring at entry point grade 9 or skills bridging, Higher Diploma
Programmes of 2 years requiring Grade 12 or completion of the 3 Certificate levels, Bachelor Programmes



1This overview is based on the Cambodia Report on Standards and Qualifications (2015) prepared by a team of Cambodian
experts with support from the World Bank. The Report and its overview expand on the original submission by Cambodia for the
East Asia Summit Vocational Education and Training Quality Assurance Framework Project managed by Australia
Commonwealth Government in 2012.
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project

                                                                               Cambodia | NQF | 2015




of 4 years requiring Grade 12 or 2 years after completion of Higher Diploma levels, and Master
Programmes of 2 years after completion of Bachelor Degree.



Cambodia Qualifications Framework (CQF)
Cambodia is still in the process of developing a fully integrated CQF. The CQF is the National instrument
that develops and classifies qualifications based on a set of nationally agreed-upon criteria for specified
learning levels. CQF encompass all levels of Education and Training in Cambodia, in service of the nation’s
Human Resources Development.

There are eight levels of qualifications and each level is differentiated by the general characteristic
classified criteria that include minimum entrance requirements, typical duration, programme
characteristics, cumulative duration in fulltime equivalent, type of subsequent education and learning
outcomes.

The framework has a credit system so that the volume learning may be recorded and students may receive
credit for all qualifications.

At this stage, there is no legislation being developed for an agency to monitor and manage the CQF.



Quality Assurance Strategies

Accreditation of Qualifications


There are two accrediting bodies for qualifications, one is the Accreditation Committee of Cambodia (ACC)
for the higher education sector and the other is the National Training Board (NTB) for the TVET sector.
ACC and NTB are the bodies responsible for accrediting qualifications and for managing and monitoring
accreditation. The NTB is supported by the Directorate General of Technical and Vocational Education and
Training (DGTVET). The NTB is made up of the ministers from the 14 line ministries.

Accreditation processes through the NTB is in the trialing stage through the ADB STVET project. There are
no quality standards or criteria related to the performance of the accrediting agency or related to the
accreditation of qualifications.

Currently there is no public register of national qualifications (or qualifications developed internally and
not accredited).

Currently the DGTVET through the ADB STVET project has developed competency standards (clustering
into qualifications), curriculum, learner workbooks (which include some theory assessment) and
assessment materials (for the practical assessment) for Level 2 to Level 4 qualifications for electrical,

                                                                                                            2
                                          Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project

                                                                              Cambodia | NQF | 2015




plumbing, masonry and carpentry. There has been no development of curriculum, workbooks or
assessment packages for Diploma or above.

Assessment

The NTB is the proposed awarding body responsible for the issuance of national TVET qualifications.
National TVET qualifications endorsed by NTB will be based on competency standards. Certificates and/or
statements will include a list of required competencies.

It is proposed that registered TVET providers will be able to undertake training and assessment services,
and 10 assessment centres will be established for the purpose of assessing current competencies (RPL)
and qualifications.

It is anticipated that the providers and assessment centres will administer the assessments. Beyond the
assessment delivered via the learner workbook and the competency assessment package, there is no clear
guidance as to how assessments will be evaluated to ensure consistency.

Relationship to standards
Competency standards will form the basis of TVET qualifications. These standards are being developed
under the purview of DGVET through an ADB STVET project.

The competency standards are based on the notion of competence, which is the skills standard “required
for effective performance in the workplace.” The standard goes beyond specifying knowledge, skills and
behavioral requirements into defining “the performance levels the workers in a particular job must
achieve” (competency standards strategy).

The competency standards describe a distinct work activity that would normally be undertaken by one
person in accordance with industry standards; therefore, they are job-related task specifications.

Currently competency standards have been developed through the ADB TVET project and include 3 key
priority sectors (construction, automotive and IT/Business). Overall there are to be 63 qualifications
developed, for four trade areas (electrical, plumbing, electrical, plumbing, masonry and carpentry).

Competency standards are divided into basic and core competencies. Basic competencies are
employability or generic skills, whereas core competencies are the skills set for the technical job role.

The development of the competency standards is being trialed through the ADB project, however
documentation in relation to the process is not developed. It is anticipated that NTB will be responsible
for the development of competency standards and TVET qualifications, although it is not clear whether
some of the responsibilities will be devolved to other line ministries.

There are no quality standards for the development of competency standards, although the Competency
Strategy outlines the process. The development process includes: Industry Advisory Group, Industry
expert worker and a Technical Working Group.

                                                                                                           3
                                             Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project

                                                                                  Cambodia | NQF | 2015




The Industry Advisory Group’s job is to advise on critical job roles that need skill development, validate
the list of competencies to be developed and endorse the competency standards and qualification
completion rules. The Technical Working Group facilitates functional and job task analyses to identify
competencies in need of further development. These lists of proposed competencies are reviewed and
endorsed by the Industry Advisory Group. The Technical Working Group then drafts the competencies.
These draft competencies are then taken to skilled experts in the field for comment and then final drafts
are endorsed by the IAG. Next, the IAG submits the competencies and qualification completion rules to
the NTB sub-committee for review to ensure that they meet the requirements of the CQF. They are then
passed to the NTB for final approval.

Endorsement and approval of competency-based curricula are included in this process; these are the
programme standards. These programme standards include advice in relation to course design.

Competency standards development are informed by: functional and job task analysis, expert advice from
industry/employers, experts in the field and expert trainers/assessors.

Although it is anticipated that there will be national TVET qualifications, it is proposed that in the transition
to a fully skilled workforce meeting required competency levels, that individual providers will be able to
have their qualifications accredited until a national qualification framework is approved.



Registration of Providers/Awarding Bodies


The Accreditation Committee of Cambodia is a registering body with the responsibility to register
academic providers in higher education. There are nine standards which apply to the academic education
providers seeking registration in higher education. Providers are registered with regard to these nine
standards of education accreditation and within the Educational Accreditation Royal Decree of the
Kingdom of Cambodia.

In TVET, currently the registering bodies are separated by sectors. There are currently 14 line ministries
who manage the training and assessment services across the relevant industry sectors. There are 292
providers of training and assessment registered with GDTVET, of which 39 are government owned
institutions.

There are currently no quality standards developed that address the role of regulators. There is no body
responsible for the monitoring of these regulators (e.g. ministries).

NTB supported by DGTVET, MLVT will register all providers of TVET. The standards or requirements that
need to be met for the registration of providers is being developed in the on-going ADB funded project,
strengthening Technical and Vocational Education and Training (STVET). These criteria have been
developed.


                                                                                                               4
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project

                                                                               Cambodia | NQF | 2015




In the case of TVET, the registration standards for TVET providers focuses on 6 criteria: Management and
Governance, Resources, Staff and Teaching Staff, Trainee and Student, Curriculum and Teaching/Learning,
Research and Development. These criteria have been developed. The supporting documents related to
these criteria are being developed to assist the training providers. Currently those registered with DGTVET
are required to complete an application form to be registered.

Each of the 39 government institutes will monitor themselves against the 6 criteria. It is envisaged that
this process will eventually be implemented across all registered providers. A detailed monitoring and
evaluation system will be put in place.

For both sectors, TVET and higher education, there is a register of providers, but they are incomplete. The
providers must undertake quality audits and annual self-assessments, as well as prepared annual
performance reports.

It is anticipated that the TVET system will include assessment centres for recognition of current
competencies (RPL) and qualifications.



Educator/Assessor Requirements
The ADB STVET Project is developing an integrated learning services system for the upgrading of technical
and vocational education and training (TVET), including teacher training, skills standards, testing and
assessment, development of curriculum and training materials, and institutional management and
upgrading. The Competency Standards for TVET Teachers, which are being finalized, will be used as a tool
for identifying the minimum standards of TVET teachers.
For education sector, teachers, trainers and lectures are trained at the National Institute of Education for
upper secondary school and universities. Teacher, trainer, educator, and lecturer requirements are noted
in legislation.



Transnational/Cross Border Education

Application of the Framework to International Institutions Operating in Cambodia
International institutions and programmes offered within the Kingdom of Cambodia must also meet the
requirements established in this Kingdom. These include consistency with the Cambodia Qualifications
Framework including conformity with its credit hour requirements, the requirements for years of study,
and the development of learning outcomes in different domains of learning.




                                                                                                            5
                                            Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project

                                                                                Cambodia | NQF | 2015




Barriers and Obstacles
The current TVET management and delivery system is predominantly a legacy of Cambodia's history. Many
of the institutions were modeled on a centralized planning system where training programmes were
developed to meet the specific skills needs of each Ministry and post-training job placement was
guaranteed. This TVET system is characterized by a supply-driven philosophy. This has contributed to
inefficient and low quality training and limited market responsiveness from existing TVET institutions.
Several issues surround the relationship between greater openness to the free market and TVET
development:

       Low level of investment.
       Disconnection between TVET institutions and the labour market or private sector.
       Lack of a labour market information system.
       Lack of pathways through TVET programmes to higher levels of education, and also the pathway
        across from schools sector.



Issues
The main issues confronting the implementation of NQFs and quality assurance are:
       The complexity of the processes designed for highly industrialized countries but well beyond the
        needs of emerging economies;
       The arcane language used which causes confusion and frustration; and
       The absence of a step-by-step process that is respectful of varying levels of need.



Additional information
Personnel involved in the development of this overview.

 Name                   Role                                Organization
 Khim Yorm              Deputy Director                     National Competency Standards Department,
                                                            Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training
                        TVET Curriculum and
 Kath Marnane                                               Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training
                        Qualifications Specialist




                                                                                                             6
