MONGOLIA 1

Education System Overview
The education system in Mongolia consists of the following levels: pre-school, secondary (combining
primary, lower secondary and upper secondary), TVET and tertiary education. After completing nine
years of basic education, students can either continue to upper secondary education or enter TVET
schools. Following twelve years of secondary schooling, students who wish to continue with further
studies may enter tertiary institutions or TVET schools.
Tertiary education offers four levels of qualifications: Diploma level (up to 90 credit hours), Bachelor
degree (120 credits), Master’s degree (150 credits) and Doctoral degree (210 credits). Tertiary
education is offered by universities, colleges and institutes. Colleges mainly offer undergraduate
programs, while universities and institutes focus more on research and graduate study. Admission to
universities requires the Gerchilgee or diploma of secondary education awarded at the end of
secondary school. Students must take a competitive entrance examination administered nationally by
Education Evaluation Center (EEC). The Education Law states that higher education institutions are to
award academic degrees or qualifications.
TVET schools were administered by the Ministry of Education until 2012 and are now under the
Ministry of Labor. There are four types of institutions which offer TVET programs: (a) vocational
training and production centres (VTPC) (40 of them); (b) independent (technical) colleges (9); (c)
branches of higher education institutes (7); and (c) branches of universities (15).
VTPC and technical colleges enrol students who graduated from 9th grade of secondary schooling
(completion of basic education). They are expected to study two and a half years and to receive both
a vocational education certificate and a secondary education completion certificate.
Vocational programs operating within branches of universities and institutes enrol only graduates of
12th grade of secondary schooling (high school graduates). They are expected to study only one year
to receive a vocational education or occupational certificate or 2-3 years for a vocational education
diploma.
There are non-formal vocational training programs offered called short-term (up to three months)
vocational skills training. They are administered by the Ministry of Labor. After completion of training
the participants receive a vocational/skills or competency certificate. In addition, on-the-job training
is designed for new employees or to enhance the skills of the industry workforce. They are
administered directly by employers.


National Qualifications Framework
The NQF is a relatively new concept for Mongolia. Currently, there is no NQF nor are there sectoral
QFs, although discussions have been had regarding development of a TVET QF. The Ministry of Labor
is eager to continue this initiative. However, there are many issues to solve before such a system could
be put in place.



1
    This overview is based on the Mongolia Report on Standards and Qualifications (2015) prepared by Khishigbuyan Dayan-
Ochir with support from the World Bank. The Report and its overview are based on information collected from the survey
developed for the East Asia Summit Vocational Education and Training Quality Assurance Framework Project managed by
Australia Commonwealth Government in 2012.
                                                    Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                                       Mongolia | NQF | 2015



Quality assurance mechanisms

Accreditation (Approval) of qualifications
At the moment, there is no accrediting or assessment agency for qualifications in Mongolia. In tertiary
education, there are 4 levels of qualifications: diploma, BA degree, MA degree and doctorate degree.
The MEDS defines the general rules for issuing qualifications by education institutions. Based on the
general rules, each institution develops their own rules on issuing qualifications. Recently, the
Minister for Education and Science revised the rules and issued Decree No A/174, dated 28 April 2014
about common requirements for BA degree training to be followed by all education providers. It
explains general competencies that students are expected to demonstrate, assessments,
requirements for teaching staff and learning conditions, and learning outcomes for all majors’ general
foundational subjects (8 subjects). Regarding TVET, the following degree or certification system exists.

             TABLE 1. TYPES OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION/TRAINING AND GRADUATION DOCUMENTS

 No      Types of Training                  Duration         Provider               Degree/Certificate Granted
 1       Vocational Education               2.5 years        VTPC and colleges      Certificate of vocational edu.
 2       Training of professional           1 to 2           VTPC and colleges      Occupational certificate
         workers                            years
 3       Training of technicians and        1.5 to 3         VTPC and colleges      Vocational diploma
         technologists                      years
 4       Skills and Competency              1-2 months       Short-term             Competency certificate
         Training                                            training providers
                                                             and VTPC
 5      On-the Job Training             3 months             Employers              Certificate
Source: adopted from KRIVET, 2010, p. 337

Since there is no specialized agency for accreditation of qualifications, existing quality assurance
mechanisms for both the TVET and tertiary education sectors are quite weak. Establishing a quality
assurance system is one of the government’s current challenges. The TVET and tertiary education
sectors’ quality assurance system includes three main modes: institutional or program level
accreditation, attestation and licensing. These three modes are detailed in the following Table.
                                       TABLE 2. QUALITY ASSURANCE MODES


                ACCREDITATION                         ATTESTATION           LICENSING (opening of new institution)
 Purpose        Institutional     Programme           Compliance            Permission for operation
                performance       improvement         Check with
                improvement                           standards

 Focus          HEIs and TVET     Academic            HEIs and TEVT         HEIs and TVET         Academic
                schools           programmes          schools               schools               programmes
 Responsible    MNCEA                                 MECS and MOL          MECS and MOL
 institution

 Steps          Self-evaluation   Self-evaluation     Self-evaluation       External              External
                External          External            External              evaluation            evaluation
                evaluation        evaluation          evaluation
 Follow-up      Periodic Re-      Periodic Re-        Periodic renewal of   Renewal               Renewal of
 or result      accreditation     accreditation       attestation           of HEI license        academic
                of HEIs           of academic                                                     programme licenses
                                  programmes




                                                                                                                       2
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                              Mongolia | NQF | 2015


    A. Institutional or program level accreditation was initiated in 1998 with establishment of the
       Mongolian National Council of Education Accreditation (MNCEA) which has accredited 65
       HEIs, 4 TVET schools, 174 higher education programs and 8 TVET programs. MNCEA has
       established a two-step process for quality assurance: self-assessment by institutions and on-
       site assessment by external assessors. There are schools that have not yet been accredited.
    B. Attestation. Attestation rules for HEIs were established by the Minister’s order No 09 dated
       13 November 2011. Every HEI should go through the attestation process once every five years
       by the External Expert Team appointed by the Ministry of Education. The criteria for
       attestation includes several aspects of HEIs such as legal environment, academic program
       organization, teaching, students, learning environment, ICT, and research activities. For
       example, the criteria for academic programs stipulates that each academic program should
       have its own developed curriculum according to the Ministry’s list of approved qualifications.
    C. Licensing. Licensing is awarded through Special Permission by the Ministry of Education or
       Ministry of Labor to those who successfully apply to establish a new educational institution,
       including a TVET school or HEI. Certain rules and application procedures apply to this process.



Relationship to standards
Standards in Higher Education
The concept of standards is relatively new in Mongolia. In the higher education sector, the standards
were introduced in 2002. The 2002 Education Law stipulated that the higher education program
standards approved by the Mongolian Agency for Standardization and Metrology (MASM) should be
used as mandatory national standards for all HEIs. MASM is the government agency that registers and
maintains the standards. This has resulted in the development and approval of about 120
undergraduate program standards. There are other programs offered in HEIs that have not yet
developed standards.
These standards approved by MASM include sample course lists for the program, a list of common
competencies to be acquired by the graduates, knowledge and skills related to the profession to be
obtained by graduates, and evaluation and qualification criteria for teaching staff. Each program
standard is initially drafted by a team composed of university professors and specialists/practitioners
in the related field, and approved by the MASM. Ministry of Education and Science (MEDS) is to review
the standards and work closely with MASM in the approval process. At the MASM level, there is a
committee to review and approve the standards. A representative from MEDS must be on this
committee.
Unfortunately, descriptions of standards on paper documents and the actual implementation process
are not always in compliance.

Standards in the TVET sector

The Law on TVET (2009) stipulates that (Article 10) vocational education and training standards should
define the requirements of knowledge and skills for learning content (learning content consist of the
three: general core, professional core and specialized core), requirements for evaluation, learning
conditions and teacher qualifications. Standards are to be approved by the MASM according to the
Law on Standardization and Metrology.

Sample standards of the TVET program were approved by the Minister of Labor’s Resolution No A/163,
dated 18 July 2014. The sample standards include expected job skills of graduates, admission




                                                                                                        3
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                              Mongolia | NQF | 2015


requirements, requirements for curriculum content and its assessment, teacher qualifications and
requirements for institutions and learning conditions, such as tools and equipment.
Notion of competence
Competence in higher education. The above standards attempt to define what are the competencies
that graduates are to be obtained through their chosen course of study. In addition, there are some
other documents and policies where the notion of competencies has been emphasized. For example,
the recent Minister of Education and Science’s decree (Sept, 2014) on Rules of Graduate studies in
HEIs defined the competencies for graduates of graduate programs as follows:
    1. Personal and professional skills and attitudes
            a. Problem solving skills (solve problem based on proof, analyse and research problems,
                propose new ideas, do mapping, choose optimal solutions)
            b. Research skills (prepare report based on comparative analysis)
            c. Systematic planning
            d. Personal skills (self-organization, creative thinking, time management)
            e. Professional skills (professional and research ethics, engagement in continuous
                research activities)
    2. Communication skills (team building)
            a. Team spirit and leadership
            b. Communication skills (use of communication tools such as electronic way, multimedia
                and writing skills)
            c. Foreign language skills (English and other)
    3. The knowledge, skills and attitude to be obtained from professional core subjects will be
        defined by institutions themselves.
Competence in TVET. In the TVET sector, the notion of competence has been introduced and talked
about since 2010 under the MCA TVET project funded by MCA,USA. Under this initiative, 28 sample
competency-based curricula for TVET were developed and national experts were trained in curriculum
design methodology. In doing this, the curriculum development process involved employers in order
to consider their needs and skills mentioned in job descriptions of various qualifications at the job
market. The notion of “competence” is understood as a combination of knowledge, skills and
attitudes possessed by learners. Each competence has a definition, units of competence and
performance indicators.
Quality assurance of standards
The State Professional Inspection Agency (SPIA) under the government cabinet is in charge of
overseeing the implementation of standards in all fields of the economy and social sectors, including
education sectors. This agency has a department in charge of overseeing educational institutions,
which is in charge of quality assurance of standards and competency framework.
Curriculum development in Higher Education
Curriculum development has been a questionable issue in the higher education reform process over
the last 24 years. For the first time, the country introduced a western degree structure and credit hour
system. However, it is hard to say if all the HEIs adapted the system fully in terms of offering optional
choices of courses for students. There are only a few public universities that can offer the opportunity
to choose among many course options by students. Otherwise, the majority of institutions define the
assigned list of required courses by students for each semester. The government is attempting to
strengthen the institutions revising the rules and regulations related to academic program
management. Recently, the Minister adopted the list of professions or programs that HEIs can offer
training as one of the measures to reform higher education reform taking place since the 1990s. This




                                                                                                        4
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                              Mongolia | NQF | 2015


list was composed of 800 professions before and the system looked quite messy. Now this list has 175
professions or majors considering the needs of the market and its linkage to the job market.
Article 8.4 of the Higher Education Law states that programs and their curriculum should be developed
for each major field of study and they should be endorsed by the Ministry of Education and approved
by rectors of higher education institutions. The curriculum includes general and professional core
content, and the specialization core as content. The general core should constitute 30% of the
curriculum, the professional core 40%, and the specialization core 30%.
In September of 2014 the Minister issued Decree No A/370, which defined the new requirements for
graduate programs and curriculum development. According to this decree “program” (major field of
study) is defined as a comprehensive document that identifies the content of learning and research
activities and their organization. It further defined the common guidelines for all the programs offered
by HEIs as follows:
         Introduction of the program (name of the program, index, evaluation report by outsiders,
            program goals, learning outcomes of graduates, name of responsible department chair)
         Curriculum
         Program description
         Organization of the program
         Learning conditions
         Admission requirements
         Requirements for teaching staff
         Skills of graduates
         Student assessment
         Quality assurance
This decree required that at the institutional level there should be a Program Committee for each
major field of study in charge of designing and implementing the programs. The composition of the
committees is to be approved by rectors.
According to this decree, each program should have a study plan or curriculum. A curriculum is to
define the list of required courses, assigned credits for courses, the sequence and logical linkage of
courses and the justification of meeting the requirements for a program as defined above. Curriculums
are to be developed by assigned Program committees. Then they should be endorsed by the Ministry
and, finally, approved by the Rectors of HEIs.
The TVET curriculum is supposed to be in accordance with relevant industrial and educational
standards involving employers, experts, teachers and methodological experts. They are to get
approval from the Ministry of Labour. MOL has the Department of TVET Policy and regional
methodological centers in 5 provinces. The regional methodological centres play a key role in
curriculum development. The vocational and technical education curriculum is implemented with 30%
contact hours allocated for classroom teaching (theoretical knowledge) and 70% of study time
devoted to gaining skills in practical training workshops at school or through industry internships,
depending on each school.
According to the Article 9 of the Law on TVET, the curriculum content for technical education programs
must provide the knowledge, skills and attitudes students need to manage technological processes
and occupational activities. The content is divided into three parts: general core, professional core and
specialized core. Since 2010, this competence-based curriculum development process is underway.
Faculties of TVET schools were trained in designing competence-based curriculum under MCA TVET
project.




                                                                                                        5
                                            Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                               Mongolia | NQF | 2015


Registration (Approval) of education and training providers/awarding
bodies
The Education Law sets the rules for awarding a license for establishing a new higher education
institution. Also, the Law on Licensing of entities in Mongolia is applied to this process along with
education related legislations and rules. According to this Education Law statement, the following
documents should be submitted to the Ministry of Education for establishing a higher education
training provider or institution:
      Curriculum
      Detailed information about teaching staff and their qualifications,
      School building, equipment and textbooks
      Financial resources and capacity to run the school
      List of real estate or buildings to be provided by owners
      Land license
The 2013 joint Ministerial order No 386 by the Ministry of Education and Science (MEDS) and the
Ministry of Labor (MOL) sets rules for establishing a new TVET school. According to this joint
Ministerial order, the following quality requirements are set for establishing a new TVET school:
    Each program offered at the TVET schools should describe the proposed curriculum in terms
        of student competencies to be gained. Each program should identify the hours allocated for
        contact hours and internships. Curriculum should be developed around the competencies to
        be developed throughout the course, and in partnership with industry.
    Criteria for teaching staff are as follows:
             o Highly qualified
             o Industrial experience
             o Trained in pedagogical methodology and program delivery
     Learning conditions should meet the requirements for infrastructure, safety and hygiene.
     Adequate lab equipment in good condition
The educational institutions are monitored by the respective Ministries. The quality assurance modes
are mentioned above.



Educator requirements
As for tertiary education faculty and lecturers, the main requirement is a Master’s degree in their field
of teaching, as stated in the Article 13 of the Law on Higher Education. Additional requirements are
that they should have studied teaching methodologies. In order to meet this additional requirement,
a newly hired university faculty member should take the pedagogical training, choosing among those
pedagogical training providers approved by the Ministry which can offer short-term pedagogical
training for newly hired university faculty.
In addition, the Ministers of Education and Science’s 2003 order No 139 identifies key general
requirements for tertiary education faculty as follows: (a) communication skills; (b) creative skills; (c)
professional skills as educators; (d) research skills. Further, the Order identified the following
minimum requirements for tertiary education faculty as per their ranks.
For TVET and higher education sectors, there is no official approval or licensing for teachers.
There is no centralized register body or system. Every year, the Ministry of Education collects
administrative data from each institution including pre-school to tertiary, with data from TVET schools



                                                                                                         6
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                              Mongolia | NQF | 2015


collected by the MOL. This administrative data shows the number of teachers for each school,
professional degrees, education background and teaching subjects.



Transnational/cross border education
The government is quite open and supports incoming providers. There are joint or international
schools in Mongolia. There are regulations granting special permissions to incoming schools. They
should be registered and monitored by the Ministry of Education.
Higher education qualifications have not been recognised in other countries.
There are no special rules related to graduates of overseas schools. Graduates of overseas schools
present their official transcripts and diploma to employers.



Quality indicators/data
There are three government agencies in charge of collecting data related to education: the National
Statistical Committee, the Ministry of Education and Science (MEDS) and the Ministry of Labor (MOL)
(only in charge of TVET). Regarding the data collection system used by the MEDS, each school sends
information to its local education department. Local education departments disaggregate data at the
provincial level and send it to Monitoring and Evaluation department staff at the MEDS. Higher
education institutions send their information individually, by school.



Barriers and obstacles
Until recently, there was little quality assurance or public accountability in Mongolia’s education
sector. Over the last 24 years, the system has been piloting different reforms and policies. Policies in
the education sector are not consistent and are highly influenced by politicians. There are several
challenges to strengthening the quality of the system:
       The reforming of curriculum development process is underway. There are many complaints
         that the curriculum is outdated and lacks adequate labour market linkages, which
         contributes to the low quality of education.
       The sector lacks experienced experts who can help the government and schools to design a
         quality assurance system. There is no budget to support this gap.
       The low quality of tertiary education is the “hottest” issue today. There is a mismatch
         between demand and supply, which produces many unemployed graduates.
       Poor and centralized management over higher education. The MEDS has centralized higher
         education management, but lacks capacity to strengthen the system considering emerging
         societal needs. The management of higher education institutions themselves have little will
         to strengthen the quality assurance system since it would add extra work load to them or
         reduce their power over school management. Student and parent community are weak in
         terms of requesting accountability from higher education management. Also, academic
         freedom is quite limited for higher education institutions.
       There is little understanding about establishing NFQ as a system to improve the quality and
         accountability in education. Understanding of education outcomes on students should be
         promoted.




                                                                                                        7
                                Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                   Mongolia | NQF | 2015


   The TVET sector has been facing management challenges, “bouncing” between two
    Ministries several times in the last years. Consistency in policies is lacking.




                                                                                             8
