MYANMAR 1

1. Overview
From the newly enacted National Education Law, 30 September 2014 (unofficial translation): In order
to implement a system of national education, the government will use the following kinds of education
and make connections between them:
   Formal education
   Non-Formal Education
   Personal Education

Early childhood education will be implemented by parents, villages and appropriate departments and
organizations. Pre-school education will be implemented from age 3 to age 5. Formal education will
include:
   Basic Education
   Technical and Vocational Education
   Higher Education

Technical and Vocational Education is divided into the following:
  Basic level technical and vocational education that can be attended by those who have completed
   primary school.
  Middle level technical and vocational education that can be attended by those who have
   completed middle school.
  Diploma level technical and vocational education that can be attended by those who have
   completed high school.
  Non-formal education and vocational education for improving ability regardless of educational
   level, gender, or age, offered in schools opened by government or private organizations that meet
   the criteria.

The relevant ministries shall establish the curriculum, period of study, kind of degree or certificate to
be awarded for each of the levels of education.


2. National Qualifications Framework
The planned NQF will cover all sectors, from Basic Education through to TVET and Higher Education.
The proposed framework will be 8 levels.




1
    This overview is based on the Myanmar Report on Standards and Qualifications (2015) prepared by a team of
Myanmarese experts with support from the World Bank. The Report and its overview expand on the original submission
by Myanmar for the East Asia Summit Vocational Education and Training Quality Assurance Framework Project managed
by Australia Commonwealth Government in 2012.
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                              Myanmar | NQF | 2015


3. Quality assurance mechanisms

3.1 Accreditation (Approval) of qualifications


Approval
There is no accrediting agency currently in the Higher Education sector. The National Skills Standards
Authority (NSSA) has the authority under the Employment and Skills Development Law (ESD) to
accredit TVET qualifications from levels 1-4. Accrediting agencies for some professions (e.g.
Engineering) and international agencies (e.g. City and Guilds) do exist.
Accreditation of qualifications is legislated only under the ESD, for TVET levels 1-4. Currently, there
are quality standards for accrediting agencies being developed under the ESD for TVET, levels 1-4.
There are no national qualifications, but there are provider-specific qualifications i.e. by institution.
There is no public register of qualifications.
NSSA for TVET levels 1-4 is responsible for managing and monitoring accreditation processes. Different
Ministries (e.g. Science and Technology, Education) have their own accreditation and monitoring
arrangements.
Ministry officials visit institutions for discussions with high-level management to monitor the quality
and currency of qualifications.


Assessment
Assessment for recognition of qualifications includes:
    For TVET under NSSA, assessors are from the industry sector committees.
    Higher Education institutions use peer assessment.
Consistency of judgements are managed by NSSA using a “trial test” to validate test instruments and
consult with employers.
Higher Education Institutions issue their own qualifications, but in TVET the NSSA issues skills
qualifications levels 1-4.


Relationship to standards
For TVET, the occupational and/or competency standards (which standard depends on the industry
sector and/or occupation) have been copied/adapted from other countries and are now undergoing
review by industry sectorial committees under the NSSA. Occupational and/or competency standards
relate to specific tasks. The format design includes required items such as type of competencies (basic,
industrial and technical or functional), unit code, unit title, competency elements, performance
criteria, essential or underpinning knowledge, range and context, etc.
Myanmar’s working definition of competency standard is: Knowledge, skills and ability.
In 2007, the NSSA has developed 173 standards across a number of industry sectors and occupations.
International standards apply for specific industries where there are employment requirements, such
as maritime, international welder association, etc.
Employability skills or generic skills are used by NSSA, e.g. communication skills, teamwork skills.


                                                                                                        2
                                          Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                             Myanmar | NQF | 2015



The process for development of competency standards includes:
    Standards were adapted from other countries with minimal industry consultation. They are
     now being reviewed and refined with industry input. Sectorial committees should develop the
     standards, according to the ESD Law.
    The Cabinet approved the 173 standards developed in 2007. However, they are not yet in place
     and the public does not yet have access to them. So far out of 173, 6 occupations have been
     modified and tested for fast track implementation.
The NSSA is responsible for the development, following enactment of the ESD Law in 2013.
In Higher Education there are central discipline-based Boards of Study. A central University Council
approves curriculum. Standards are not used or developed for higher education.
The occupational standard from NSSA is currently used for testing and used as a reference for the
curriculum development requested by training centers, both private and public.



3.2 Registration (Approval) of education and training providers/awarding
bodies
At present there are no registering bodies. In terms of managing and monitoring registration of
providers or awarding bodies:
    For TVET this will likely be the NSSA
    For basic education it is the Department of Basic Education


3.3 Training/Assessment providers
The establishment of quality standards for providers is in process. In a testing/assessment pilot
conducted by the NSSA with support from GIZ, the requirements for assessors has been set. The
selection process is as follows:
The members of the concerned Sectorial Committees were asked by the NSSA to nominate
occupational experts for the formation of standard review teams, inspection teams and assessor
teams for their respective occupations. Their role during the first round was to review and revise the
occupational standards, audit the venues and conduct assessments. For the members of inspection
teams and assessor teams the ACC, in consultation with the NSSA, made a final confirmation and
appointed them to carry out their tasks and roles as described in the NSSA guidelines and criteria.
In order to carry out their roles, assessor teams were trained in NSSA assessment methods and
guidelines developed by project teams.



3.4 Educator/Assessor requirements
The minimum requirements for teachers, trainers, educators, lecturers, and assessors:
    For TVET: In a testing/assessment pilot conducted by the NSSA with support from GIZ, the
     requirements for assessors have been set.
    For Higher Education: Lecturers must have a master’s degree.

                                                                                                       3
                                            Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                               Myanmar | NQF | 2015


The bodies responsible for monitoring and managing teachers, trainers, educators, lecturers, and
assessors are:
    NSSA for TVET (Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Security) - in process
    Department of Higher Education (Ministry of Education)
    Department of TVET (Ministry of Science and Technology).

There is no register of teachers, trainers, educators, lecturers, or assessors.



3.5 Transnational/cross border education
Overseas qualifications are recognized on a case-by-case basis, by institutions in Higher Education.



3.6 Quality indicators/data
Data is not collected for quality purposes. But departments do require data from institutions, in
various forms by both state and national bodies. Key data include:
     Student background characteristics (e.g. ethnicity, age, gender, disabilities, prior
        qualifications)
     Funds invested in staff professional development/in-service training
    

4. Barriers and obstacles


The issues identified include:
     The greatest barrier pertains to human resources requirements/qualifications, which need to
        be discussed, agreed-upon and enforced/met.
     Myanmar is a long way behind other nations in the region and is trying very hard to catch up.
Initiatives include:
      Myanmar is in the last phase (phase 3) of the Comprehensive Education Sector Review (CESR).
         It is currently developing a national education sector plan following a rapid assessment (phase
         1) and in-depth analysis (phase 2).
      As the name suggests, this review is across all education sectors: Early childhood education,
         Basic Education (primary, middle and high schools), TVET and Higher Education. It has also
         been informed by further reform groups, including a TVET Taskforce set up by the President’s
         office.
      There have been many projects and programmes planned and initiated along the way, funded
         and organized by both the National Government and donors/development partners. Projects
         and programmes include: modularized short courses (for TVET levels 1 and 2) in selected
         industry sectors; a pilot of testing centres for TVET level 1; increases in teacher salaries and
         the number of teachers employed; new text books for basic education schools; mobile training
         programmes; and a large increase in the national education budget.
      A national education law (mother law) was enacted on 30 September 2014 after extensive
         discussion. However, this law is already about to undergo review due to a number of concerns
         from the public, especially from students.



                                                                                                         4
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                              Myanmar | NQF | 2015


5. Additional information
Provide names (and role and organization) of person involved in the development of this overview.


 Name                             Role                                Organisation
 Daw Khin Mar Aye                 Director, NSSA                      NSSA
 Dr Kyi Shwin                     Rector                              Banmaw University
 Robyn Jackson                    Programme Specialist TVET           UNESCO
 Daw Naing Yee Mar                Senior Consultant                   GIZ
 Konrad De Bortoli                Head TVET Project                   GIZ
 U Ko Ko Naing                    Consultant                          GIZ




                                                                                                        5
