VIETNAM 1

Overview

Education and training system
School education takes 12 years for students aged 6 to 18 years. After graduation from lower secondary
school, students can go into one of three pathways. First, students can go to upper secondary school and
study there for three years and take a national exit examination from high school (if they do not have
problems with learning achievement). Second, students who cannot go to upper secondary school will
continue their learning at the continuous education center and may sit for a national examination to get
a certificate of high school program graduation by the end of three years of learning. Students who do not
want to join the previous program can go to technical and vocational education and training (TVET)
institutions.
TVET institutions in Vietnam are divided into two:
          Vocational training under the administration of the Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs
           (MOLISA); classified into three types according to the credentials they offer (vocational training
           center, middle vocational school and higher vocational colleges). Vocational training centers offer
           vocational training courses from some days up to less than 1 year and are eligible to offer
           elementary vocational certificates, while intermediate vocational schools offer vocational training
           courses of at least 1 to 2 years leading to vocational intermediate qualification. Vocational training
           colleges admit high school graduates to train them from 2 to 3 years and offer upper-intermediate
           qualification. The last two types of vocational training institutions can offer both short and long
           courses.

          Technical and vocational education (TVE) under the Ministry of Education and Training (MOET).
           TVE institutions can offer courses from 1 to 3 years according to students’ entry qualifications.
           Students who hold a vocational certificate (one year course) have to be trained at least one year
           more and can gain an intermediate diploma. Graduates from lower secondary schools need to
           take three-year courses leading to the diploma. Two-year courses are for graduates from high
           school and lead to a diploma.

In November 2014, The TVET system has underwent some changes due to a new TVET law endorsed by
the Parliament (validated 01 July 2015). There will no longer be a separate vocational training under
MOLISA or a subsystem under MOET, but there will be one college type, one secondary school type and
one center for TVET oversight. Information in this overview pertains to pre-November 2014 law.




1
    This overview is based on the Vietnam Report on Standards and Qualifications (2015) prepared by a team of Vietnamese
experts with support from the World Bank. The Report and its overview expand on the original submission by Vietnam for the
East Asia Summit Vocational Education and Training Quality Assurance Framework Project managed by Australia
Commonwealth Government in 2012.



                                                                                                                             1
                                            Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                                 Vietnam | NQF | 2015




NQF Development in Vietnam
Currently a final NQF proposal is due to be completed by the end of 2014. The single framework will cover
the higher education sector and the vocational training sector. The structure of the proposed framework
includes 8 levels and will include 3 levels of certificates, diploma, advanced diploma, bachelor, masters
and doctorate qualification levels. It is anticipated that the governance of the framework will be with an
established board.



Quality assurance mechanisms

Competency standards and curriculum
For education institutions, MOET provides national curriculum similar to programme standards. These
standards include: an introduction, general qualification objectives, learning outcomes, required subject
or knowledge areas, duration of study, assessment advice, requirements of the teachers, and equipment,
facilities and textbook advice. These programme standards are developed through a committee process.
The committee is initiated through the MOET and incorporates those teaching in the area, experts and 1
or 2 industry expert representatives. From these programme standards individual education institutions
are to develop their own detailed curriculum within an internal quality management system. MOET may
inspect quality of education programmes at site inspections. MOET has a website register of providers
but does not have a register of qualifications that providers offer.
For vocational institutions, MOLISA is responsible for developing national curriculum. This curriculum is
similar to that developed by MOET in terms of structure but includes a great deal more detail. The
curriculum development process is most closely aligned to occupational and functional analysis processes.
MOLISA convenes meetings and workshops with TVET institutes, companies and university experts to
identify job tasks to develop into curriculum. The curriculum includes: essential knowledge and skills,
learning outcomes, assessment guide and criteria, including performance criteria, duration and module
(subject) detail. The curriculum may be informed by national skills standards if they are developed in that
particular field, however it is more than likely that the curriculum has been developed before the
competencies; hence there may be a disconnect between the two approaches; the body of knowledge
and skills. MOLISA has a registry of registered providers, although it does not include information on what
qualifications are offered by these providers (offered qualifications must be submitted to GDVT for
registering a specific occupation training). MOLISA also has a register of curriculum summaries (not
detailed).
Both sectors cover similar qualifications across similar occupations, skills and knowledge. In both sectors,
common subjects (generic subjects) that all students must undertake in each qualification include: IT,
foreign language, physical education, politics, law and national defense/security. These subjects are
taught at all qualifications levels, however subject complexity and duration vary across qualification levels.
The Minister of Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs is responsible for defining principles, procedures for
developing and issuing national skills standards for each occupation; and responsibilities of relevant
offices and organizations in developing and issuing national vocational skills standards for each
occupation.
                                            Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                                 Vietnam | NQF | 2015



National skills standards consist of regulations on performance level, requirements of essential
knowledge, and the skills and attitudes to perform the tasks of one occupation. Ministers, heads of
Ministry-equivalent offices, and heads of Government offices organize and coordinate with relevant
offices and trade associations to develop and issue national skills standards under regulations of
vocational training law and the above regulation.
National skills standards are based on a job role, equated to a qualification, and describe specific tasks.
National skills standards are based on the notion of competence.
MOLISA has oversight of the development of national occupational skills standards that are developed
through the line ministries for qualifications up to Level 5. National Skills Standards have a consistent
format, which includes: occupation description, list of tasks, performance criteria, assessment criteria and
performance conditions. The process for development includes:
       National Skills Standard Developing Committee with no more than half aligned to the Ministry
        and the remainder of representatives for employers, employees, trade associations and experts.
       Occupational analysis, job task analysis, with a list of job tasks to be confirmed by a minimum of
        30 experienced, independent experts.
       Development of competency standards to be confirmed by a minimum of 30 experienced,
        independent experts.
       Appraisal Council with at least 1/3 (one third) from industry.
       Minister makes a decision of endorsement (or non-endorsement).

MOLISA has a register of all national skills standards that have been developed on its website.
Generic competencies have not been developed to be included in qualifications; they are all vocationally
specific tasks.



Assessment
For education institutions (MOET), all institutions are responsible for issuing their own qualifications and
retaining student outcomes data. However, each institution submits a graduation report to MOET for
limited data retention. Refer to data section of the overview of data collected.
For vocational training institutions, certificates related to curriculum programs are issued by the
institution and are the responsibility of the principal. However, for certificates issued related to national
occupational skills standards the certification process is the responsibility of MOLISA, and is issued by
MOLISA. For national occupational skills standards, MOLISA develops the test item bank and also the
practical test for testing centres to use.



Quality Assurance Agencies (approval of providers)
There are two accreditation organizations: one under the General Department of Vocational Training
(MOLISA), the other is the Department of Testing and Accreditation, MOET. Two Ministries have issued
their own documents related to accreditation standards focused on quality assurance.
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                                Vietnam | NQF | 2015



MOLISA has issued Decision No 1&2/2008/QĐ-BLĐTBXH dated 17 January 2008, on regulation of the
system of criteria, standards of accreditation for vocational training schools and vocational training
colleges. MOET has promulgated Decision No 65/2007/QĐ-BGDĐT dated 17 January 2007 on regulation
of quality standards evaluation of university.
All providers of education and training must register at the State administrative authority of education
and training in local or central level according to the qualifications they are going to offer.
All providers are monitored to a certain extent by state administrative authorities of education and
training in dependence of decentralization of the central government. MOET and MOLISA have
regulations to mandate all TVET and higher education institutions to self-assessment (internal evaluation).
An accreditation body can be established by the Government, private organization or individuals under
permission of the Minister of Education and Training.
GDVET/MOLISA is responsible for skills testing. Testing centres are generally established within a TVET
institution and are responsible for national occupation skills standards testing. MOLISA licenses these
centres. Skills testing centres can be accessed by students completing programs at institutions or those
that have developed their knowledge and skills in non-formal and informal settings. At this stage, there
has been limited update of competency testing.



Educator requirements
For TVET institutions (MOLISA) and for education institutions (MOET) the requirements are that vocational
and training educators require a Bachelors degree within the field of teaching plus a pedagogical
certificate. There are no specific requirements for assessors in TVET. There are no registers of teachers
retained nor is there a national oversight/agency in either sector.



Translation and Cross Border Education
Vietnam encourages providers to deliver their services to other countries but does not have standards or
any requirements to apply to translational delivery. At the same time, Vietnam has a policy to allow
international institutions of education and training to deliver programs across the country.
Qualifications offered by Vietnam education and training organizations are accepted in a number of
countries as Vietnam has signed agreements of credentials recognition with partner countries.



Quality indicator data
Both MOLISA and MOET retain and annually report on a range of quality indicator data.



Barriers and Obstacles to NQF Development
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project
                                                                                Vietnam | NQF | 2015



Building up a NQF system in Vietnam is very essential now, but Vietnam faces a series of critical issues
such as: TVET administration assigned to two main ministries (MOLISA and MOET) and hundreds of TVET
institutions under control of line ministries and of provincial authorities; overlapping functions of State
supervision; lack of awareness of the importance of NQF for law makers, education and training policy
makers; and no consensus on TVET terminology.



Additional information
The following personnel were involved in the development of this overview.

 Name                     Role                                          Organisation
 Nguyen Quang Viet        Deputy Director of National Institute for     General Department of
                          Vocational Training                           Vocational Training, MOLISA
 Dr Hoang Ngoc Vinh       General Director of TVE Department            MOET
