     CASE STUDY OF AN EXCELLENT TVET INSTITUTION1:

                             Busan Meister Technical High School, Korea



                                                                     By


                                                                   Lan Joo




                                                                September 2016




																																																													
1
 	This	case	study	has	been	conducted	with	the	support	of	the	Korea-World	Bank	Partnership	Facility	Grant	to	
promote	job	creation	and	skills	development	in	the	East	Asia	region.	It	aims	to	provide	an	example	of	an	
excellent	TVET	facility,	as	a	model	for	TVET	reforms	in	the	EAP	region.	
                                                                                                                                          	
                                                                        Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                                             																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                                                  	
                                                                                                                                                                 		




	

                                                            Table of Contents

Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 2	
              ........................................................................................................................................	2	
    Background	
    Literature Review	..............................................................................................................................	3	
    Premised Four Factors Contributing to School Outcomes	.................................................................	3	
    Research Design and Method	............................................................................................................	3	
About BMT ............................................................................................................................................ 4	
    History	...............................................................................................................................................	4	
    Educational Goals	..............................................................................................................................	4	
    Four Majors	.......................................................................................................................................	4	
    Outcomes	...........................................................................................................................................	5	
Findings .................................................................................................................................................. 5	
    Factor 1: Adequate Financial and Human Resources	........................................................................	6	
    Factor 2: Relevant Program	...............................................................................................................	8	
    Factor 3: Effective Management System	...........................................................................................	9	
    Factor 4: School-Industry Linkages	.................................................................................................	11	
Conclusion............................................................................................................................................ 13	



                                                               Introduction

Background

East Asian countries are among the fastest growing economies in the world over the last
decade. However, as growth continues, the countries in East Asia are faced with a skills
shortage and mismatching that has limited their economic growth. To tackle this issue,
regional governments are currently restructuring their respective Technical and Vocational
Education and Training (TVET) systems to guide schools towards demand-driven education
and training.

In this context, the World Bank’s East Asia Education team has embarked on an in-depth
study of “Excellent Institutions” by selecting particularly outstanding cases in select countries
of East Asia to research (a) which factors contribute to a particular school’s successful
outcomes; (b) how the school developed its demand-driven system; and (c) how the school
utilizes finite resources to enhance school performance. The purpose of this study is to
provide policy makers with empirical evidence that will be used to develop new policies to
direct schools towards more market-responsive and demand-driven approaches. Specifically,
it aims to; (1) offer guidance for individual institutions to develop innovative methods to
improve the internal and external efficiency of their programs and determine resource

                                                                                                                                             Page	2	of	14	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                    																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                                   		




	
priorities; (2) provide the World Bank with empirical evidence to guide the knowledge
services it offers client countries regarding TVET policies and practices; and (3) engender a
productive dialogue on the improvement of TVET relevance within the EAP region.

This report summarizes the successful experience of Korea’s Busan Meister Technical High
School (BMT), analysing the problems it has encountered in its operation and providing
lessons learned to improve vocational education. This research is part of the “Excellent
TVET Institutions in East Asia and Pacific (EAP)” study commissioned by the World Bank.


Literature Review
Definition

The definition of excellent is measured by the school’s internal and external efficiency.
Internal efficiency refers to the relationship between the inputs and outputs and focuses on
what occurs within the educational and training processes. Then, what happens to the outputs
of the training process in relation to economic and social requirement is defined as external
efficiency, which is also referred to as relevance of the program (Johanson and Adams,
2004). Therefore, the excellent TVET institutions produce the best training outcomes by
retaining high internal efficiency.


Premised Four Factors Contributing to School Outcomes
Based on the literature review, the study premises that a school becomes excellent when it (1)
conserves adequate resources; (2) delivers relevant programs; (3) develops an effective
management system; and (4) establishes linkages with enterprise in the three previously
discussed areas. Additionally, there are external factors impacting the success of schools,
called “ecosystem factors” (Altbach and Salmi, 2011).


Research Design and Method

Research Design

By conducting an in-depth analysis, this study seeks to find (1) whether or not the above
premise factors impact school outcomes; and if so, then, (2) which of these factors is the
determining factor that contributes most to the enhancement of school performance and in
what context (various settings and time periods within respective countries); and (3) how this
factor can be strengthened based on suggestions from teachers/instructors and school
administrators. Korea’s BMT was selected because it meets all three criteria.

Research Method

The study collected data from multiple sources (archived information, quantitative measures,
a survey, and interviews) to increase validity.




                                                                                                   Page	3	of	14	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                    																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                                   		




	
The Survey

The survey was conducted with students, teachers, vice principals, and the principal. 555 2nd
and 3rd grade students out of a total of 600 responded to the survey. 1st grade students were
excluded, as they are assumed to have a lack of learning experiences with BMT. 107
teachers (including the principal, two vice principals and 104 teachers) responded to the
survey out of the total number of 113 teachers. The survey is designed to address whether or
not schools retain each factor (resources, teaching, management, and linkage with industry)
and these factors’ impact on school outcomes.

The Interview

In order to conduct an in-depth analysis, interviews were conducted with 10 students, 10
specialty teachers, the principal, and one vice principal. Interview questions were structured
to investigate the association between the premise factors and the factor most effective in
enhancing school outcomes and how this identified factor can be improved.



                                      About BMT

History
BMT was founded in 1967 by the government to supply skilled workers to Korea’s newly
established industry, and as of 2015 the school has produced 28,415 graduates in the field of
mechanical engineering. The school became a Meister High School (MHS) in 2009. This
same year, it reorganized the program to cover Precision Machine, Mold Design,
Shipbuilding and Machine, and Robot Tech classes. The program changes and a series of
reforms within the school system were undertaken to meet new industry demands for the 21st
century global economy.

Educational Goals
BMT aims to help students become future industry leaders through self-development. The
educational goal is to produce Young Meisters who are self-motivated and have problem-
solving skills and warm hearts. More specifically, the school focuses on developing basic
occupational competencies and problem-solving skills; combining academic knowledge with
industry-specific technical skills; providing students with an excellent learning environment;
and ensuring teacher competency.
Four Majors

Since 2009, the school has reorganized its majors, the number of classes, and the number of
students in each class. Currently, the school offers four majors: Precision Machining, Mold
Design, Shipbuilding and Machining, and Robot Tech; each major includes three classes,
except for Robot Tech which has six classes, and each class has about 20 students.




                                                                                                   Page	4	of	14	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                    																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                                   		




	
Outcomes
BMT has showed very high graduate employment rates particularly after being transformed
into a Meister High School. Prior to becoming a MHS in 2009, its graduate employment rate
was between 45% and 55%. Upon reforming its program and transforming into a MHS,
BMT’s employment rate increased to 83% in 2010. Since 2013, when the school first began
producing MHS graduates, the graduate employment rate has consistently been above 90%.


In 2014, public enterprises and large companies hired approximately 40% of BMT’s
graduates, while about 50% were hired by SMEs. By major, Precision Machine shows a very
high employment rate, while Shipbuilding and Machine shows the lowest employment rates.
Considering its comparatively larger number of students, Robot Tech also shows a high
employment rate, particularly in the public enterprises and larger companies most pursued by
BMT graduates. According to a survey conducted by BMT, the majority of students (70%)
responded that their plan after graduation was either employment with large companies
(35.6%) or public enterprises (34.8%); 21.5% responded that they were planning to work at
SMEs (Educational Planning, 2015, BMT).


BMT teachers believe their students are highly competent. During the teacher survey, 96%
responded that their students are highly competent and 97% believe that BMT is attractive to
highly competent students. During the interview, teachers mentioned a “virtuous circle,”
indicating that because the school achieves successful results, graduates have a high chance
of being employed, which makes the school very attractive to prospective students who are
already competent and can easily obtain the skills taught by BMT. As a result, the school
produces successful outcomes again and again.



                                         Findings

In this paper, ‘excellent TVET’ institution’ means that it helps students’ transition smoothly
into the labor market upon graduation by inputting adequate resources. BMT teachers agree,
stating that ‘excellent school’ means that it produces a high employment rate and, in order to
do so, the school requires competent teachers, demand-driven programs, and well-established
school-industry linkages. The teachers pointed out that the skills currently in-demand by
industry include basic technical skills along with socioemotional (SE) skills such as
adaptation, diligence, consideration for others, problem solving and work ethic.


BMT’s teachers further described an excellent school as one having a “virtuous circle.” If the
school inputs key resources and uses them efficiently, then more students become
employable, which in turn results in a higher graduate employment rate. This outcome in
turn increases the school’s brand power, which attracts even better teachers and more
competent students. Also, when the school produces high employment rates, it receives more
financial support from the government, which enables the school to acquire and retain
expensive equipment and practical training facilities. With the high social recognition of


                                                                                                   Page	5	of	14	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                    																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                                   		




	
being a top performing school, more companies are interested in hiring BMT graduates. This
is BMT’s virtuous circle.


BMT’s students agree with its teachers. During the interview, students stated that the factors
contributing to BMT graduates’ high employment rate are good teachers and facilities, and
the school’s well-established school-industry cooperation. In addition, some students
highlighted the school’s reputation, and alumni support, while others mentioned its strong
emphasis on employment and provision of various employment service programs.


All students stated that they choose BMT because they believe it will help them secure a job
upon graduation. Currently, they are satisfied with their choice and with the school’s
facilities, equipment and teachers, who they view as competent in their technical and teaching
skills and actively able and committed to helping them secure a job. Given Korea’s high
youth unemployment rate, BMT’s success is all the more remarkable.

Factor 1: Adequate Financial and Human Resources
	
1. Financial Resources
Budget. BMT is overseen by three government agencies: the Ministry of Education, Busan
government’s local education office, and the Small and Medium Business Administration
(SMBA). SMBA is the main agency that provides annual funding to BMT, and it also funds
two other Meister High Schools for the purpose of producing and supplying adequate skilled
workers to SMEs. According to 2015 data, the government (SMBT and the provincial office)
provides the highest percentage (about 60%) of BMT’s total revenue, followed by parental
support. Regarding expenditures, the school spends the most on student welfare (i.e.
dormitories and food), followed by administration. More than 20% of the total budget is
allocated to curriculum development. BMT spends 16% of its total budget on teachers’
wages. Teacher and student survey and interview results demonstrate that the school retains
adequate financial resources with 85% of surveyed students responding that at least some
portion of course fees, residential costs, and academic materials are covered by the school.


Facilities and Equipment. During the teacher survey, 85% responded that school building
conditions are excellent or good, 84% believe equipment maintenance is excellent or good,
and 83% agree that retention of full or updated equipment is excellent or good. Overall, the
majority of teachers are satisfied with school facilities, equipment and their maintenance.
The student survey showed majority satisfaction regarding school’s facilities and equipment.
Sixty-seven percent responded that they are satisfied with classroom conditions, 61% are
satisfied with computer labs and access, and 72% are satisfied with practical training
resources. All ten of the interviewed students agreed that BMT retains adequate training
facilities and equipment, providing each student with practice space and materials.


	



                                                                                                   Page	6	of	14	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                    																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                   		




	
	
2. Human Resources

Number of Teachers and Staff

As one of largest Meister High Schools, BMT also retains a large number of teachers and
staff, including one principal, two vice-principals and 113 teachers.


Teacher Characteristics
The majority of BMT teachers are in their 50s, while there is a shortage of teachers in the 40s
age-range. This shortage prevails throughout Korean TVET schools, because during the
1990s government policy on TVET teachers limited their numbers. The average years of
teaching experience is high, with nearly half of BMT teachers possessing over 20 years. The
average educational level of the teachers is an undergraduate degree, and roughly one third
have also obtained a master’s degree in their areas of specialty.
	
In-service Training
BMT requires its teachers to receive 90 hours of in-service training per year. According to
their 2015 Educational Planning, among 65 specialty teachers, 4 from Precision Machining, 8
from Mold Design, 17 from Shipbuilding and Machining, and 15 from Robot Tech, received
in-service training in their respective areas. Our teacher survey results show that 96% of
BMT’s teachers received in-service training, and among them 59% had received more than
61 hours by April of 2015. The majority (61%) had received seminar/workshop training.


During the survey teachers were asked to assess their own competency. Ninety-eight percent
regard themselves as a competent teacher who possesses the required technical and teaching
skills. The same proportion of BMT’s teachers believes that the school has adequate teacher
recruitment standards. During the in-depth interview, all teachers indicated that the most
important element of being a competent TVET teacher is technical skill. However, newly
hired teachers often lack technical skills due to a lack of practical training during tertiary
teacher training programs. According to the Principal, BMT offers 3-6 months of training to
newly hired teachers, hiring substitute teachers during their absence, in order to overcome
this issue. The school also appoints industry mentors for teachers to help them improve their
technical skills.


According to the student survey, 75% of students agree that their teachers are competent.
Interviewed students further stated that BMT’s teachers are competent in both technical
knowledge and teaching. Students said the older teachers have more teaching and technical
skills than younger teachers, and that older teachers are able to teach the latest skills.
Students also mentioned that teachers support them in acquiring certificates by working with
them even after class, on weekends and during vacations. Students further report that their
teachers actively find prospective companies for them, continually providing information on
employment with these companies.


                                                                                                   Page	7	of	14	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                    																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                   		




	
Career Development Support Programs
BMT offers various programs to help its students build their career plans. First, “Semester
for Promotion of Learning Motivation” is a new initiative developed by the current Principal,
Dr. Lee. The program is offered to freshmen during the first month of the high school year
and aims to improve learning motivation to help them develop career plans. The program
also seeks to enhance students’ sense of community, self-reflection, self-esteem, self-control,
commitment to and respect for others. During this month, students participate in various
group activities and attend special lectures conducted by prominent graduates. They also
visit large companies and SMEs. Overall, the teachers (59.5%), parents (63.5%), and students
(63%) are satisfied with this program (The Educational Planning of 2015, BMT). During our
interview, students said that “My future company visit” during the Motivation program was
key in helping them understand how a manufacturing plant operates and the workings of a
real job. Another program, “Weekly Special Lectures of Personalities,” invites prominent
alumni (such as corporate CEO) to foster student motivation for future achievement and job
acquisition. Lectures are aimed at increasing student self-confidence, helping them
developing their future career plans and cultivate a sense of caring for others. Overall, the
teachers (69.7%), parents (57.3%), and students (51.9%) are satisfied with this program (The
Educational Planning of 2015, BMT).

The fact that BMT has instituted an excellent support system to enhance student employment
is supported by evidence collected by our study. During the teacher survey, 38% rated
BMT’s support system as excellent, particularly in the area of career services. During the
interview, they agreed that the school has successfully motivated student learning, helping
them develop career plans. According to the Principal, BMT’s support system directly and
positively influences the graduate employment rate. As of April, 90 students out of 295 (3rd
grade) had secured employment and in order to make this happen, the school has provided
various other programs, besides the two aforementioned, such as Employment Camp, Job
Fair, and Company Field visits.

BMT’s students also said that the school’s support system has been very helpful. During the
survey, 63% reported receiving career counseling, and among them, 89% responded that the
counseling has helped them navigate their career plans. In particular, homeroom teachers
guide them in finding their specific interest, occupation and companies. Then, the school
provides information on the company and employment opportunities: for example, assisting
students in acquiring certifications needed for the specific job and company, improving their
interview skills, and supporting them in writing a resume and self-introduction letter.


Factor 2: Relevant Program
As BMT is a specialized high school whose specific purpose is to produce skilled workers
within relevant fields, the specialist subjects occupy the most (50%), and are comprised
primarily of required credits. BMT’s 1st year program focuses on the National Common
Basic Curriculum, while the 2nd and 3rd year programs focus on Optional Subject Curriculum.

Our study findings support the fact that BMT is providing its students with programs that
enhance industry-required skills. Ninety-three percent of teachers said BMT offers high


                                                                                                   Page	8	of	14	
                                                                                                               	
                                             Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                     																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                    		




	
quality programs and 87% believe its curriculum is industry-relevant. Sixty percent of the
teachers reported that students need to take additional training to be employed. This is
because in Korea’s case, the students need to acquire certificates, and additional training
serves this purpose. Overall, 95% of surveyed teachers believe that the school provides
relevant programs (including practical training) to produce competitive graduates. During the
in-depth interview, teachers generally agreed that the school offers its students what industry
requires. Furthermore, 90% of teachers believe that BMT’s program can also help students
advance to higher education.


According to the Principal, currently needed skills include basic technical skills, cognitive
skills, and SE skills such as adaptation, consideration for others, diligence, patience, problem-
solving skills, and self-determination. In regard to technical skills, teachers believe that the
school should impart basic technical skills because these are the job-ready skills needed on
production lines and they form the basis for acquiring firm-specific skills. To meet the rapid
changes in industry, BMT annually reviews its curriculum and updates supplemental training
materials.

Students agree that BMT provides industry relevant programs. During the internal survey,
63.7% of students responded that they are satisfied with their major (The Educational
Planning of 2015). In our survey, 72% of students responded “Yes” to the question of
whether they believe BMT is preparing them adequately, skill-wise, to find a job and 56%
mentioned receiving more than 20 hours of practical training each week at BMT.
Nevertheless, 78% of students said that they take additional training outside of BMT’s
regular program, and among them, more than half are receiving 10-15 hours of additional
training per week. Students said that they take additional training aside from school’s regular
program not because they lack practical training but because they need to prepare for certain
certificates. According to students, Korean companies emphasize whether or not an applicant
holds needed certifications during the hiring process.
	
Factor 3: Effective Management System
The teachers all agreed that BMT’s management contributes to its positive school outcomes.
	
Organization of School Management
BMT’s management includes one principal, two vice principals, seven center heads and 25
team leaders. Under the Principal, there are two vice-principals and one head of
Administration. Each vice principal is responsible for the three centers, and each head of
center manages their own department. The head of Administration under the Principal
manages the school administration center that consists of five departments, including school-
industry cooperation.	
	
Center-focused Department Management
BMT’s unique Center-focused Department Management aims to improve open
communication, unity, and harmony among faculty members by integrating 25 departments


                                                                                                    Page	9	of	14	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                    																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                                   		




	
into seven major centers. The seven centers are the Education Planning Research Center;
Meister Center; Technical Education Center; Creative Design Center; Cognitive Education
Center; Student Support Center and; the School Administration Support Center. The school
holds bi-weekly meetings to discuss and share the centers’ issues, including curriculum,
budget, and facilities; therefore, during the meetings, the teachers understand the total
workflow across the department as well as among the centers. Also, this center-focused
management approach enables BMT to use the budget efficiently as funds are allocated by
center, and departments within the center share the funds overall.


To assess management perceptions, BMT conducted an internal survey of its teachers.
Regarding the question of to what extent teachers’ suggestions and demands are reflected in
the school’s education plan and aim, 36.7% of the teachers responded “some” and 44.3%
responded “moderate.” In response to the question of to what extent teachers’ suggestions
and demands are reflected in the school’s division of duties and personnel management,
40.5% of teachers responded “some” and 35.4% responded “moderate.” On school support
for in-service training, 17.7% of the teachers responded “very satisfied” while 46.8% said
“satisfied.” Another question concerned whether they were satisfied with BMT’s suggested
2014 educational goals and 62% responded “satisfied.” Lastly, 35.4% of the teachers said
they are “satisfied” with the center-focused management (The Educational Planning of 2015,
BMT). Overall, BMT’s teachers are satisfied with its management system.


The Bank also conducted a teacher survey to assess their perception of school management,
particularly leadership. Ninety-one percent of the teachers believe that BMT’s school leaders
have consistent school policies and an equal percentage believe that the school leaders
execute BMT’s guiding principles with clarity. Ninety-two percent believe their school
leaders envisage the future and consistently look for new and innovative products, processes,
and services. Seventy-four percent of teachers find school leaders encourage collaboration
by building trust among faculty members while the same percent indicated that their school
leaders encourage self-determination and ongoing competency development among teachers.
Eighty-two percent teachers responded that BMT has a vision that is shared among faculty
and staff. Seventy-six percent said that school leaders are consistent about their words and
deeds and 87.7% of the teachers said, “the school leaders recognize my contribution by
showing appreciation.” Lastly, 82% of the teachers responded that the school has the
capacity to deal with both anticipated and unexpected challenges/risks.

The teachers indicated that the Korean education system confers strong management power
to the Principal. For example, Principals can reorganize the school system, manage teachers,
and even develop new curricula. This is particularly so in Meister High Schools, which have
more freedom to develop their own curricula to meet industry demands. Accordingly, BMT’s
Principal is able to develop and institute new initiatives and he has a strong vision. Several
teachers referred to the school’s new initiative programs as one example of the principal’s
strong leadership.


One teacher pointed out that management impacts graduate employment rates by increasing
student motivation and confidence. In particular, student experiences during the new


                                                                                                  Page	10	of	14	
                                                                                                               	
                                             Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                     																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                              	
                                                                                                                    		




	
initiative programs, directly influence their motivation for learning and acquiring a job. This
view is supported by the students as well. During the interview, students stated that their
experiences during “Semester for Promotion of Learning Motivation” helped them find the
purpose of their study and navigate a career plan, which pushed them to work harder during
the school year to achieve their employment goals.


Factor 4: School-Industry Linkages

To strengthen school-industry linkages, BMT has created various departments, including
School Industry Cooperation TF, the School-Industry Cooperation Advisory Committee,
Council for Operation Field Practice, and Management of Job Career Development Center.
Furthermore, the school organizes several field visits to select companies for the students.


School-Industry Cooperation Advisory Committee
The committee is composed of the school teachers/staff and representatives from enterprises.
The chair is selected from industry, and the head of the Meister Center is designated as an
assistant administrator. Within the committee, operation committee members are composed
of the vice principal, the head of five centers, and the team leader of the 3rd grade, two staff
members from the school-industry cooperation department, and the head of four major
departments; while advisory Committee members are composed of representatives from
enterprises. The meeting is held annually, and during the meeting, the members discuss
specific programs, textbooks, curriculum to meet industrial demands, share employment
information, and discuss the possibility of in-company training for both the students and
teachers.


Council for Operation Field Practice
The council is composed of the vice principal, the head of five centers, and the team leader of
3rd grade, the head of four major departments. The vice principal is designated as a head and
the head of the Meister Center is designated as an assistant administrator. Their main tasks
include selecting companies for practical training; defining procedure for in-company
practical training; and assessing practical training.


School Industry Cooperation TF
Its role is to develop a MoU with prospective companies, and their specific activities include
finding excellent SMEs, visiting these SMEs, developing a MoU with them, and sending
students to these companies for in-company practical training and employment.


Job Career Development Center
The center’s main responsibilities include building a database on company information in
connection with SMEs administration; supporting educational programs offered by the
companies; organizing staff’s company visits to develop MoU for employment. In addition,
the center provides the students with the latest information on the companies, helping them


                                                                                                   Page	11	of	14	
                                                                                                              	
                                            Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                    																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                             	
                                                                                                                   		




	
prepare self-introductions, resumes, and job application letters, and providing personalized
career counseling via job interview simulation. According to the internal survey, 65.9% of
teachers, 55.9% of parents, and 62% of students are satisfied with their experience with the
Job Career Development Center (The Educational Planning of 2015, BMT).


Field Trip to Select Companies

The school provides students with an opportunity to visit prominent companies to help them
understand how products are manufactured in the production lines, to help them develop their
career roadmaps, and to promote school-industry linkages. Because the students of 3rd year
are taking in-company training during summer, the site visit is designed specifically for 1st
and 2nd year students who are still developing their career plans.

According to the teacher survey, 95% reported a belief that BMT has built successful
partnerships with companies that enhance school outcomes. Also, in regard to the type of
cooperation, 96% of teachers believe that a school should have a formal partnership with
companies. However, teachers often face difficulty in finding interested companies. Indeed
67% of those surveyed identified companies’ disinterest as the main impediment to MoU
development. During the interview, all teachers stated that in particular SMEs are generally
not interested in developing school-company cooperation.

To overcome this challenge, BMT teachers have made tremendous efforts by visiting
companies in person to discuss possible collaboration and MoU. Once a MoU is developed,
then the companies participate in developing training materials and curricula as well as
provide scholarships, in-company training for the students and teachers, places for the field
visits and employment.

Also, all teachers agreed that their cooperation with the companies is systematic as the MoU
defines each party’s roles and responsibilities. The role of companies is rather advisory: for
example, during the School-Industry Cooperation Advisory Committee meeting, the
representatives from the companies provide advice on the direction of the program and
curriculum. In regard to developing BMT’s own training materials, the teachers of each
department work closely with the representatives from four companies according to their
relevant fields.

However, most teachers indicated that the companies need to be more active in this
cooperation. Although the formal School-industry Cooperation Advisory Committee is held
twice a year, sometimes one third of representatives of the companies fail to attend the
meeting. Therefore, the teachers note that school-industry cooperation can have the best
outcome only when the companies also actively participate in this cooperation.




                                                                                                  Page	12	of	14	
                                                                                                               	
                                             Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                     																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                               	
                                                                                                                    		




	

                                        Conclusion

This study reversely examined the relationship between outcomes and premise factors by
selecting a high-performance school and the impact of the premise factors on school
outcomes. The logic is that if this high-performance school demonstrates that it possesses
these factors, then these premise factors likely raise employment rates.

The first research question is whether or not the school possesses these factors. The findings
strongly support that BMT has 1) adequate resources, 2) relevant programs, 3) excellent
management, and 4) well-established school-industry linkages. The second question is
whether or not the above premise factors impact school outcomes. The findings suggest that
these factors both directly and indirectly influence BMT graduate employment rates.
According to the survey and interview conducted with teachers and students, these factors
increase student employability. The third question concerns which of these factors
contributes most to the enhancement of school performance, in what context, and how this
factor can be strengthened. According to the findings, the primary factor has changed over
time due to economic and social conditions.

During the 1970s, because the country shifted from a lighter to heavier manufacturing
industry, it required different types of labor force, such as skilled technicians and experts.
Accordingly, the government expanded technical and vocational education to meet the
demand for skilled workers in the heavier manufacturing industry (Zang, 2009; Kim, 2000;
Lee et al, 2012). Given this economic context, BMT was strongly supported by the
government. In fact, the government founded BMT in 1967 to meet this shortage of skilled
workers with support from the German government as well as IBRD. Then, the government
produced practical trainers within a short time period by issuing a practical trainer certificate
to those who graduated from BMT. The teachers stated that during this period, both financial
and human resources were the most important factors contributing to the school’s
performance. Although BMT faced a lack of resources, strong government support, along
with support from IBRD and other donor countries, and their ability to expedite technical
teachers enabled them to overcome the odds.

Since 1985, higher education enrollment (both 2 year technical and vocational college and 4
year university) has rapidly increased due to economic growth and social demands. As a
consequence, according to the teachers, all TVET schools had the most difficult time during
the 1990s: most students entered academic high school to pursue higher education, while
stigma attached to those who studied at TVET schools prevailed. During this time, the
teachers generally agreed that management, particularly a strong leadership and vision, was
the most important factor contributing to school outcomes. First, BMT management
efficiently utilized its resources in the face of a lack of financial support from the government.
Second, management focused on establishing school-industry cooperation with strong alumni
support. Because of its long history, BMT had a good number of prominent alumni, including
CEO of SMEs. Their companies provided scholarships, lectures, and employment to BMT
students. Also, under strong leadership direction, the teachers not only taught but also
actively worked on establishing the school-industry cooperation. Therefore, the teachers said
that during the 1990s when there was low demand for and high stigma attached to TVET



                                                                                                   Page	13	of	14	
                                                                                                                	
                                              Promoting	Skills	Development	and	Job	Creation	in	East	Asia	Project	
                                      																					Korea’s	Busan	Meister	School	|	Excellent	TVET	Case	Study	
                               	
                                                                                                                     		




	
schools, BMT’s management was the most important factor, and their recommendation was
to have a leader with strong vision and leadership.

In 2008, the government made a major policy change in the TVET system. Due to a shortage
of technical skilled workers and stigma attached to TVET schools, it decided to establish the
Meister High Schools by selecting 39 existing TVET schools whose performance meet the
criteria. The purpose of establishing the Meister High School is to produce skilled workers
via a curriculum tailored to industry needs in order to reduce skills mismatching. By
transforming TVET schools into specialized high schools purposed to produce the best
skilled workers, the Meister High Schools would reduce the stigma attached to TVET schools.
To achieve this goal, the government first provides the schools with financial resources to
substitute their students’ tuition, dormitory, and fees, as well as to maintain training facilities
and equipment. Second, the schools are given the autonomy to develop customized curricula
to meet the demands of companies in their relevant fields. Third, due to increasing school
autonomy, the government encourages the schools to select a Principal with strong
management skills via public contest. Lastly, the government encourages Meister from
industry to train Meister High School students via school-industry cooperation.

Since becoming a Meister High School BMT has received strong government support,
particularly financial resources. BMT has built a strong reputation and high employment rate
outcomes. Given that a Meister High School has strong autonomy in the areas of curriculum
development and management (including the Principal’s), most of BMT’s teachers agreed
that management, particularly leadership, is a key factor in determining school outcomes.
They recommended that schools should have a good leader who has vision, manages
resources efficiently, encourages teachers to improve their competencies, develops demand-
driven, tailored curricula, and establishes meaningful school-industry cooperation. In
Korea’s BMT Meister High School, all school inputs are created and utilized under the
direction of the Principal’s strong leadership.




                                                                                                    Page	14	of	14	
