MALAYSIA 1

Overview
The Malaysian education system encompasses education beginning from pre-school through university.
Pre-tertiary education (pre-school to secondary education) is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of
Education (MOE) while tertiary or higher education is the responsibility of the Ministry of Higher Education
(MOHE). The Department of Skills Development, of the Ministry of Human Resources is responsible for
the Skills sector. The Government’s vision is to make Malaysia a centre of educational excellence.
The legislative base for tertiary education (higher education, TVET and the Skills sectors) is:
       1. Universities and University Colleges Act 1971
       2. The Private Higher Educational Institution Act 1996 (PHEI Act 1996)
       3. Education Act 550 1996
       4. National Skills Development Act 2006 (NASDA Act 2006)
       5. Malaysian Qualifications Agency Act 2007



National Qualifications Framework
MQF was officially published in 2007. The MQF is an instrument that develops and classifies qualifications
based on set criteria. The MQF integrates with and links all national qualifications. MQF covers all sectors
i.e. skills, technical/vocational and academic sectors. The MQF enables individuals to progress in higher
education through transfer of credits and recognition of prior learning, acquired from formal, non-formal
and informal learning. Key characteristics of the MQF are:
           An 8-level framework, with each level having 8 learning outcome domains
           A credit point system that measures the volume of learning or academic load to attain the set
            learning outcomes. Student Learning Time (SLT) is included in the calculation of credit and
            academic load2.
           A Program Profile for disciplines and qualifications.

The qualifications are based on learning outcomes and there are generic outcomes for every qualification.
Quality documents have been developed and are comprised of rules and regulations that HEPs must
follow. The documents are:



1
    This overview is based on the Malaysia Report on Standards and Qualifications (2015) prepared by a team of Malaysian
experts with support from the World Bank. The Report and its overview expand on the original submission by Malaysia for the
East Asia Summit Vocational Education and Training Quality Assurance Framework Project managed by Australia
Commonwealth Government in 2012.
2   40 hours of notional student learning time is valued as one credit.
                                            Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project

                                                                                 Malaysia | NQF | 2015


    1. Malaysian Qualifications Framework (MQF)
    2. Code of Practice for Program Accreditation (COPPA)
    3. Code of Practice for Institutional Audit (COPIA)
    4. Programme Standards (PS)
    5. Guidelines to Good Practices (GGP)
    6. National Occupational Skill Standard (NOSS)
    7. Code of Practice for Skills Programme Accreditation



Quality Assurance Mechanisms

Accreditation of Qualifications
For TVET & Higher Education qualifications, the Malaysian Qualifications Agency (MQA) is the only
accrediting body as stated in the MQA Act of 2007. Programmes of studies that are accredited by MQA
will be registered in the Malaysian Qualification Register (MQR).
There are professional bodies that recognise their own specific fields, such as the Engineering
Accreditation Council (EAC) and the Malaysian Medical Council (MMC).
For Skills qualifications, the Department of Skills Development, Ministry of Human Resource (DSD, MOHR)
accredits programmes. The accreditation process for skills programmes are based on NASDA Act 2006.
The DSD, MOHR uses National Occupational Skills Standard (NOSS) to accredit programmes. At the
moment there are no specific National TVET qualifications, however qualifications are guided by National
Occupational Skills Standards (NOSS).
Monitoring of quality and currency of qualifications includes:
       For technical and vocational programmes conducted by Polytechnics and Community Colleges will
        be monitored by MQA through maintenance audit once every five years.
       For skills programmes, the DSD MOHR audits and award star ratings once every two years.

Assessment
Higher education and technical and vocational providers are the awarding bodies. For skills programmes
based on NOSS standards, the Department of Skills Development, Ministry of Human Resources is the
main awarding body. Assessments are undertaken by individual providers.
For programmes accredited through MQA, assessments are internally developed and subject to COPPA
and to some extent COPIA, which requires student assessment processes to have external scrutiny
(enhanced standard).
For those programmes accredited through DSD, MOHR there are assessment test banks which providers
must use (this initiative is still in progress and assessment banks do not address all industry sectors of the
NOSS). Portfolio or practical assessments are developed by the individual providers. NOSS qualifications
are subject to internal and external verification processes.



                                                                                                             2
                                           Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project

                                                                                Malaysia | NQF | 2015


To ensure consistency of assessor judgements in relation to student assessment:
       For technical and vocational programmes and skills programmes, the quality and currency of
        qualifications are monitored through accreditation, maintenance audit, Institutional Audit, ratings
        and continuous quality improvement.
       For MQA accredited programmes, the evaluations undertaken by the panel of assessors are based
        on quality assurance documents and MQA established Accreditation Committees to ensure
        consistent judgement. These committees are comprised of subject experts from various fields.

Relationship to standards
Standards are used for programme development for the higher education, technical and vocational
education and skills education sectors.
Higher education and technical vocational education programmes
For higher education and technical vocational education programmes approved by the MQA, educational
standards are developed (referred to as programme standards) to inform curriculum, training, and
assessment materials development.
These standards have undergone a number of iterations and provide guidelines for different modes of
study, including coursework, research and a combination of both. They outline subjects (body of
knowledge) and key topics, credits allocated to each subject as well as formative and summative
assessment information. The standards also outline student entry requirements and benchmarks for
academic staff, including qualifications and experience, ratio of part time to full time staff and the staff–
student ratio.
Programme standards cover the following areas: accounting, building, surveying, computing, multi media,
hospitality and tourism, law and Syariah, Islamic studies, Muamalat and Islamic Finance, psychology,
traditional and complementary medicine, performing arts, medical and health sciences, media and
communications, engineering and engineering technology, education, early child education, and
information technology.
These standards are used by prospective providers for curriculum development and program design,
along with approval to deliver the curriculum for purposes of accreditation.
Generic or employability skills are addressed through the MQF. All programmes approved through the
MQA must meet these requirements. The MQF is based on eight domains:
    Knowledge
    Practical skills
    Social skills and responsibilities
    Values, attitude and professionalism
    Communication, leadership and team skills
    Problem solving and scientific skills
    Information management and lifelong learning skills
    Managerial and entrepreneurial skills.
Programmes standards do not specify separate generic or employability skills, but are more specific to the
skills required for each occupation area. It is through demonstrating these domains at the various levels




                                                                                                            3
                                            Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project

                                                                                  Malaysia | NQF | 2015


of the MQF that curriculum addresses generic or employability skills contextualized to discipline
requirements.
Assessment of student performance is subject to the quality assurance as set out in COPPA and
contextualized by discipline through the Programme Standards at programme level by COPIA when
checking the policies and systems on student assessment at the institutional level. External examiners are
mandatory for programmes at the bachelor and above levels.
Programme standards are developed through a panel convened by the MQA. Panel members include
MOHE, higher education providers (both private and public) and related industry or government agencies.
Programme standards are informed by existing program design, provider educational standards, and
industry needs - as described by representatives - plus any professional bodies, or licensing and/or
regulatory requirements. In turn, the programme standards inform providers’ future program design,
educational standards, and curriculum for accreditation purposes. All curriculum is provider-developed
and owned.
Programme standards are all available on the MQA website.
Engineering programmes at the degree level for engineering technologist and engineering technology are
recognized by the Washington Accord.
Skills programmes
For skills programmes approved by DSD, MOHR, the development of ‘occupational skills standards’ are
developed at a national level. The National Occupational Skills Standards are the ‘minimum specification
of performance that an individual must achieve competency in when carrying out a function in the
workplace, together with the knowledge and skill set needed to meet standard requirements’ (NOSS
Guideline, Department of Skills Development (DSD) Ministry of Human Resources, 2013).
The competencies are based on the ILO definition of skills, which means an acquired and practiced ability
to competently carry out a task or job. The competencies describe broad occupation competencies rather
than specific tasks.
NOSS are developed through a DACUM process based on occupational and job task analysis. NOSS can be
developed by staff within the DSD or by external consultants, however the development processes require
a committee panel consisting of ‘industrial practitioners representing the major players in the respective
industry, relevant authorities and professional bodies in the development of the Standard Practice (SP)
and Standard Content (SC)’. The development of the Curriculum of Competency Unit (CoCU) should also
include additional panel members who are involved in the training line of the respective industry.
NOSS address the 30 different industry sectors, including transportation, printing, chemical, tourism and
hospitality, information communications and technology (ICT), machinery and equipment, mechanical
and electrical service maintenance, building and construction, business management, textiles and
apparels, agriculture and agro-based, biotechnology, oil and gas, as well as distributive trades. The Skills
sector has a 5-tier qualification system (Skills certificate level 1-3; skills diploma level 4; skills advanced
diploma) that is consistent with the NQF.
NOSS consists of:
    A standard practice section, which provides an overview of occupational background
           o Occupational Structure table that shows the career pathway for a particular occupation
               derived from Occupational Analysis (OA) process and occupational structure table


                                                                                                             4
                                             Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project

                                                                                   Malaysia | NQF | 2015


            o Qualifications available
            o Other information including: working conditions
       Standard content
            o Competency profile chart
            o Competency profiles, including work activities (job tasks) and performance criteria
            o Curriculum of competencies unit (COCU)
The competency profiles are the competency specifications supported by the COCU, which includes
required knowledge and skills, training hours, delivery mode and assessment criteria.
Originally NOSS specified only specific skills and did not address generic or employability skills. Due to the
need to meet the requirements of the MQF, generic competencies are being added to profiles. NOSS
qualifications now incorporate Core competencies plus Core Abilities and Electives. Core Abilities are
generic abilities, including ICT, communication skills, numeracy, teamwork, problem-solving; they are
described separately from vocational skills competencies.
NOSS standards all follow a set format, guided by the information in the 2013 NOSS Guideline. NOSS
standards are all available from the DSD at a small cost. There is no public register per se. Standards are
reviewed on a regular basis, 3- 5 years or earlier if required.
The NOSS standards inform employers, trainers and students. They inform the program and learning
design and curriculum, along with the training and assessment materials developed by the provider for
approval purposes.


Registration of Training Providers/Awarding Bodies
The registration of higher education providers and technical and vocational providers is under the
jurisdiction of the Ministry of Education, whilst the registration of skills providers is under the jurisdiction
of the Ministry of Human Resources. Both ministries have developed their own standards and
requirements for registration of TVET/Skills Programmes Providers.
For skills providers, DSD approves providers to deliver programmes against the NOSS. Providers need to
meet a series of standards for approval, which are similar to MQA standards. Curriculum, learning
materials, and assessment all need to be approved by DSD. The Curriculum of Competency Unit provides
guidance for program and learning material design. Providers receive a template for learning guides.
Monitoring strategies are employed by both ministries and TVET provider outcomes are reported through
programme accreditation reports and maintenance audit reports.
There is a register for higher education and TVET and for Skills providers maintained by the Ministry of
Education and the DSD, Ministry of Human Resources.

Educator/Assessor Requirements
There are minimum requirements for teachers stated in the MQA quality assurance documents. In
general, teachers’ qualifications should be at least one level higher than the program that he/she intends
to teach (although experience is not mandatory and therefore does not matter). These requirements are
used as a guide by the panel of assessors/experts. The Ministry of Education is responsible for assessing




                                                                                                              5
                                         Promoting Skills Development and Job Creation in East Asia Project

                                                                              Malaysia | NQF | 2015


and registering teachers’ qualifications for public and private HE providers. This is for the purpose of
issuing a teaching permit.
According to DSD, MOHR quality assurance documents, teachers should have qualifications appropriate
to the program that they intend to teach. The DSD requires assessors to have at least a Malaysian Skills
Certificate one level higher than that for which they are assessing and the Vocational Training Officer
qualification (which is a 3-month program with a 6-month internship). Trainers and assessors have
different standards, with the trainer standards being less stringent.

Transnational/Cross Border Education
MOE and MOHR are responsible for policy matters, including allowing providers to deliver in other
nations. Incoming providers need to undergo the same registration process as local providers and the
same set of standards apply. MQA also conducts assessments to determine the relative equivalency of
programs and qualifications from abroad for the purpose of continuing studies in Malaysia.

Quality Indicators/Data
Data is collected by the MQA, MOE and DSD, MOHR.



Additional information
Information for this summary was provided by the following representatives.


 Name                           Role                                  Organisation
 Zita Mohd Fahmi                                                      Malaysian Qualifications
                                                                      Authority
 Datuk Dr Pang Chau Leong       Director-General, Department of       Ministry of Human Resources,
                                Skills Development,                   Malaysia




                                                                                                          6
