Innovative Governance &
Anticorruption Initiatives


                 A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity




                                                   JANUARY 2014

THE WORLD BANK
                                                       Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                          A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         TABLE OF CONTENTS


         INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................... 2
         AFRICA (AFR)............................................................................................. 4
         EAST ASIA & PACIFIC (EAP) .................................................................... 14
         EUROPE & CENTRAL ASIA (ECA) ............................................................. 21
         LATIN AMERICA & CARIBBEAN (LAC) .................................................... 26
         MIDDLE EAST & NORTH AFRICA (MENA)................................................. 32
         SOUTH ASIA (SAR) ................................................................................... 38
         GLOBAL INITIATIVES ................................................................................ 45
         ATTACHMENT 1: WORLD BANK GOVERNANCE
         LENDING FY07 - FY12 .............................................................................. 49
         NOTES....................................................................................................... 51
         ABOUT THIS SURVEY................................................................................. 51
         LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS .......................................................................... 52




                                                                                                                Page 1
                                                 Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                  A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         INTRODUCTION
         The World Bank’s work on governance and anticorruption (GAC) is broad and diverse. The
         Bank’s transition to a global practice structure, including a Governance Global Practice,
         provides an opportunity to take stock of a number of innovative initiatives that are having an
         impact upon the lives of our clients and to highlight the lessons that can be learned from them.

         Historically, the Bank has focused heavily on issues of public sector management, with particular
         emphasis upon public financial management (PFM). Such work remains a major part of the
         Bank’s portfolio. From 2007 to 2012, around 15 percent of the Bank’s total lending was for
         governance issues, including both policy-based and investment lending (see Attachment 1).
         Around 81 percent of this governance-related lending was for public sector reform, with over
         half of this being for work on PFM and procurement.

         In the wake of the Bank’s 2007 Governance and Anticorruption Strategy and the 2012
         Governance and Anticorruption Strategy Update, this effort has become more complex and
         varied, involving changes in both what the Bank does and how we do it. Substantively, the
         agenda has moved beyond a focus on the core systems of government to embrace a more
         comprehensive approach that focuses on improved service delivery and results among line
         ministries and departments. It has sought to incorporate new actors into the dialogue about
         reform, from institutions of accountability such as parliaments, ombudsman offices and
         anticorruption agencies, to more explicit engagement with a wide variety of private sector
         actors and civil society organizations. New objectives, such as facilitating transparency,
         participation and accountability, have been added to the traditional goals of efficiency,
         effectiveness and fiscal sustainability. New approaches, particularly those involving information
         and communications technologies, are being employed to facilitate this broader outreach and
         stakeholder engagement.

         Changes have also been made in how the Bank approaches governance issues. GAC projects
         have been increasingly designed with an eye towards strengthening country systems or explicitly
         addressing country risk. There has also been a push to employ new techniques, such as political
         economy analysis, to better understand and address the incentives for and against reform.

         Country and project teams have increasingly used creative and unconventional approaches to
         design programs that respond to pressing governance problems. The following are but a few
         samples of the type of innovative governance efforts envisioned under the Bank’s governance
         agenda. They were identified and put forward by the GAC Focal Points in various regional and
         sectoral vice presidencies, often after extensive internal consultation. They encompass a variety
         of regions, sectors and problems. The activities typically combine a multi-disciplinary approach,
         a track record of success, and the promise of significant prospects for scale-up downstream.




                                                                                                      Page 2
                                                   Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         Care was also taken to display the diversity of activities taking place within individual Bank vice
         presidencies or at the global level. The initiatives from Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC)
         were selected, for example, because they reflect the depth and variety of governance work
         taking place in the Region. They cover different sectors and include both country-specific as
         well as regional initiatives, and they range from investment lending to analytic work and policy
         dialogue to integrating governance issues into the country partnership strategy framework.

         Diverse as they are, many of the initiatives demonstrate a clear trend towards enhanced
         accountability, including both improved monitoring and greater citizen participation. They
         range from monitoring procurement in West Africa and investments in Colombia, to
         improvements in local service delivery in Indonesia, to participatory anticorruption efforts in the
         Dominican Republic. They also include efforts to leverage the use of new communications
         technology for monitoring absenteeism in Pakistan, improving budget monitoring and
         participation in the Kyrgyz Republic and facilitating better natural resource management in the
         Philippines. Such initiatives are complemented by other efforts, such as fostering communities of
         practice on various governance topics, supporting cutting edge research on transparency, or
         adopting new tools and filters to mainstream governance in country programming.

         Any effort of this type is admittedly abbreviated and anecdotal, and undoubtedly many worthy
         initiatives are not captured here. Yet, viewed either individually or together, these examples
         provide a brief yet fascinating glimpse into the type of innovative governance initiatives
         currently being supported by the Bank, as well as the possibilities for capturing and scaling up
         these efforts in the pending transition to a governance global practice.




                                                                                                        Page 3
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                     A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         AFRICA (AFR)

         Contract Monitoring Network Program

         The monitoring of procurement in West Africa has historically been
         limited in scope and impact, reflecting constraints in both opportunity and capacity. This can
         deny the poor access to desperately needed infrastructure such as roads and power.

         The Contract Monitoring Network (CMN) program supports the assessment of processes leading
         to the award and implementation of contracts. The objective of the program is to build the
         capacity of emerging multi-stakeholder coalitions in Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria and Sierra Leone so
         that they can monitor procurement/contracting processes and outcomes more effectively and
         advocate for improved governance arrangements in priority sectors such as transport and
         energy.



                 Countries: Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria & Sierra Leone
                 Activity Type: Institutional Development Fund
                 (IDF) Grant
                 Duration: 3 years
                 Cost: $1million




         Each coalition has developed tools and templates for contract monitoring in various sectors. In
         Liberia, a coalition is focusing on municipal contracts and the effectiveness of procurement
         processes in waste collection and management. Community engagement workshops carried
         out by the coalition have resulted in increased public access to municipal contracts, greater



                                                                                                         Page 4
                                                    Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                  A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         community knowledge about the responsibilities of contractors, and the reporting of contract
         violations to municipal authorities. The program has also provided a forum for continuous
         dialogue between the community and municipal contractors, which has translated into clear
         improvements in garbage collection in Monrovia. In Nigeria, a coalition is focusing on the poor
         quality of service delivery in the power sector. It has, thus far, successfully contributed to
         improved enforcement of the country’s Freedom of Information Act; it has also facilitated mid -
         course project corrections, including the replanting of electricity poles to meet required
         standards. As a whole, the CMN program has helped to increase transparency and
         accountability in public procurement processes and contracts, thereby significantly improving
         the delivery of socioeconomic benefits to citizens.

         Kenya and Rwanda: Cutting Red Tape and Corruption for Construction Permits



                 Countries: Kenya and Rwanda
                 Activity Type: Advisory Services
                 Duration: 2 years
                 Cost: $500,000




         Basic business regulatory transactions in Kenya and Rwanda are often hampered by excessive
         red tape and corruption. The International Finance Corporation’s (IFC) Investment Climate
         Program helped the City Councils of Nairobi and Kigali to reform and automate the
         administration of construction permits, reduce the compliance burden on businesses, and
         improve the transparency of the underlying permitting processes. Prior to the reform, all
         processing of construction permits was done manually, following a convoluted process across
         multiple departments and external organizations. Approval times in Nairobi averaged 6 months.
         The process was considered so complex and opaque that private “expediters” offered services
         to speed up the permitting process at a cost equivalent to 60 percent of the permit fee.




                                                                                                      Page 5
                                                    Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                     A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         The project developed a web-based software application to automate the plan review
         procedures and the delivery of construction and occupancy certificates. In Nairobi, the project
         was launched in September 2011, and cut approval times to 30 days, thus eliminating the need
         for “expediters”. Construction permit applications have increased by 300 percent due to the
         rapid growth of Nairobi; however, the system allows the City Council of Nairobi to keep pace
         with these rising volumes. The reforms are also expected to increase the level of formalization in
         building construction and improve compliance with the safety requirements mandated in the
         city’s by-laws and national building codes.

         A variant of the software application was implemented in 2013 in Kigali, Rwanda. The process for
         obtaining a construction permit was cut from 12 procedures and more than 100 days, to 5
         procedures and a maximum of 30 days. As in Nairobi, this reduction in procedures and direct
         business-to-government interactions cut red tape and corruption significantly.

         Zambia: Good Governance in Roads Pilot Project

         In Zambia, roads cost far more to build than they should, do not last as long as they ought to,
         and their construction can involve corrupt or illicit dealings. One way of tackling these issues is to
         improve the level of oversight in the sector, particularly the level of non-state actor monitoring.
         Yet civil society organizations (CSOs) and the media have historically been ineffective when it
         comes to engaging in the road sector in an informed and constructive manner.




                 Country: Zambia
                 Activity Type: Governance
                 Partnership Facility (GPF) Grant
                 Duration: FY13 – FY15
                 Cost: $300,000




                                                                                                         Page 6
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         Government ministries and departments have not been proactive in engaging with these
         stakeholders, and non-state actors have very little understanding of the sector or of what
         mechanisms can be utilized to improve governance and hold providers accountable.

         The aim of the Good Governance in Roads pilot project is to improve accountability and service
         delivery in the road sector by developing the capacity of CSOs and journalists to engage in the
         sector in an informed manner and incentivizing collaborative partnerships across road
         stakeholders. It includes intensive training, mentorship, coalition building and a competitive small
         grant program. The project is based on collaboration between the World Bank and the Road
         Development Agency (RDA), in particular the RDA Integrity Committee.

         The pilot project has greatly increased the interaction between government and non-state
         actors on road governance issues. Thirty non-state actors from all over Zambia were
         competitively selected to take part in the training and have since formed the first Road Watch
         Coalition. Over 20 proposals for innovative interventions (including community monitoring,
         investigative journalism, citizen reporting, dramatization of road issues, and using Information
         and Communication Technology (ICT) to enhance transparency) were developed through the
         project. The Bank directly funds five of the best proposals. The Ministry of Transport and road
         institutions have publicly expressed their full support for the project.

         Burkina Faso: Health Procurement and Risk Management




                  Country: Burkina Faso
                  Activity Type: Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAA)
                  Duration: FY13 – FY14
                  Cost: $170,000




                                                                                                        Page 7
                                                     Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                      A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         The Africa Region's Procurement and HD units have worked with OPCS to initiate an innovative
         engagement in pharmaceutical procurement and supply chain management in Burkina Faso,
         primarily with the Central Medical Stores Institution (CAMEG). The goal has been to improve
         service delivery by strengthening CAMEG’s efficiency and transparency across the supply chain,
         from the quantification of needs through procurement, warehousing, distribution and quality
         assurance. Specific objectives included developing more strategic links with the
         pharmaceutical market, developing a smoother supply chain between CAMEG and the Ministry
         of Heath, and clarifying the framework for oversight. In addition to the multi-disciplinary core
         team, the project also leveraged expertise from the IFC, Quality Medicine for All of the Tropical
         Institute of Antwerp (QUAMED), and the World Health Organization (WHO).

         Cameroon: Revenue Enhancement Measures




                 Country: Cameroon
                 Activity Type: GPF and Trade Facilitation Facility Grants
                 Duration: FY10 – FY13
                 Cost: $1.8 million



         The Bank has piloted a number of innovative approaches to strengthen sector governance and
         stimulate demand-side governance in Cameroon. Projects have included analytical work on
         service delivery, civil society capacity building and customs reform. Studies on the political
         economy of various sectors have informed the development of targeted programs to improve
         service delivery, and offered empirical evidence for frank stakeholder discussions. The Bank has
         subsequently piloted a citizen-centered open budget program in two regions, which has raised
         public awareness about government allocations for schools, health centers, and local councils.
         This program has successfully increased tax revenue for local councils, encouraged parents to



                                                                                                          Page 8
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         contribute to the financing of schools, and created greater trust between mayors and
         constituents.

         The Bank has also supported the development and implementation of a comprehensive
         national customs integrity action plan, including performance contracting for customs officials.
         Through technical assistance and training, the Cameroonian customs have generated $60
         million in additional revenue. In addition to reducing corruption, average customs clearance
         time in Douala was reduced from 22 hours at the end of 2009 to two hours in 2011 for the
         container office, and from 15 hours to less than one hour for the office in charge of clearing cars.

         Liberia: Citizen Engagement for Fair, Equitable and Durable Land and Natural Resource
         Management




                                                                          Country: Liberia
                                                                          Activity Type: AAA
                                                                          Duration: FY13 – FY15
                                                                          Cost: $735,000




         In Liberia, the persistence of historical land disputes and the rapid rise of large-scale natural
         resource concessions have triggered a new wave of contests and grievances. The bulk of these
         disputes are sourced in contests around land tenure, use and management, as well as related
         social, economic and environmental grievances, including the loss of livelihoods, environmental
         damage, and claims of socio-cultural disrespect. Despite commitments enshrined in the
         regulatory framework, government, investors and communities have struggled to engage in fair
         and effective processes of consultation, decision-making and grievance redress around the
         management of natural resources.




                                                                                                        Page 9
                                                   Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                     A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         This project seeks to address these issues through a citizen engagement study that consists of: (1)
         a review of the nature and source of disputes arising from concessions management; and (2) an
         evaluation of the impact of methods used to engage citizens on the fairness, equity and
         durability of concessions management, so as to inform the development of more effective,
         equitable and durable procedures for the implementation of the new land policy and
         concessions management. The findings of this study will be used to support (1) the development
         of an inter-agency government priority work plan, and (2) the testing of citizen engagement
         models designed to contribute to fairer, more equitable and durable strategies for citizen
         engagement on land and natural resource management.

         More specifically, the project will (1) support multi-stakeholder forums for the preparation and
         testing of innovative models for citizen engagement (e.g. public information dissemination,
         consultation, social monitoring, communal governance, negotiation, mediation or other
         grievance redress activities); (2) review the outcome- and process-oriented merits of the pilots,
         and thereby (3) enable relevant stakeholders and/or multi-stakeholder groups to
         replicate/upscale the most effective arrangements, including by incorporating them in the near-
         and medium-term strategic plans, budgets and operational capabilities of the relevant entities.

         Union of the Comoros: Reducing Fragility, Strengthening Country Systems




                                                                    Country: Union of the Comoros
                                                                    Activity Type: AAA, Technical
                                                                    Assistance (TA) Loan
                                                                    Duration: FY11 – FY16
                                                                    Cost: $5.45 million



         The Union of the Comoros has been struggling with political instability since its independence in
         1975. The non-transparent and partisan resource allocation mechanisms among the different
         islands have been identified as a major source of fragility and conflict. In light of this challenge,



                                                                                                        Page 10
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                   A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         the Bank prioritized the strengthening of the country’s public financial management system, with
         the objective of making it more transparent and accountable. The Africa Poverty Reduction
         and Economic Management (PREM) team leading the project leveraged the knowledge of a
         number of Bank units, including the GAC-in-Operations teams of Operations Policy and Country
         Services (OPCS) and Africa – Core Operations Services (AFTOS), the World Bank Institute (WBI)
         Leadership and Governance team, and the PREM anti-corruption practice leader. As a result,
         several innovative approaches were initiated, including the piloting of the Leadership-for-Results
         methodology to support wage-bill management, the introduction of an automated payroll
         system, and the development of a country governance action plan.

         The project helped the country reach the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) completion
         point in December 2012 and led to tangible results, as reflected in improved public expenditure
         and financial accountability (PEFA) ratings. It also contributed to the introduction of the new
         budget law, the implementation of an integrated financial management information system,
         the elaboration of an organic framework completion methodology, and increased
         transparency with regard to the sharing of resources among islands.

         Kenya: Judicial Performance Improvement Project



                                                                      Country: Kenya
                                                                      Activity Type: TA Loan
                                                                      Duration: FY12 – FY18
                                                                      Cost: $120 million




         Kenya’s 2010 Constitution has provided a unique window of opportunity for transforming the
         country and the Judiciary. The Constitution established a basis for institutional and financial
         independence for the Judiciary, and together with its ambitious devolution program, creates
         opportunities for transforming judicial services. This vision is articulated in the Judicial



                                                                                                      Page 11
                                                   Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                      A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         Transformation Framework 2012–2016 (JTF). The JTF commits the Judiciary to pursuing four
         “pillars” of justice outcomes: (1) delivering justice services that are more focused on the needs of
         the people served; (2) acquiring and delivering judicial leadership that will transform managerial
         and judicial outcomes; (3) achieving adequate financial resources and physical infrastructure
         for the Judiciary; and (4) harnessing the use of technology as an enabler for improving the
         effectiveness of the judicial system.

         The Judicial Performance Improvement Project provides funding to support a more independent
         role for the judiciary, as laid out in the 2010 Constitution of Kenya and the JTF. In line with these
         priorities, the project consists of four components. The first component provides support for
         improved court administration and case management, including major ICT infrastructure. The
         second component supports judiciary training and staff development, and the third component
         supports construction and refurbishment of court infrastructure. The final project component will
         support the judiciary’s management of the project , which will entail procurement and financial
         management, coordinating implementation of project activities, monitoring and evaluation,
         and compliance with environmental and social safeguards.

         Burkina Faso: Enhancing the Demand for Good Governance in the CPS




                 Country: Burkina Faso
                 Activity Type: Country Partnership Strategy (CPS),
                 Development Policy Lending, AAA, GPF Grant
                 Duration: FY13 – FY16
                 Cost: $1.3 billion over four years


         In the wake of Burkina Faso’s 2011 socio-political crisis, attention to governance issues became a
         priority in the context of both the preparation of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) and the
         Competitiveness and Growth development policy lending series introduced in 2011.



                                                                                                         Page 12
                                                   Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                     A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         The GAC taskforce introduced new and innovative approaches to addressing governance in
         the Burkina Faso context and laid a strong foundation for the design of the new CPS. The GAC
         activities triggered an increase in non-trust-funded governance work by the Country Team and
         many of the pilot initiatives, including the civil society debate series and third party monitoring of
         Bank projects, have been incorporated into regular project or Bank budget funding.

         GAC activities were successfully integrated into the Bank’s program in Burkina Faso, at a
         country, sector and project level. At the national level, GAC activities consolidated Bank
         engagement and leadership on governance issues, notably with respect to anti-corruption
         monitoring, decentralization and justice reform, and facilitated continued collaboration and
         coordination with other development partners on issues of governance.

         At the sector level, GAC activities have strengthened the Bank’s analytical understanding of the
         political economy and governance environment in the justice, mining and transport sectors, as
         well as in relation to decentralization and anti-corruption. At the same time, they have
         stimulated discussions around improving the orientation of policy reforms and support in these
         areas.

         At the project level, GAC activities have enhanced the extent to which governance risks were
         addressed in most projects under preparation, through direct operational support to project
         teams in the form of political economy analyses, dedicated project team discussions and /or
         support in the preparation of project documentation. In addition, through information
         exchanges and support for capacity development and Demand for Good Governance (DfGG)
         activities, engagement with civil society was strengthened and regularized. As a result, civil
         society and local communities have become more actively engaged in monitoring the
         performance of Bank-financed projects and recipient-executed trust funds.




                                                                                                        Page 13
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         EAST ASIA & PACIFIC (EAP)

         China: Participatory Approach in the Poor Rural Communities
         Development Project

         The Poor Rural Communities Development Project (PRCDP), which
         closed in FY12, was implemented in the three provinces of Sichuan, Yunnan and Guangxi in
         China. The project adopted a participatory approach to local management on an
         unprecedented scale, involving a large number of remote villages in participatory planning and
         decision-making. For example, in Guangxi, 88 percent of the project’s villages were directly
         involved in project decision-making, and 399 project implementation groups were set up.
         Project communities participated substantially in decision-making at critical stages as well as in
         the monitoring and final evaluation of project activities. Levels of participation were particularly
         high in small-scale infrastructure activities, such as drinking water schemes, implemented
         through a community-led approach.




                 Country: China
                 Activity Type: Investment
                 Project Financing (IPF)
                 Duration: FY05 – FY12
                 Cost: $100 million


         The participatory approach supported high levels of transparency and ownership at the
         community level. As a result, the project communities felt more responsible for the management
         and maintenance of project facilities. The project set an example for decision makers that
         substantial levels of participation can be achieved on a large scale in government-led projects




                                                                                                       Page 14
                                                Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         if sufficient attention is paid to ongoing capacity building and learning. The project has
         developed a number of innovative practices that are seen as useful for strengthening
         community engagement and a pro-poor focus in poverty reduction projects, such as
         participatory poverty analysis, community procurement, and setting up project implementation
         groups in remote villages. As a result, the project has become an influential platform for
         innovative participation practices in China.

         Indonesia: Program National Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (PNPM) Series



                 Country: Indonesia
                 Activity Type: IPF
                 Duration: FY11 – ongoing
                 Cost: $222 million




         Indonesia has served as a model for many countries in the region to replicate Community Driven
         Development (CDD) projects, which serve as a dominant entry point for Demand for Good
         Governance (DfGG) and Social Accountability activities in the Region. The government has
         demonstrated a commitment to using the CDD approach in its poverty reduction efforts through
         the PNPM Rural project series. This project series addresses the development needs of poor
         communities through participatory means, while also providing a good opportunity to
         incorporate the principles of social accountability such as awareness raising/information
         disclosure and dissemination, participatory planning, participatory performance monitoring,
         local and community capacity building and learning, procurement monitoring, and grievance
         redress mechanisms.

         Consequently, the social development team in Indonesia has been able to scale up the effort
         through the CDD approach and find opportunities to strengthen and innovate work on social




                                                                                                   Page 15
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                   A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         accountability through enhanced financial resources. For example, the PNPM Generasi project,
         an innovative community conditional cash transfer (CCT) program, uses community planning
         and incentivized kecamatan grants to target three Millennium Development Goals lagging in
         Indonesia, while also helping the government to address the problems of governance and
         poverty in the 70 poorest districts in the country.

         The project has a number of relevant GAC features: (1) a ministerial decree forbidding PNPM-
         Rural and Generasi personnel from running for public office —staff must resign prior to declaring
         themselves as candidates; (2) monitoring by local and national media of PNPM staff
         compliance with this decree; (3) regular governance updates; (4) complaints handling
         monitoring; (5) large corruption case tracking and reporting; (6) Revolving Loan Fund
         performance monitoring; (7) support and capacity building for the development of internal
         audit standard operating procedures; (8) internal and external audit monitoring; (9) external
         auditor training; (10) audit results analysis and follow-up; and (11) development of a risk
         management framework and capacity building for the government’s partners.

         As regards PNPM Urban III, the project development objective is to ensure that the urban poor in
         PNPM Urban locations benefit from improved socio-economic and local governance conditions.
         PNPM Urban, which is a CDD program, caters to 11,000 urban wards in the country.

         Mongolia: Public Procurement Reform through an Open Contracting Approach




                                                                          Country: Mongolia
                                                                          Activity Type: GPF Grant
                                                                          Duration: FY12 – FY14
                                                                          Cost: $120,000




                                                                                                      Page 16
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                   A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         The Mongolian government requested assistance from the Bank to improve the country’s public
         procurement system. The response was an innovative open contracting approach that brought
         together government offices and a network of CSOs in enhancing disclosure of procurement-
         related information and citizen monitoring of the procurement process. The program —jointly
         implemented by the Mongolia country office, PREM EAP and the World Bank Institute (WBI), and
         supported by the Governance Partnership Facility (GPF)—focused on providing technical
         assistance (e.g., coaching) and seed funding for procurement and contract monitoring
         activities. Some of the notable results are: (1) the formation of the civil society network:
         Partnership for Public Procurement; (2) the revision of the implementing rules and regulations for
         the Procurement Law to include formal roles for citizen monitors; and (3) the improvement of
         road maintenance plans by local governments based on the results of civil society monitoring.

         Given the relative success of this approach, WBI is now working on similar open contracting
         initiatives with country offices in Europe & Central Asia (ECA) and Africa.

         Philippines: National Program Support for Environment and Natural Resources Management




                 Country: Philippines
                 Activity Type: IPF
                 Duration: FY07 – FY13
                 Cost: $50 million



         The program’s overall development objective was to assist the Department of Environment and
         Natural Resources (DENR) in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of its service delivery.
         More specifically, the project aimed to strengthen the allocative efficiency of DENR’s limited
         budget resources through better prioritization and partnership arrangements, and better linking
         of plans and budgets.



                                                                                                      Page 17
                                                Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                 A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         In terms of specific governance dimensions, the project used a geo-tagging system to track
         whether funds were being used for the intended purpose, as part of the National Greening
         Program. CSOs were provided with seedlings, and the geo-tagging system allowed the
         beneficiaries to tag where the seedlings were planted. A transparent, public website also
         allowed stakeholders to monitor seedling planting. Collaboration between DENR and
         procurement, financial management and internal audit staff ensured that geo-tagging data
         could be used for fiduciary oversight and monitoring.

         Vietnam: The Transparency Project




                 Country: Vietnam
                 Activity Type: AAA
                 Duration: FY12 – FY16
                 Cost: $1 million



         Prior World Bank analysis identified transparency and access to information as among the
         fundamental governance challenges for Vietnam. The Vietnam Development Report 2010 —
         Modern Institutions catalogued more than 30 laws, rules and decrees calling for access to
         information, yet only a fraction of that information is actually made available to the public.
         Similarly, in a study on land transparency in 2010, a precursor to the Vietnam Transparency
         Project (VTP), only a small number of provinces made land related information available. Other
         studies on land corruption and on corruption more generally have confirmed that limited access
         to information is a key governance challenge for Vietnam.

         The VTP is the key set of tasks under the transparency pillar of the Programmatic Governance
         Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAA). The VTP is premised on the idea that transparency can




                                                                                                    Page 18
                                                 Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                 A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         be measured and tracked over time. With its emphasis on data and evidence, the VTP will both
         empower constituencies calling for improved transparency and afford the possibility to
         demonstrate empirically the value of improving transparency. It will also facilitate learning
         across provinces, as good practices can be fed back to provinces that are not doing as well.
         Finally, the VTP will help strengthen integration of governance within and between sectors, and
         support the overall objective of governance mainstreaming.

         The approach of the VTP has its roots in an earlier intervention. In 2010, the governance team,
         with support from a United Kingdom trust fund, supported the piloting of a novel approach that
         measures actual transparency over time and provides real feedback on the degree of
         transparency across provinces and ministries. The VTP will scale up this approach by: (1)
         gradually expanding the coverage of sectors, (2) repeating the exercise annually, (3) paying
         greater attention to dissemination and feedback, (4) exploring new avenues for integrating the
         citizenry into the dialogue on transparency using modern technology, and (5) working with
         Vietnamese think-tanks, universities and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to generate
         sustained interest in the VTP and champions for transparency. In expanding this approach, the
         VTP will create a forum for keeping the problems with access to information consistently in the
         spotlight and demonstrating the benefits of greater transparency.

         Vietnam: Anticorruption Diagnostic

         In 2011, the government requested help to develop an anticorruption diagnostic, which falls
         under the Programmatic Governance AAA. In 2012, the government planned to review
         implementation of the Anticorruption Law and the Party’s resolution on anticorruption passed in
         2006, and to prepare an amendment to the current Anticorruption Law for submission to the
         National Assembly. To inform these reviews, the Government Inspectorate (GI) and the Office of
         the Steering Committee on Anticorruption (OSCAC) commissioned a set of diagnostic surveys on
         corruption. Under the leadership of GI and OSCAC, the study, covering 10 provinces, was
         initiated with a view to providing an empirically grounded source of information on the nature,
         causes and consequences of corruption in Vietnam, from the perspective of public officials,
         firms and citizens. Three development partners supported the Anticorruption Diagnostic: the
         World Bank led the data collection and report writing; the United Kingdom’s Department for
         International Development (DfID) provided technical and financial support; and the United
         Nations Development Programme (UNDP) provided technical advice throughout.




                                                                                                    Page 19
                                                 Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                  A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




                 Country: Vietnam
                 Activity Type: AAA
                 Duration: FY11 – FY14
                 Cost: $450,000



         The report on the Anticorruption Diagnostic, titled “Corruption from the Perspective of Citizens,
         Firms, and Public Officials—Results of Sociological Surveys,” was publicly released in November
         2012 at an event hosted by the GI and the Bank. This was the first time that the government had
         ever officially and publicly endorsed and released such a report. After release of the report, an
         active dissemination effort ensued and is ongoing, including at least 10 provincial and regional
         workshops, and dissemination to broader audiences through blogs, television programs, and
         presentations at international conferences and to donor groups in Vietnam.




                                                                                                     Page 20
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         EUROPE & CENTRAL ASIA (ECA)

         JUSTPAL (Justice Sector Peer-Assisted Learning) NetworK

         The JUSTPAL Network provides an innovative peer-to-peer knowledge
         sharing and learning model for justice practitioners to design and implement justice service
         delivery reforms. It is based on five demand-driven Communities of Practice (IT-enabled Justice
         Service Delivery, Court Administration, Prosecution and Anti-Corruption, Budgeting and
         Infrastructure). Its track record includes: (1) starting small (10 ECA countries) and demand-driven
         and then scaling up (more than 50 countries globally are now members); (2) development of a
         member-provided online library of innovations and good practices; and (3) development of
         performance measurement and benchmarking tools (e.g. Justice At A Glance) for self-
         assessment. Members are practitioners from Supreme Courts and the Judiciary, Ministries of
         Justice, Ministries of Finance, prosecutors/ombudspersons and external audit entities.




                                                             Countries: Global now
                                                             (initially Europe and Central Asia)
                                                             Activity Type: AAA, GPF Grant
                                                             Duration: FY11 – ongoing
                                                             Cost: $500,000



         The cross-cutting JUSTPAL Communities of Practice use a "joined-up" approach to sector reform
         by facilitating collaboration across disciplines (legal, public financial management, auditing,
         procurement, IT-enabled service delivery, business process streamlining, and performance




                                                                                                       Page 21
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         measurement), thereby promoting sector reforms that combine changes in core systems with
         "last mile" improvements in service delivery. JUSTPAL now engages stakeholders beyond
         government (e.g. Bar Associations, academia). Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz
         Republic, Montenegro and Tajikistan have requested Bank support for justice reforms based on
         their JUSTPAL participation. Policy dialog is ongoing and investment projects are under
         preparation in Azerbaijan (estimated cost $600 million), Kazakhstan (estimated cost $60 million)
         and the Kyrgyz Republic. A Justice Sector Public Expenditure and Institutional Review has been
         completed for Croatia and has been begun in Georgia. More recently, Singapore’s judiciary has
         expressed interest in collaborating with JUSTPAL on a Knowledge Brief to distil its lessons — aimed
         at policy-makers—on e-enabled delivery of justice services. Finally, the Asia-Pacific Judicial
         Reform Forum (initiated through a 2004 World Bank IDF grant), which brings together Chief
         Justices to share reform experiences, is sharing the JUSTPAL online library with Pacific Rim
         Supreme Courts, further multiplying JUSTPAL’s impact and influence.

         For further information, please see: www.justpal.org

         Tajikistan: Governance Checklist



                 Country: Tajikistan
                 Activity Type: Knowledge Products, GPF Grant
                 Duration: FY10 – FY14
                 Cost: $400,000




         The Governance Checklist is an innovative tool for mainstreaming governance elements
         throughout the Tajikistan portfolio. It is an interactive questionnaire for sector task teams that
         encourages the use of governance, institutional, and political economy analysis for mitigating
         non-fiduciary risk in lending operations. Its implementation has been supported by a GPF
         Window 1 grant (a total of $3.8 million over 3.5 years, including the allocation of $400,000 to the




                                                                                                       Page 22
                                                    Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                      A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         component financing the Checklist). The purpose of the Checklist is to help task teams at the
         design stage to think through the governance challenges that the project needs to address, as
         well as the risks that could create barriers to project implementation down the road. A detailed
         manual developed as part of the grant is available to project teams, with instructions on how to
         apply the Checklist.

         The Governance Checklist has been applied to every new lending operation in the Bank’s
         Tajikistan portfolio (currently seven projects), helping teams think critically about governance
         risks and consider mitigation measures. The Checklist is now being revised so that it can be
         applied in other countries in Central Asia. It has also been included in the Bank’s work plan for
         FY14, and there are plans to continue engagement with task teams after the GPF grant is
         closed, which will ensure the sustainability of its application. The application of the Checklist has
         helped identify the need for strategic project- and sector-level political economy and
         governance studies. A number of these tailored analyses have been completed in sectors such
         as urban water, mining, and health. The funding has been deployed for the most strategic
         projects in the Tajikistan portfolio, including projects that are likely to have substantial political
         economy challenges. For example, the political economy analysis (PEA) of the mining sector
         was used as the basis for a forthcoming policy note, which includes recommendations directly
         targeting governance in the extractives sector, building on the recent Extractive Industries
         Transparency Initiative (EITI), to which Tajikistan has recently subscribed.

         Information Matters—Transparency and Accountability in the Kyrgyz Republic (IMTAK)




                 Country: Kyrgyz Republic
                 Activity Type: GPF Grant
                 Duration: FY09 – FY13
                 Cost: $793,000




                                                                                                         Page 23
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                   A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         In Kyrgyz Republic, a GPF grant helped improve budget literacy and information transparency
         at the local level, and catalyzed a series of follow-up projects. Well over 1,000 heads and other
         staff of Ayil Okmotu (local self-government bodies), Ayil Kenesh (local elected council) members
         and CSO/NGO representatives were trained. In addition, 170 journalists and journalism students
         were trained in practical skills for budget analysis and reporting. The results demonstrated the
         growing interest and support of local and central authorities in the budget literacy and
         transparency agenda. Based on the early successes of its training program, the local partner
         obtained further funding from the USAID’s Office of Transition Initiatives to extend the program
         through facilitation of public hearings on local government budgets in 185 Ayil Ayimak (rural
         municipalities) and 4 towns, attended by over 7,000 residents.

         Monitoring and evaluations have shown: (1) an increased understanding of budget concepts
         (training participants); (2) an almost two-fold increase in budget information accessibility (as
         perceived by residents); (3) the ability to see beyond budget tables to understand what
         budgets mean to people and services (trained journalists); and (4) improved responsiveness to
         budget information requests (local authorities).

         Early in the implementation period, it became evident that civil servants and elected officials at
         the Ayil (local) level have very few support networks. As a result, the idea of peer-to-peer
         learning (PTPL) between Ayil representatives has found a lot of support in the government and
         among local leaders. Following a request from the State Agency on Local Self Government and
         based on the demand generated by the IMTAK, an innovative approach was piloted on a sub-
         national PTPL platform on local budgeting, and transparency and accountability of the budget
         process.

         Azerbaijan: Judicial Modernization Project

         The project objective is to support the initial phase of a long-term judicial modernization
         program through improvements in efficiency, information provision to citizens, and increased
         system capacity to handle future demand. Significant results have been achieved so far. The
         transparent, merit-based selection of judges through computerized testing (in venues open to
         observers from the media and embassies) has created a new cadre of young judges who now
         constitute 70 percent of lower court judges

         Judicial salaries have been increased thirty-fold to reduce corruption. Innovatively designed
         courthouses enable several courts (criminal, administrative, civil) and other justice functions
         (prosecution, enforcement) to be co-located under one roof. Information technology has
         increased access to judicial matters by litigants and lawyers through public information kiosks
         and provides automatic audio-video recording of proceedings, with different levels of access
         for the public, judicial staff and judges.




                                                                                                      Page 24
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                   A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




                                                         Country: Azerbaijan
                                                         Activity Type: Investment Loan
                                                         Duration: FY07 – FY15
                                                         Cost: $96.3 million (jointly with the
                                                         Governments of Azerbaijan and Japan)




         Energy-efficient heating and ventilation and automated business processes are saving time and
         money. Physically handicapped access and Braille signage and floor bands have made these
         courthouses an example for the public sector. Other key features of the project are pilot
         automation of notarial services, random allocation of cases to judges, free legal aid for the
         vulnerable and e-filing of plaints. Together, such reforms have begun to improve access and
         integrity, reduce corruption, increase public satisfaction and trust, and protect the environment.
         Countrywide scaling-up and consolidation of these reforms will be done through a follow-on
         project.




                                                                                                      Page 25
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         LATIN AMERICA & CARIBBEAN (LAC)
         Network of Access to Information Practitioners in LAC

         To support the growing movement toward democratic governance in LAC, the Region
         undertook a project to promote the implementation of Access to Information (ATI)
         legislation. In response to local demand, especially from state actors, the Bank supported
         the establishment of the Network of Access to Information Practitioners known as the Red de
         Transparencia y Acceso a la Información (www.redrta.org). The Bank played multiple roles as a
         convening authority, a knowledge facilitator and a financier of technical assistance. Several
         outcomes of this Network are already apparent, including: (1) the increased exchange of
         statistical information; (2) the establishment of regional policies and standards for jurisprudence;
         and (3) the design of indicators to monitor and measure success in accessing information (e.g.
         timeliness of the response to a citizen’s request). The Network provides an important incentive
         and attracts non-member countries with either pending ATI draft legislation or existing ineffective
         laws. Thus, more and more countries are seeking to learn from the Network with a view to
         enhancing their governance capacity through the use of their country’s own information
         systems and ATI laws and regulations.




            Countries: Mexico, Chile, Uruguay, Bolivia,
            Peru, Brazil
            Activity Type: TA, Spanish Fund for Latin
            America and the Caribbean
            Duration: 2 years
            Cost: $145,000




                                                                                                       Page 26
                                                    Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                      A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         Dominican Republic: Participatory Initiative Against Corruption




                                                             Country: Dominican Republic
                                                             Activity Type: Investment Loan, AAA, Policy
                                                             Dialogue
                                                             Duration: FY10 – FY12
                                                             Cost: $400,000




         The Participatory Initiative Against Corruption (IPAC) is a multi-stakeholder participatory effort
         designed to identify and implement a set of activities to strengthen transparency and
         institutional integrity while reducing the risk of corruption in Dominican Republic institutions. It has
         engaged representatives from many NGOs and CSOs, government ministries, the private sector,
         and international development agencies. CSOs involved in the transparency initiatives, which
         included involving users of state services in the evaluation of how well they were delivered, were
         invited to participate in the early stages of the IPAC process, and they received assurances from
         the executive regarding their meaningful participation and the transparency of the process. In
         subsequent stages, CSO input increased and focused on social monitoring and oversight of the
         whole reform initiative. A set of 30 short-term recommendations was first published on-line and
         then presented to the government at a public event. The recommendations were approved by
         the Council of Ministers during a day-long Cabinet meeting. A coalition of 14 CSOs, coordinated
         by a prominent transparency and anti-corruption CSO, formed the Citizen Observatory for
         Implementation, which was recognized by the government.




                                                                                                         Page 27
                                                   Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                     A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         The IPAC monitoring process featured a number of quarterly public events that report and
         discuss implementation progress. Participation in these events has been stable, attracting each
         time more than 300 people from the government, private sector, civil society and the
         international community. Out of the 30 recommendations (and 99 activities to achieve them),
         20 of them (and 66 activities) were accomplished in one year. For example, a unified
         procurement system for drugs and medical equipment resulted in a reduction of 65 percent in
         the cost of medicines and medical supplies, a net saving of US$20 million during the first 10
         months of 2013. Similarly, the Single Treasury Account reform has led to the closure of more than
         3,000 bank accounts. Citizens can now access the Central Government budget on-line and in a
         friendly format, following implementation of the recommendations on Public Finance
         Management.

         Peru: Mainstreaming GAC in the CPS

         The current Peru Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) illustrates how governance and anti-
         corruption can be built into the Bank-Borrower relationship, based on a Country Governance
         and Anticorruption (C-GAC) pilot project. The country’s anti-corruption authorities, such as the
         High-Level Anti-Corruption Commission and the Comptroller General, are gradually becoming




                 Country: Peru
                 Activity Type: CPS, Investment Lending,
                 AAA, TA (non-lending), Policy Dialogue
                 Duration: FY12 – FY16
                 Cost: $1 billion over four years



         strong and capable institutions. The various projects, including a GPF grant and lending
         operations in the justice sector, have helped Peru to better identify the needs of its citizens as
         well as open up institutions to an evaluation of their services and then, in response, focus on
         improvements. (The above photograph is taken at the ALEGRA in Comas, a free legal aid




                                                                                                        Page 28
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         center established as part of the $30 million Justice Services Improvement Project. These centers
         were part of a broader program under the CPS designed to improve access to justice services
         for the poor and enhance dispute resolution options.)

         The CPS’s comprehensive, “big picture” approach includes: (1) strengthening national
         procurement systems, including training for public officials; (2) a GPF grant on risk mapping
         across sectors; (3) a justice project that covers five agencies and includes the strengthening of
         Peru's anti-corruption systems (special prosecutors, courts, investigations, etc.); and (4) a Stolen
         Asset Recovery program of mutual legal assistance between Peru and foreign jurisdictions where
         accounts of former Peruvian officials are held. This broad governance approach has enhanced
         confidence in the Peruvian state’s capacity to identify, investigate and sanction corruption,
         following the corrupt practices of earlier regimes.

         Colombia: Citizen Audits to Improve Public Investment Transparency and Accountability




                 Country: Colombia
                 Activity Type: GPF Grant
                 Duration: FY11 – FY13
                 Cost: $700,000



         Royalties in Colombia represent roughly 10 percent of total public investment expenditure at the
         sub-national level. Given the importance of these investments, the Colombian Anticorruption
         Presidential Commission developed an innovative mechanism for participatory accountability
         called "Citizen Visible Audits" (CVA). CVAs generate capacity in local communities to exert
         social control over public investments funded by royalties.




                                                                                                       Page 29
                                                   Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         A Bank-executed GPF-funded pilot project financed the implementation of CVAs in 25
         communities located in 21 Colombian municipalities. The grant supported the organization of 80
         community forums with the participation of more than 4,000 citizens organized in "Beneficiaries
         Committees" and representing more than 680,000 beneficiaries of public investment projects.
         These participatory arrangements allowed citizens to monitor public works representing royalty-
         funded investments of $81.5 million. The grant has also contributed to institutionalizing the use of
         CVAs. In 2013, the government approved a decree that mandates it to promote the
         implementation of CVAs in all projects financed with royalties. The Bank is planning to support
         the implementation of CVAs through a $70 million loan for a project that aims, among other
         objectives, to strengthen citizen participation and social control.

         El Salvador: Security and Justice Institutions Public Expenditure and Institutional Review




                   Country: El Salvador
                   Activity type: AAA
                   Duration: FY11 – FY12
                   Cost: $185,000



         Security issues are a major concern in El Salvador. The murder rate peaked at 71 homicides per
         100,000 inhabitants in 2009, and the 2011 Global Study on Homicide (conducted by the United
         Nations Office on Drugs and Crime – UNODC) ranked El Salvador as the country with the second
         highest rate of homicides per 100,000 inhabitants. Crime is a major constraint to growth in El
         Salvador. To address these challenges, the government (1) convened a Public Security and
         Justice Cabinet, formed by the Ministry of Public Security, the Supreme Court, the General
         Prosecutors’ Office, the Public Defense and the National Civil Police; and (2) initiated an Anti -
         Crisis Plan, investing nearly US$600 million over the period 2009–2011.




                                                                                                       Page 30
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         The World Bank and the Ministries of Finance, Justice and Security conducted a Public
         Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR) of the security and justice sectors in El Salvador. This
         analysis focused on the value chain of security and justice services, and the performance of the
         institutions that deliver them. It included an institutional assessment, a performance and
         efficiency analysis, an expenditure assessment, a review of the budgetary process, and a
         political economy analysis. Stakeholders have used the findings to start developing an action
         plan for more efficient allocation of resources in the security and justice sector.




                                                                                                       Page 31
                                                     Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                      A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         MIDDLE EAST & NORTH AFRICA
         (MENA)
         MENA: University Network to Support Governance Reforms

         Recent events in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region have highlighted the
         importance of openness and transparency in governance, including (1) making government
         processes, decisions, and expenditures visible to public scrutiny and (2) providing citizens with a
         voice in decisions affecting their access to basic services and economic opportunities. This
         applies to higher education to the same extent as it does to social and financial institutions,
         corporations, and public agencies. It is in this context that the MENA Regional Program on
         Higher Education emerged to assist higher education institutions by promoting knowledge-
         sharing about their governance approaches, fostering best practices, and initiating and
         implementing reforms.

         This program sets out to increase awareness of some of the most compelling issues faced by
         higher education systems and institutions in the region, whilst building up the capacity of
         universities, Ministries of Higher Education, Quality Assurance Agencies, and research institutions
         in MENA. The program collaborates with global and regional experts, as well as partners on the




                 Countries: Algeria, Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon, Morocco,
                 Tunisia, West Bank and Gaza
                 Activity Type: TA
                 Duration: Ongoing multi-year program
                 Cost: $170,000




                                                                                                         Page 32
                                                    Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                      A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         ground—such as university leaders and Ministries of Education, Higher Education, and Finance.
         In addition, the program has developed a University Governance Screening Card that assesses
         the extent to which universities are following governance practices aligned with their institutional
         goals and international trends, whilst monitoring their progress over time.

         To date, 100 universities from seven countries (Algeria, Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon, Morocco, Tunisia
         and the West Bank and Gaza) have participated in a benchmarking exercise and have found
         this tool to be useful. It is now also in demand by other regions, offering the potential for it to be
         scaled up and replicated.

         Following this benchmarking exercise, participating universities have begun initiating and
         implementing reforms to improve their governance processes. As a result, more than 10
         universities across the region are implementing reforms, including: revising their mission and
         vision; establishing internal quality assurance units; revising staff job descriptions; conducting
         tracer studies; setting up alumni associations; promoting a participatory approach in decision
         making by involving more stakeholders; revising curricula; and improving their auditing system.
         Together, these reforms account for a more transparent governance approach, higher
         accountability for results, and more voice and participation from students and alumni. These
         institutional reforms were shared at the Rabat regional conference and later documented in the
         latest report “Benchmarking Governance as a Tool for Promoting Change”. Moreover, at the
         national level, countries in the region launched reforms to improve the quality of higher
         education services and are in the process of establishing external quality assurance bodies.

         The current phase of the program focuses on the implementation of reforms at a broad range of
         institutions, based on institutional action plans and supported by capacity-building measures. It
         will be followed by a second phase in which the University Governance Screening Card will be
         applied in order to measure progress.

         For further information, please see: http://cmimarseille.org/highereducation/

         United Arab Emirates: Abu Dhabi Judicial Department

         In line with the Abu Dhabi Economic Vision 2030 and as a part of the government-wide
         restructuring efforts, the Abu Dhabi Judicial Department (ADJD) was established as an
         independent judicial entity in 2007. Led by the 2030 Vision, the ADJD developed its first
         comprehensive five-year Strategic Plan, which set out the ambitious goal of becoming one of
         the leading high performance courts worldwide. The Plan identifies 5 strategic goals: (1) Access
         to justice; (2) Fair and accomplished judicial system that provides effective and innovative
         judicial services; (3) Public trust and confidence; (4) Highly qualified workforce and motivating
         work environment; and (5) Transparency and accountability.

         Since it was approached by the ADJD in 2009, the World Bank has provided support for the
         ADJD’s efforts to achieve the goals set out in its strategic plan. The scope of engagement
         focuses on support to four entities of the ADJD: the Strategic Planning and Performance
         Management Bureau, the Case Management Systems Department, the Human Resources




                                                                                                         Page 33
                                                 Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                  A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         Department, and the International Cooperation Department. Building on initial assessments,
         support to these departments has centered around sharing international best practices,
         developing recommendations for improving operations in these four areas, capacity building
         through training and workshops, and improving commercial case processing.




                 Country: United Arab Emirates
                 Activity Type: AAA
                 Duration: FY09 – FY14
                 Cost: $490,000




         The Bank's activities have focused on improving internal systems, operations and practices that
         collectively contribute to improved governance and increased accountability and
         transparency. Implementing an automated case management system allows judges to better
         manage their cases and enables users to gain better access to courts. This has not only simplified
         case processing but also increased transparency and accountability. Electronic access to case
         information and the random selection of judges have also increased internal and external
         accountability by eliminating secrecy about what is required of users and court staff alike. Data
         generated on court performance have also equipped management with the tools required to
         better govern, allocate resources and hold courts and staff accountable. Through improving HR
         operations and implementing monitoring and evaluation systems, the ADJD now has the
         necessary data to make more informed and objectively driven decisions, while also making the
         courts accountable to the public and management alike.




                                                                                                     Page 34
                                                    Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                     A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         Morocco: Post Arab Spring Governance Reform Program (Hakama)

         The Morocco Governance program aims at maximizing the window of opportunity for
         transformational reforms offered by the Arab Spring and the new Constitution adopted in 2011.
         The First Transparency and Accountability development policy loan (DPL) —which is intended to
         be one in a series—and associated TA support the implementation of governance principles
         and rights, introduced into the Constitution in response to citizen demands for more open,
         inclusive and effective governance. The loan provides funds for intertwined reforms intended to:
         (1) strengthen transparency and accountability in the management of public resources and the
         delivery of public services, and (2) foster an open and more participatory democracy through
         new policies on access to information, public petitions and participation.




                 Country: Morocco
                 Activity Type: Development Policy Loan (DPL), TA
                 Duration: FY13 – FY15
                 Cost: $454 million (Jointly with EU, African Development Bank
                 (AfDB), Deauville Partnership Transition Fund)




         This project supports international knowledge transfer and technical assistance on public
         engagement policies, performance based budgeting, and fiscal decentralization. Building on
         lessons from the past, the Morocco reform program adopts an integrated and holistic approach
         to governance in order to achieve greater results. It integrates multiple intertwined reforms that
         cover the entire public sector (central administration, agencies and local governments). The
         program also aims to strengthen the linkage between the cross-cutting reforms and the
         downstream service delivery constraints, and includes some quick wins to build the momentum
         for the medium-term reforms. In particular, the first law on Public-Private Partnerships and the
         new decree on public procurement to enhance transparency and competition in public
         spending and contracting have already been adopted. In addition, the government is



                                                                                                        Page 35
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                   A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         becoming increasingly open, as evidenced by greater fiscal transparency and disclosure, the
         draft law on access to information that is in the final stage of approval, and enhanced public
         consultations on a number of other draft laws and regulations. Finally, four ministries (finance,
         education, agriculture and forestry) have prepared a programmatic budget and performance
         plan for 2014.

         Iraq: Procurement of IT Equipment for a Social Safety Net Program




                 Country: Iraq
                 Activity Type: Government Executed Project
                 Duration: FY06 – FY13
                 Cost: $8 million


         After 30 years of conflict and embargo, the Iraqi government sought to strengthen social
         protection for its citizens by transforming subsidies into a targeted cash-based Social Safety Net
         (SSN) program. However, the program was very ineffective in reaching the poorest Iraqis: just 1.2
         percent of the population was assisted through cash transfers. Under the Iraq Emergency Social
         Protection Project, the Bank and the Government of Iraq sought to help reform the program by
         establishing a basic information system within the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs to record
         and process information on safety nets through accurate and timely data collection.

         This required the establishment of functioning SSN centers that would be supplied with essential
         Information Technology (IT) equipment. The total cost for the equipment, connectivity, and
         generators for all SSN centers was estimated at $5.2 million. Given the large amount of money
         involved, three international procurement processes were planned for launch. This decision
         followed traditional thinking about procurement policies at the Bank: international competition
         was thought to best capture economies of scale and value for money.




                                                                                                      Page 36
                                                    Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                      A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         But the reality in Iraq was quite different. In 2007, the first of these large procurement processes
         was floated with an estimated cost of $830,000. Yet, after an extended period of time to
         prepare bids, only one company had responded with a price of $5 million. This initial approach
         had not accounted for the unique institutional constraints of Iraq, particularly the difficulty of
         linking up with outside firms and the weakened Iraqi private sector.

         The task team and MENA Regional Procurement Manager then devised a new approach that
         involved offering multiple smaller-value contracts, while removing constraints, such as bid
         guarantee requirements and firms’ high financial capacity, which would have discouraged
         participation by local small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). The testing of the three smaller
         procurement contracts for the supply of IT equipment by SMEs was a resounding success in terms
         of costs and efficiency. It led to the re-structuring of all contracts into the smaller sizes that local
         SMEs could provide.

         In the end, the procurement from the local SME market not only helped promote growth for
         SMEs, but also provided substantial cost savings for the country. By effectively responding to
         local market conditions, the project saved $1.4 million, or around 20 percent of the original
         estimated cost of the contract. These savings allowed for the purchasing of additional
         equipment for disaster recovery, monitoring equipment, software, etc.—all of which are
         necessary for the proper functionality and sustainability of the system in the long term —and
         supported the expansion of the SSN program so that it now reaches nearly one million families.

         Challenges related to Iraq’s volatile situation, including the lack of interest from international
         suppliers, encouraged the Bank to look for alternative solutions in the design of the procurement
         process. The experience of working in a conflict-affected country led to smaller procurement
         packages and simplified procedures. An unorthodox and riskier approach at the outset ended
         up not only saving costs but also strengthening the local private sector and generating jobs in
         the country. Moreover, despite the weak control environment and risk in doing business in Iraq,
         this project received no complaints with regard to fraud and corruption.




                                                                                                         Page 37
                                                    Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         SOUTH ASIA (SAR)

         Afghanistan: Improving the Business Environment through
         Public-Private Dialogue

         The private sector in Afghanistan is in a formative stage, troubled by
         challenges ranging from political instability to incessant intimidation from insurgent groups. The
         economy is predominantly comprised of informal businesses and suffers from extremely high
         unemployment. Obtaining a trade and business license is often a first step for entrepreneurs to
         join the formal economy. However, the licensing procedure has been identified as stifled by
         bureaucracy, time-consuming, and highly corrupted.




                 Country: Afghanistan
                 Activity Type: Advisory Services
                 Duration: 3 years
                 Cost: $1.2 million




         IFC’s Investment Climate Team has been supporting the Ministry of Commerce and Industries in
         promoting a more transparent and less corrupt business environment. Support has included the
         establishment of public-private dialogue roundtables under the Afghanistan Private Sector
         Advocacy Forum.

         One of the main achievements to date is the reduction in the time taken to obtain a business
         license, which has been cut from 30 to 7 days; and a trade license from 180 to 120 days. The
         required procedures have been cut from 21 to 8 steps. A reduction in the time and cost of



                                                                                                       Page 38
                                                   Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         registering a business and obtaining a trade license has made starting a business in Afghanistan
         more accessible and predictable. The new transparent and comprehensive licensing system has
         also reduced the discretionary power of licensing officials. The reforms have given a boost to
         new and existing businesses, allowing them to concentrate on expanding and creating jobs,
         thereby encouraging growth in the economy.

         India: e-Delivery of Public Services

         This innovative policy loan supported the government’s national reform program to strengthen
         the system for the delivery of electronic public services and integrate it more effectively at both
         central and state levels. The reform efforts aimed at improving e-governance and broader
         public administration through policy initiatives including strengthening institutions with technical
         and professional specialists, providing project-development support, promoting public-private
         partnerships (PPPs), defining policy standards and technical frameworks, improving citizen
         participation, improving monitoring and evaluation, and supporting electronic platforms
         (broadband and mobile) for improving the reach, quality, and transparency of public services.

         The project included the development of legislation to mandate the delivery of public services
         through electronic channels. By improving the capacity of central and state government
         agencies to develop and implement e-services and also analyze the level of quality and
         reliability of e-services, the policy interventions are expected to have a direct positive impact.
         The reform program will also contribute to improvements in the investment climate, partnerships
         with private sector service providers and the openness and transparency of government
         generally.




                 Country: India
                 Activity Type: DPL
                 Duration: 2 years
                 Cost: $150 million




                                                                                                       Page 39
                                                      Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                       A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         Specific project results include:

                    1,776 e-services in operation (out of which 225 are based on PPPs);
                    Launch of mobile services: 113 Pull and 126 Push services in operation;
                    Setting up of 95,649 access points for citizen service delivery;
                    246 e-services have undergone re-engineering;
                    Leadership and re-orientation program for senior officials conducted in 20 states; and
                    18 services have adopted the new e-Praman user authentication / verification
                     processes.

         India: Mobile-based Citizen Engagement & Feedback for Monitoring and Evaluation (Karnataka
         Health and Maharashtra Water and Sanitation)




                     Country: India
                     Activity Type: GPF Grant
                     Duration: 1 year
                     Cost: $100,000 (for pilots)




         These innovative pilots in the health and water & sanitation sectors support mobile-based citizen
         engagement and feedback for the monitoring of planned activities and outputs (assets and
         services) and obtaining beneficiary feedback from the field. The mobile and web based systems
         provide real time results to monitor how reform policies are translating into successful
         implementation and the extent to which outputs and benefits are reaching the intended
         beneficiaries. These mobile-based solutions provide a more efficient and cost-effective system
         through which the Bank and government agencies can monitor projects for better results.




                                                                                                          Page 40
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                   A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         These innovative solutions provide an early warning system for corrective actions. They have built
         in support for geographic information system (GIS) based asset mapping, asset/service
         verification for real time monitoring, and mobile feedback (voice, data, photo and video), and
         aggregate all the information / feedback received into a real time ‘results monitoring
         dashboard’. The Service Level Benchmarks (SLB) Connect City Workshop was held in Pimpri -
         Chinchwad in March 2013. In June 2013, the Ministry of Urban Development recognized SLB
         Connect as one of the good practice models for citizen engagement and has asked other
         states to replicate this pilot.

         These pilot solutions also have the potential to support ‘participatory decision making’ and can
         provide a wealth of information that policy-makers can use for better design and corrective
         action. After the success of the pilots in the health and water & sanitation sectors, plans are now
         being made to implement the solutions across bank projects in other sectors.

         For further information, please see: http://www.slbconnect.in

         Nepal: Pioneering e-Procurement Reduces Corruption and Yields Savings




                   Country: Nepal
                   Activity Type: GPF Grant
                   Duration: FY09 – Ongoing
                   Cost: $2,000




         The Bank's promotion of GAC has played an instrumental role in introducing e-procurement in
         the roads sector in Nepal. Procurement by the Department of Roads had proven to be
         challenging in Nepal due to frequent security concerns as well as widespread corruption. There
         were frequent cases of genuine bidders suffering from intimidation and worse by gangs



                                                                                                      Page 41
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                   A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         employed to deter competition and steer contracts to particular companies with special
         political or other connections. This situation was compounded by frequent cases of collusion
         that, when caught, led to frequent re-bidding of contracts with increased transaction costs. As
         part of a GAC action plan in the Bank-financed Road Sector Development Project, e-bidding
         was introduced in order to reduce the opportunities for obstruction and physical intimidation by
         'middlemen' as well as to provide greater access and hence competition.

         The introduction of e-bidding via the project led to significant benefits to the Department of
         Roads’ procurement process. The system is estimated to have reduced the problems associated
         with the submission of bids by 80 percent. Moreover, media reports estimate that the system
         yielded savings from cost estimates of up to 3 billion Nepalese rupees (roughly $30 million) in
         FY10 – FY11. The successful experience prompted the government to make e-bidding
         mandatory for all contracts above 6 million rupees ($60,000). The Public Procurement Monitoring
         Office has been working towards developing a central e-procurement portal to expand its
         usage by other government agencies.

         Pakistan: Smart Monitoring Program for Combating Absenteeism




                                             Country: Pakistan
                                             Activity Type: WBI Innovation Fund, International
                                             Growth Center Grant, Investment Lending
                                             Duration: FY11 – Ongoing
                                             Cost: $50 million



         The Smart Monitoring Program uses smart phones to improve data collection and analysis,
         monitor performance and tackle absenteeism. This is particularly relevant for developing
         countries seeking to improve public sector productivity and service delivery. In Pakistan, the rate
         of absenteeism for health service providers is close to 50 percent. Anecdotal evidence suggests



                                                                                                      Page 42
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         that absenteeism is even higher for field workers, who are more difficult to monitor than those
         posted to stationary facilities.

         The Program was piloted by the government of the Province of Punjab in the health sector to
         monitor the performance of health inspectors, and it is now being rolled out in various sectors
         (education, agriculture, livestock, etc.). Armed with a basic smart phone, health inspectors are
         asked to enter the results of the visit to the health facility, including a self-photo to prove that
         they were present at the time of the inspection. The information is automatically uploaded and
         entered into the database, allowing for both live time and spatial monitoring. In addition, various
         tiers of management are automatically provided with an analysis of the information, thus
         completing the accountability loop. A randomized control trial at the district level found that the
         Program almost doubled inspection rates.

         With the recent approval of the Punjab Public Management Reform Program, these efforts are
         being scaled up, with added innovation. This project uses the Bank’s Program for Results
         instrument.

         Pakistan: Citizen Feedback for Government Services




                                                         Country: Pakistan
                                                         Activity Type: WBI Innovation Fund, TA,
                                                         GPF Grant, Program for Results Lending
                                                         Duration: FY10 – FY18
                                                         Cost: $1.1 million



         The Citizen Feedback Model (also called the Jhang Model or the Proactive Governance Model)
         aims to fight petty corruption, communicate state responses and assess the quality of service
         delivery by proactively soliciting feedback from identified citizens who have received a




                                                                                                       Page 43
                                                   Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                     A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         particular service. The model relies on a third party call center to send a combination of SMS
         and calls to every citizen who visits a government facility, soliciting his or her feedback. Citizen
         responses are then collected, categorized by type and analyzed for patterns of corrupt
         behavior. They are then displayed in an online dashboard to enable managers in government
         to take action on this information. The Office of the Chief Secretary monitors implementation
         and follows up with the field offices where patterns of corruption are identified.

         The Citizen Feedback Model is designed to find trends and patterns of misbehavior so that
         evidence-based action can be taken against chronically corrupt officials. More importantly,
         however, it will deter officials from engaging in corrupt practices.

         More than 3.3 million citizens receiving 16 revenue, health and policing services had been
         contacted by November 2011, out of which around 0.46 million have sent responses over SMS
         (an overall response rate of 14 percent). Another 64,000 citizens were reached via calls.




                                                                                                        Page 44
                                                   Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         GLOBAL INITIATIVES
         Promoting Audits as a Key Instrument for Monitoring Results




         Practical experience has repeatedly shown that financial audits alone are not enough to
         monitor achievement of development results. New complementary types of audits, such as
         performance audits and social audits, are needed to ensure that results are being achieved on
         the ground. To that end, the OPCS Financial Management (FM), Procurement and GAC teams
         joined forces and launched various initiatives to promote innovative audit approaches,
         strengthen related country capacity and ensure that Bank clients receive maximum benefit from
         audits. Specific initiatives include: (1) a global partnership with the International Organization of
         Supreme Audit Institutions to build the capacity of supreme audit institutions; (2) the
         establishment of a Bank Trust Fund to modernize public sector audit standards; and (3) the
         revision of the Bank’s audit framework, including guidance for Bank staff and Bank clients.


         Expanded Use of Political Economy Analysis

         Political and economic incentives shape what reforms are adopted, whether they are adopted
         and how they impact poverty reduction and shared growth. In an effort to incorporate this
         perspective into their work, for many years now, Bank teams have been conducting political



                                                                                                       Page 45
                                                    Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         economy analysis. This type of analysis gained
         significant momentum after the adoption of the
         GAC Strategy in 2007 and the publication of
         Problem Driven Governance and Political Economy
         Analysis in 2009.

         In 2009, with the founding of the Political Economy
         Community of Practice (PE CoP), new collaborative
         efforts began to drive more operationally relevant
         assessments, encouraging learning and knowledge
         sharing. The PE CoP has been steadily growing
         since then; it has a core membership of around 50
         Bank staff, who bring a wealth of political economy
         experience across different anchors, regions and
         sector teams. A larger group of around 300 staff is
         also interested in this work, sharing resources and
         attending events. Between 2009 and 2012, with the
         support of the GPF, World Bank teams conducted
         over 150 PE studies.

         Through the efforts of several members of the PE
         CoP, a new edited volume of political economy
         analysis has recently been published. The eight
         good practice cases presented in “ Problem-Driven
         Political Economy Analysis: The World Bank’s
         Experience” illustrate recent Bank achievements in applying this approach and cover examples
         from Mongolia, Morocco, Dominican Republic, Zambia, Ghana, Sierra Leone, Papua New
         Guinea and the Philippines. The cases show how political economy analysis can be applied to
         specific development challenges and opportunities from different sectors. They highlight the
         range of empirical evidence that can be used and discuss the types of recommendations and
         follow-up actions that result from the more systematic application of PE tools and techniques to
         long-standing development challenges.

         Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)

         Approximately 3.5 billion people live in countries rich in oil, gas, and minerals, but many of these
         countries suffer from poverty, corruption and conflict stemming from weak governance. The
         Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), launched in 2003, promotes and supports
         improved governance and transparency in resource-rich countries. It does this through the full
         publication and verification of company payments and government revenues from oil, gas, and
         mining activities. As a voluntary association of stakeholders with common goals, the EITI includes
         resource-rich developing countries, donors, international and national resource companies, and
         civil society.




                                                                                                       Page 46
                                                  Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                   A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         World Bank support spans the following activities: (1) administration and management of the EITI
         Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF), comprising 15 donors and cumulative contributions of $65 million;
         (2) technical assistance to 50+ countries throughout the EITI implementation cycle up to the EITI-
         compliance stage and beyond; (3) direct support to civil society organizations to strengthen
         their capacity to engage on EITI issues; and (4) training, knowledge management and policy
         inputs in coordination with the International EITI Secretariat.




         The EITI has been successful in catalyzing reforms in several countries. Specifically, EITI reports
         have helped uncover financial irregularities and have provided a roadmap for meaningful
         reforms of the oil, gas and mining sectors, which are often the largest generator of foreign
         exchange and government revenues. EITI implementation has also set the stage for wider sector
         reforms, such as public financial management, or institutional reforms, such as the strengthening
         of government institutions that regulate the sector—areas that will be an increasing part of the
         EITI agenda downstream. The active participation of CSOs is also one of the main EITI criteria
         and a condition for the success of the standard. The World Bank/MDTF supports capacity
         building of CSOs to increase their effectiveness in advancing transparency and accountability.




                                                                                                      Page 47
                                                   Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                    A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative (StAR)

         The Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative (StAR) is
         a partnership between the World Bank
         Group and the UNODC that supports
         international efforts to end safe havens for
         corrupt funds. StAR works with developing
         countries and financial centers to prevent
         the laundering of the proceeds of
         corruption and to facilitate more systematic
         and timely return of stolen assets.

         StAR works with regional and global
         networks in asset recovery. These networks
         build trust among practitioners, one of the
         key ingredients for successful international asset recovery. In this context, StAR supports, jointly
         with INTERPOL, the Global Asset Recovery Focal Point Network, that provides asset recovery
         practitioners with a platform to meet on a regular basis for the purpose of capacity building and
         the exchange of experience and good practices, and facilitates the daily exchange of sensitive
         case-related data and other operational needs. To date, 95 countries have joined the network.

         In addition to its policy/advocacy agenda, over the last two years StAR has significantly
         increased its capacity building/advisory support to client countries, providing hands-on
         technical assistance to policy makers and practitioners working on asset recovery and acting as
         a facilitator between developing countries and international financial centers in the context of
         cooperation on actual cases. StAR is currently providing such assistance to more than 20
         countries across all regions. To date, more than 1,500 officials and practitioners have
         participated in capacity building activities and over $112 million has been recovered in four
         countries with StAR assistance.




                                                                                                       Page 48
                          Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                       A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         ATTACHMENT 1: WORLD BANK GOVERNANCE
         LENDING FY07 - FY12




                                                                          Page 49
                 Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                              A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




                                                                 Page 50
                                                 Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                                   A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         NOTES
         The analysis of Bank lending is derived from reviewing the thematic codes for Bank projects,
         drawing upon project information from the Bank’s business warehouse. The thematic codes used
         for the analysis incorporate 8 key public sector governance codes and 10 other governance-
         related codes. The 8 public sector governance thematic codes are: administrative and civil
         service, decentralization, public financial management and procurement, tax policy and
         administration, other accountability/anti-corruption, other public sector governance, managing
         for results, and e-government. The other 10 codes are: access to law and justice, judicial and
         other dispute resolution mechanisms, law reform, legal institutions for a market economy, legal
         services, personal and property rights, other rule of law, participation and civic engagement,
         municipal finance, and municipal governance and institution building.




         ABOUT THIS SURVEY
         This compendium was compiled by the GAC Secretariat and GAC Focal Points in December
         2013 and January 2014. Robert Beschel, Charles Adwan, Graham Colin-Jones, and Monica
         Bascon provided editorial support. Specific inputs were provided by Nazaneen Ali, James
         Anderson, Nina Arnhold, Katherine Bain, Shilpa Banerji, David Bernstein, Lisa Bhansali, Zubair
         Bhatti, Christina Biebesheimer, Abel Bove, Kate Bridges, Hana Brixi, Lida Bteddini, Paulo De Sa,
         Stephan Eggli, Samantha Fien-Helfman, Adrian Fozzard, Andrea Galina, Elena Georgieva-
         Andonovska, Hiramani Ghimire, Helene Grandvoinnet, Piet van Heesewijk, Guenter Heidenhof,
         Kimberly Johns, Sarah Keener, Gregory Kisunko, Sahr Kpundeh, Jana Kunicova, Peter
         Ladegaard, Anne-Lucie Lefebvre, Roland Lomme, Kathleen Lonergan, Caroline Mascarell,
         Amitabha Mukherjee, Rachel Ort, Jean Pesme, Anand Rajaram, Fabian Seiderer, Roby
         Senderowitsch, Rob Taliercio, Joscelyn Truitt, Charles Undeland, Serdar Yilmaz and other Bank
         staff based in various regional vice presidencies.

         For further information, please contact the GAC Secretariat at (202) 458-0140 or write Charles
         Adwan at cadwan@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                      Page 51
                                      Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                      A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
         AAA       Analytic and Advisory Activities
         ADJD      Abu Dhabi Judicial Department
         AfDB      African Development Bank
         AFR       Africa
         AFTOS     Africa – Core Operations Services
         AS        Advisory Services
         ATI       Access to Information
         CAMEG     Central Medical Stores Institution
         CCT       Conditional Cash Transfer
         CDD       Community Driven Development
         C-GAC     Country Governance and Anticorruption
         CMN       Contract Monitoring Network
         CPS       Country Partnership Strategy
         CSO       Civil Society Organizations
         CVA       Citizen Visible Audits
         DENR      Department of Environment and Natural Resources
         DfGG      Demand for Good Governance
         DfID      United Kingdom’s Department for International Development
         DPL       Development Policy Loan
         EAP       East Asia & Pacific
         ECA       Europe & Central Asia
         EITI      Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
         EU        European Union
         FM        Financial Management
         GAC       Governance and Anticorruption
         GI        Government Inspectorate
         GIS       Geographic Information System
         GPF       Governance Partnership Facility
         HIPC      Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
         ICT       Information and Communication Technology
         IDF       Institutional Development Fund
         IFC       International Finance Corporation
         IFMIS     Integrated Financial Management Information System
         IL        Investment Lending
         IMTAK     Information Matters—Transparency and Accountability in the Kyrgyz Republic
         IPAC      Participatory Initiative Against Corruption
         IPF       Investment Project Financing
         IT        Information Technology
         JTF       Judicial Transformation Framework
         JUSTPAL   Justice Sector Peer-Assisted Learning




                                                                                         Page 52
                                       Innovative Governance & Anticorruption Initiatives
                                                         A Selective Survey of Recent World Bank Activity
THE WORLD BANK




         LAC      Latin America & Caribbean
         MDTF     Multi-Donor Trust Fund
         MENA     Middle East and North Africa
         NGO      Non-Governmental Organization
         OPCS     Operations Policy and Country Services
         OSCAC    Office of the Steering Committee on Anticorruption
         PE CoP   Political Economy Community of Practice
         PEA      Political Economy Analysis
         PEFA     Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
         PEIR     Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
         PFM      Public Financial Management
         PNPM     Program National Pemberdayaan Masyarakat
         PPP      Public-Private Partnership
         PRCDP    Poor Rural Communities Development Project
         PREM     Poverty Reduction and Economic Management
         PSG      Public Sector Governance
         PTPL     Peer-To-Peer Learning
         QUAMED   Quality Medicine for All of the Tropical Institute of Antwerp
         RDA      Road Development Agency
         SAR      South Asia
         SLB      Service Level Benchmark
         SME      Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise
         SPAN     Sistem Perbendaharaandan Anggaran Negara
         SSN      Social Safety Net
         StAR     Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative
         TA       Technical Assistance
         UNDP     United Nations Development Programme
         UNODC    United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
         VTP      Vietnam Transparency Project
         WBI      World Bank Institute
         WHO      World Health Organization




                                                                                            Page 53
THE WORLD BANK
