Institutional   Assessment
Report:
The National Commission for
Social Action

October 30, 2015


A Consultancy Report by
Norbert O. Mugwagwa, PhD
Table of Contents

FOREWORD                                                                        V

INTRODUCTION                                                                     1
THE OBJECTIVE OF THE ASSIGNMENT                                                  1
THE CONTEXT                                                                      1
THE SCOPE OF THE WORK                                                            1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY AND FINDINGS                                                   2
ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                                           5

I.     SOCIAL PROTECTION HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE                                  8
DEFINING THE SOCIAL PROTECTION AGENDA                                            8
IMPLEMENTING THE EMERGING SOCIAL PROTECTION AGENDA                               9

II.     THE EVOLUTION OF NACSA’S OPERATIONS                                      9
THE NACSA LEGAL MANDATE HAS REMAINED THE SAME SINCE 2008                        10
NACSA PROGRAMS: SUMMARY OF PERFORMANCE AND DELIVERABLES                         11
WHAT PROGRAMS AND INSTRUMENTS WERE PUT IN PLACE TO DISCHARGE NACSA FUNCTIONS?   11
INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW                                                            12
WHAT NACSA OR RELATED RESULTS HAVE BEEN OBSERVED SINCE 2008?                    13
CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE GOVERNMENT                                                 16

III.    INSTITUTIONAL SET-UP AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS                    17
A) INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK                                                      17
B) ORGANIZATION OF NACSA                                                        20
C) SECTORAL COLLABORATION                                                       22
D) IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS                                                  23
FIGURE 7: PROPOSED IMPLEMENTATION STRUCTURE                                     24

IV. SYSTEMS FOR ACCOUNTABILITY, TRANSPARENCY, QUALITY CONTROL, CREDIBILITY
AND STAFFING                                                            28
FIDUCIARY COMPLIANCE: FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATIVE EFFECTIVENESS AND EFFICIENCY     28
INTERNAL AUDIT                                                                  29
NACSA STAFFING                                                                  30

V.      IMPACT OF NACSA’S WORK                                                  33

VI.     FUNDING AND FINANCING SOURCES AND SPREAD                                34
FIGURE 8: PARTICIPATION IN NSPIAF MEETINGS                                      35
FIGURE 9: NACSA TYPICAL SUBPROJECT CYCLE                                        36

VII.     OFFICIAL ACTION REQUIRES OFFICIAL SANCTION                             38
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE                                                        38
GOING FORWARD                                                                   40
BOX 2: MEETING THE CHIEF OF STAFF                                               40
BOX 3: MEETING THE NACSA BOARD CHAIRMAN                                         41

VIII.    CONCLUSION: FINDINGS, RECOMMENDATIONS AND NEXT STEPS                   42
SPECIFIC FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                           42


                                              ii
IX.   NEXT STEPS                                                                       45

X.    ANNEXES                                                                          47
ANNEX A: DOCUMENTS REVIEWED                                                            47
ANNEX B: PEOPLE MET                                                                    48
ANNEX C: NACSA STAFF CONSULTATION SCHEDULE, MAY 2015                                   49
ANNEX D: REGIONAL AND DISTRICT STAFF MOVEMENTS, 2012–15                                50
ANNEX E: CHANGING ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURES                                            51
ANNEX F: SCHEDULE OF NACSA DIRECT AND INDIRECT SOCIAL PROTECTION PROGRAM AND PROJECT
INTERVENTIONS                                                                          52




                                          iii
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CSO      civil society organization
M&E      monitoring and evaluation
NaCSA    National Commission for Social Action
NGO      nongovernmental organization
NSPIAF   National Social Protection Inter-Agency Forum
NSPS     National Social Protection Secretariat
PRSP     Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
SPTSC    Social Protection Technical Steering Committee
SSNP     Social Safety Nets Project




                                      iv
Foreword
This institutional assessment has been authorized by the task team leader of the World
Bank Social Safety Nets Project (SSNP) at the request of the National Commission for
Social Action (NaCSA) of Sierra Leone. The assessment is meant to feed into the
preparation of the follow-on national SSNP. The objective of the assessment is to assist
the organization to restructure and strengthen itself to lead in the delivery of social
protection services among the poor and vulnerable in Sierra Leone following the expiry,
in 2018, of the 10-year mandate that was granted to the NaCSA in 2008. To that end, the
consultant joined the implementation review mission, which occurred from April 28 to
May 5, 2015, and presented the preliminary findings in the mission aide-mémoire, in
addition to submitting an inception report. Follow-up work has included the NaCSA’s
response to the inception report, the consultant’s comments and observations, and
further guidance from the task team leader. This final report incorporates subsequent
comments on the institutional assessment review and highlights the consultant’s
findings.

A big thank you to the Deputy Commissioner, Mrs. Haja Isatu Kamara, and the
Coordinating Team, led by Messrs. M. Bangura and M. U. Koroma (NaCSA) and Abu
Kargbo (World Bank), for providing invaluable support and organizing meetings with
parliamentarians, key government officials, and other actors, and follow-up with NaCSA
staff. The Commissioner, Mr. Alie Badara Mansaray, the Task Team Leader, Ms. Nina
Rosas Raffo, the Coleader, Mr. Suleiman Namara, and the Chief Secretary, Mr. Saidu
Conton Sesay, provided overall guidance and insights into the way forward for the
NaCSA.




                                           v
Introduction
The Objective of the Assignment
The objective of the institutional assessment is to assist the organization in
restructuring and strengthening itself to lead in the delivery of social protection
services among the poor and vulnerable of Sierra Leone following the expiry, in 2018, of
the 10-year mandate that was granted to the National Commission for Social Action
(NaCSA) in 2008.

The Context
The government of Sierra Leone made a directed decision to focus on social
protection partly as a response to the Ebola outbreak and the resulting strain on
the country’s resources. Social protection became a major focus because the country
was battling substantial poverty arising from a poorly performing economy
characterized by high unemployment rates among youth and adults, poor health among
women and children, and the problems of orphans, the disabled, and people infected
and affected by HIV/AIDS. In addition, the legacy of displacement, war refugees, and
war victims continued to trouble the delivery of services to these disadvantaged
households and groups.

The Social Protection Strategic Plan 2013–18 was developed and adopted to
respond to these and other challenges. The government established the NaCSA as a
lead agency to manage resettlement, rehabilitation, and reconstruction initiatives. The
NaCSA pioneered the response and demonstrated strong implementation skills, coupled
with accountability capabilities using community-driven development approaches. The
country’s donors channeled sizable resources to finance the expansion of the
community-driven development projects that were developed and managed by the
NaCSA. The NaCSA became pivotal to the poverty reduction strategies of the
government, the latest of which, the third Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP III),
Agenda for Prosperity 2013–18, aimed to drive the country from reconstruction to
development. The Social Protection Strategic Plan 2013–18 was developed and adopted
as a key pillar of the PRSP III. The social protection strategy articulates social protection
policy and programs and the implementing institutions. The NaCSA has a major role in
the strategic plan; hence the call to strengthen and restructure the NaCSA.

The Scope of the Work
The scope of the terms of reference of the assignment was broad in some respects. Five
areas were covered, as follows:

   The institutional framework and organization: ensure an appropriate, effective, and
    efficient institutional framework
   The planning of interventions supported by the NaCSA: ensure that the NaCSA
    program is strategic and focused to provide stronger sectoral complementarity in
    delivering better results in social protection
   Systems for accountability, transparency, quality control, credibility, and staffing:
    ensure (1) more robust systems, processes, and procedures to demonstrate and


                                             1
    show results in real time and routinely in management information and decision
    making; (2) the availability of complete, up-to-date, and formally adopted
    documentation such as in the case of manuals and handbooks in use by the NaCSA,
    for example, the 2014 audit manual; and (3) ensure accurate and up-to-date staffing
    systems and staff records
   Impact of the work of the NaCSA: ensure the timeliness of routine reporting on
    results, for instance, through quarterly and annual reports, as well as results-
    oriented reporting that informs the NaCSA and other actors on whether the program
    is having the desired impact in the short, medium, and long term or on the effects of
    the program on hunger, poverty, and vulnerability
   Funding and financing sources and allocations: periodically report on the sources and
    applications of funds

Executive Summary and Findings
This report analyzes the origins and background of the work of the NaCSA, recaps
earlier reviews of and progress in implementing social protection programs,
explains the related institutional framework and organizational structures, and
ventures to propose the way forward in social protection in the context of the
situation after the close of the Agenda for Prosperity 2013–18. It describes the
methodology—a combination of the appreciative inquiry and the results chain
approaches—used in the analysis of organizational strengths and performance results
and in envisioning positive future results to which the NaCSA may contribute. The
report concludes that the NaCSA is crucial in leading the delivery of social safety net
interventions for the benefit of the extreme poor and vulnerable. This occurs within the
context of broader social protection initiatives and complementary activities envisaged
in the 2011 national social protection policy as articulated in the social protection
strategy outlined in the Agenda for Prosperity 2013–18. While acknowledging that the
social protection priorities of the government and its partners are broad and ambitious,
the report notes that the NaCSA will continue to play a pivotal role, given the strengths
of its systems, mandates, organization, coverage and reach, experienced staff, ability to
mobilize and account for resources, and links with government ministries, departments,
and agencies, development partners, and other stakeholders.

The findings of the report are as follows:

Categories of the poor and vulnerable: The categories of the beneficiaries of social
protection interventions that are unlikely to change after 2018, namely, the poor and
vulnerable, are children in need of care, orphans, street children, the elderly, the
disabled, youth and adolescents, the internally displaced, war refugees and returnees,
victims of sexual violence, war victims, people affected by and infected with HIV/AIDs,
victims of the Ebola virus disease, the chronically sick, widows and widowers,
households headed by children, flood victims, and so on.

Legal Status and Strategic Focus

   There may be a need to revisit NaCSA’s legal mandates to reflect the successor
    poverty reduction strategy after the PRSP III, the Agenda for Prosperity, and the
    country’s future development priorities as the PRSP III draws to an end in 2018.



                                             2
   NaCSA’s mission and objectives should be articulated clearly in the NaCSA’s core
    documents as they are refined following the envisaged role of the NaCSA post-2018.
   Whereas the government has spelled out NaCSA’s strategic focus on resettlement,
    rehabilitation, and reconstruction as well as broadbased social protection, including
    safety nets for the extreme poor and vulnerable, the PRSP IV may call for a sharper
    focus on social protection and streamlined programs to achieve greater impact.
   While concentrating on defining and supporting interventions that address the
    needs of the extreme poor and vulnerable, NaCSA’s role in promoting economic
    growth requires that it also coordinate and rationalize implementation
    responsibilities and accountabilities among the various active sectors, including
    government ministries, departments, and agencies. The coordinating role would
    include oversight for targeting the poor, payment systems, including in remote
    areas, capacity building, promoting greater accountability, and overseeing grievance
    redress mechanisms.
   A champion is needed for an NaCSA strategic vision, which is acknowledged as a
    function of the designated core staff who are government-funded custodians of the
    institution.

The Institutional Framework and Organization for Social Protection

   In the foreword to the Social Protection Strategy and Implementation Plan, 2013–
    18, the president declares that “social protection is anchored in my office, and I have
    designated my chief of staff as champion of it in 2011.? The National Social
    Protection Inter-Agency Forum (NSPIAF), which is chaired by the chief secretary
    and comprised of ministers and representatives of civil society organizations
    (CSOs), labor, and the NaCSA, is therefore the apex institution on social protection
    (see table 4). As secretary to the NSPIAF, the NaCSA, though accountable to the
    NaCSA Board, is the key actor because of its implementation of safety nets for the
    extreme poor and vulnerable, coordination of sectoral social protection programs,
    and links to platforms that promote economic growth, such as infrastructure,
    agribusiness, and microfinance.
   The Social Protection Policy Review exercise under way will resolve the institutional
    framework issues, including the current dual accountability of the NSPIAF and the
    NaCSA with respect to the National Social Protection Secretariat (NSPS).

Organization of the NaCSA

   There may be negative perceptions about NaCSA’s coverage, but NACSA remains
    relevant as an executing agency that delivers.
   Defining NaCSA core staff functions, appointing core staff as custodians of its
    mandate and institutional memory, and mobilizing staff funding should be a
    government priority. The staff should include a finance director, a human resources
    manager, a procurement director, and an administrator.
   A lean and efficient post-2018 NaCSA structure would have three main directorates,
    corporate services, strategic planning and monitoring, and operations.
    Implementation and support relative to existing programs and projects would be
    revised based on emerging implementation procedures and the organizational
    framework.



                                             3
   Standard NaCSA support documents—there are currently various project
    agreements and operating guidelines—would need to be developed and adopted.
    These would describe NaCSA operating systems, guidelines, and procedures. They
    might thus include an operational or implementation manual and supportive
    handbooks that lay out detailed new practices on administration, procurement,
    finance, grievances, and so on.
   NaCSA staff are working on the basis of annual government contracts or renewable
    project-oriented contracts. Well-performing organizations offer good incentives to
    motivate staff to deliver results.

Sectoral Collaboration

   District, regional, and national meetings of the NSPIAF and the Social Protection
    Technical Steering Committee (SPTSC) are being held, minutes taken and
    distributed, and follow-up actions implemented by NaCSA staff. The performance of
    the staff in carrying out these roles and functions are valued by sectoral
    stakeholders and others.
   NaCSA’s strong contribution to the government’s post-2018 development surge is
    accentuated by NaCSA’s demonstrated ability to build capacity, coordinate the
    deployment of social protection systems, oversee the use of these systems, and
    provide technical support to government ministries, departments, and agencies and
    to other stakeholders in executing social protection activities in the subproject cycle.

Program Delivery

   The NaCSA is pivotal in the realization of the outcomes of the social protection pillar
    in reducing extreme poverty and vulnerability under the Agenda for Prosperity. To
    this end, the NaCSA should adopt a standard planning and program cycle in short-,
    medium-, and long-term project and subproject cycles. In this way, it could support
    social protection interventions in tackling extreme poverty and vulnerability. The
    cycles would be available for the design of social protection projects that
    government ministries, departments, and agencies and nonstate actors would use in
    developing interventions.
   The NaCSA has a strong comparative advantage. It should therefore sharpen its
    focus on social protection interventions, including safety net interventions, where it
    plays a direct leadership role, such as cash transfers, cash for work, social protection
    systems, and related efforts, while continuing to strengthen coordination and its
    links among activities falling directly under government ministries, departments,
    and agencies, nonstate actors, the private sector, and so on (for example, see table
    3).

The Impact of NaCSA’s Work

   Impacts are long-term effects of interventions that are most effectively established
    through evaluations usually at the end of project life. Only the Youth Employment
    Support Project has shown positive results in an evaluation.
   Where an intervention was designed and implemented following robust results
    chains that uphold causality and adherence to the hierarchy of results, the
    achievement of desired impacts is reasonably assured.


                                             4
Funding and financing sources and allocations

   NaCSA’s good track record in terms of fiduciary compliance attracts donor funding
    for programs managed by it. However this leads to other sectoral implementing
    agencies being starved of funding and thereby withholding their services.
   The NaCSA needs to standardize its accountability, fiduciary compliance and
    reporting documentation based on government legal and operating requirements
    and move from individual donor reporting formats.
   The NaCSA cannot do everything; there is need for it to strengthen its capacity
    building outreach to sectoral management units to empower the fiduciary
    compliance of government ministries, departments, and agencies and thereby build
    the confidence of donor agencies in funding them directly.

Assessment Methodology
The consultant adopted a combination of appreciative inquiry and results chain
approaches to analyzing organizational strengths and performance results and
envisioning positive future results to which the NaCSA would contribute.

Appreciative inquiry is a narrative-based process of positive change that starts by
engaging all members of an organization or community in a broad cycle of activities and
dialogue about strengths, resources, and capabilities. Appreciative inquiry is a strength-
based approach and a process that resonates with broader definitions of sustainable
development (Cooperrider, Whitney, and Stavros 2008). It involves the art and practice
of asking questions that strengthen a system's capacity to apprehend, anticipate, and
heighten positive potential (figure 1). It is an approach to organizational analysis and
learning that is also intended for discovering, understanding, and fostering innovations
in social organizational arrangements and processes.

Figure 1: The Appreciative Inquiry Approach




Source: David L. Cooperrider, Diana Whitney, and Jacqueline M. Stavros, 2008, Appreciative Inquiry
Handbook: For Leaders of Change, Brunswick, OH: Crown Custom Publishing.



                                                5
Results chains are based on a logical framework and show the causal relationship and
hierarchy of results across a given set of inputs, processes and activities, outputs,
intermediate and final outcomes, and impacts (figure 2). Establishing that inherent logic
is critical for the design and restructuring of an operation because it provides a stress
test on whether the intended results of that operation are likely to be achieved given
the resources that have been devoted and the sets of planned activities.

Figure 2: The Results Chain Approach

                    What is the Results Chain?
         Map of the causal links between the outcomes/goals and all the steps
          needed to achieve those goals.

                                                    Planning for Results


                                                                 OUTCOMES
                                                                 OUTCOMES

                                                                  Medium-
                                                                  Medium-            Long-
                                                                                     Long-
                                                   Short-
                                                   Short-          Term
                                                                   Term               Term
                                                                                     Term
                                                    Term
                                                   Term
                                  Outputs
                                  Outputs
                    Activities
                    Activities                     Changes in the conditions, behavior or
        Inputs
       Inputs                     Products &       situation of the beneficiaries resulting
                                  services         from the use of project outputs
                    Tasks         delivered
     Resources      undertaken
     committed to   to generate
     project        outputs
     activities
                 IMPLEMENTATION                                 RESULTS
                                                         Time


Source: Norbert O. Mugwagwa, 2012, “Education Sector Report 2012: Improving the Education Sector
Portfolio and Results,? Education Portfolio Quality Enhancement Group, Human Development Network,
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Results chains require an organization to introspect and examine: the mix of its
programs and projects, the level of its resource pool, its systems to translate the
resources into deliverables, nature of its collaboration with other actors, its
institutional and organization set-up and the quality, mix and levels of its staff. The use
of results chains provides an organization’s management with a compass to monitor its
performance and ability to achieve the desired outcomes. This approach is appropriate
for assessing NaCSA’s status as it gears itself for the post-2018 period.

A desk review of the various documents produced by the government and NaCSA
was carried out. It included statutes, regulations and policy pronouncements; minutes
of government ministries, agencies, and committees, and NaCSA Board and committee
meetings; NaCSA implementation manuals, handbooks, and reports; and studies and
evaluations (annex A).

Structured meetings with the Board chairman, commissioner, deputy
commissioner, chief secretary, the Parliamentary Committee on NaCSA, ministers,
and senior government officials enabled the consultant to obtain formal insights into


                                               6
the public sector views and opinions regarding the current institutional set-up and
organization structure of NaCSA (annex B).

Interviews with NaCSA directors, managers, senior staff and regional directors
elicited responses from the implementers on what has worked and what has not
worked so well (annex C; table 1).

Table 1: Select Questions Asked during the Assessment, by Assignment Area

1. Institutional Set-up and Organization
What is the nature of the NaCSA mandate to play the lead role in social protection?
The social protection strategy advocates for an social protection authority, would that duplicate the role
of the NaCSA?
Does the mandate cover the institutional relationships between the NaCSA, the NSPIAF, the
Parliamentary Oversight Committee, government ministries, departments, and agencies, and other
stakeholders adequately?
Where there is no formally adopted project organizational structure, what operating structure does the
NaCSA use?
How does the NaCSA ensure compliance with operational practices by government ministries,
departments, and agencies and by CSOs, given that it only has a coordinating and maintenance of
linkages role over them?
Does the weak articulation of the institutional linkages and accountabilities between the NaCSA and
government ministries, departments, and agencies affect the role, functions, and organizational location
of the NSPS?
Would separating Strategic Planning from Operations Divisions promote and facilitate more efficient
and effective organizational performance?
Would replacing Support Services with Corporate Services better capture the Core Staff functions of that
division?
2. Staffing and Incentives
What is the current establishment? Of that how many vacancies exist and for how long have they been
unfilled?
Which staff category has the highest turn-over?
How do the staff salaries compare with similar agencies?
Would having a “Core Staff’ improve NaCSA’s operational effectiveness and efficiency?
Should the NaCSA continue to have full time staff at decentralized levels?
3. Program Interventions Supported by NaCSA
Has the NaCSA had a clear mandate, mission, and objectives historically?
Does the NaCSA have a good track record of implementing programs and Projects and accounting for
funds?
Is adopting a standard project cycle for NaCSA operations feasible?
Should the NaCSA adopt subproject cycles for community-driven development projects, rehabilitation
and development subprojects, and for the disadvantaged, extreme poor and vulnerable?
Should the NaCSA focus on the subprojects it leads and supports directly only?
Should the NaCSA perform coordination and technical support functions where government ministries,
departments, and agencies and CSOs and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) lead?
Is the concept of building capacity to implement social protection programs among government
ministries, departments, and agencies, while the NaCSA retains systems oversight and quality control
responsibility via focal persons viable?
4. Systems of Accountability, Transparency, Quality Control and Credibility
Has NaCSA developed and implemented the above systems throughout the subproject cycles by phase?
5. Impact of NaCSA’s Work
Do projects that adhere to results chain principles at design and during implementation necessarily
achieve desired impacts at project completion?
6. Funding and Financing Sources and Spread
What is the current level of GOAL funding of the NaCSA budget?
Which donor agencies are not contributing to NaCSA work?


                                                    7
How much does the government contribute to the NaCSA?
Why are government ministries, departments, and agencies not attracting direct funding?


Consultations with collaborating stakeholders that include donors, other funders,
and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) through meetings and follow-up with
telephone calls and e-mails.

Applied political, economic, social, technical, and legal environment analysis and
SWOT analyses to understand the external and internal operating environments of
NACSA and other social protection stakeholders.

The purpose of the results chains is to assist project teams in clarifying the development
objective, identify the final outcomes, intermediate outcomes, outputs, and project
activities during project design or restructuring. Results chains articulate the causal
relationships that are expected to lead to the desired results and help in the selection of
appropriate indicators to monitor project performance and the organization’s overall
performance. Results chains are also used to support intensified supervision during the
implementation of projects by ensuring that teams focus on activities that achieve
desired outcomes.


I.        Social Protection Historical Perspective
The challenges of vulnerability and poverty among Sierra Leoneans though declining,
‘proportion of people in absolute poverty dropped from 66.4 percent in 2003 to 52.9 per
cent in 2011 and those in extreme poverty levels fell from 31.3 per cent to 13.9 per cent in
the same period’1, remain daunting.

Defining the Social Protection Agenda

On March 30, 2011, the Cabinet approved a national social protection policy. It
defined specific outcomes and prioritized interventions for the sector. The policy
focused on 10 areas, one of which was providing transfers to increase the use of social
services. Under the policy additional analytical work to guide the rationalization and
expansion of safety nets was sanctioned. In the same year, the government of Sierra
Leone, with the support of the World Bank, launched a social protection assessment to
guide the development of an improved social protection system and to put the social
protection policy into action.

The assessment, which was concluded in June 2013, recommended that the
government should focus its efforts on three major programs selected from areas
covered in the social protection policy, including the following: (1) a cash transfer to
extreme poor households with children, (2) a social pension targeted at war victims and
the elderly, and (3) a permanent labor-intensive public works program that would seek
to help the unemployed and those rural and urban households that are seasonally
exposed to food insecurity.


1   Social Protection Strategy and Implementation Plan 2013–18


                                                   8
The assessment further recommended an approach of building capacity and
systems to increase the cost effectiveness of interventions and to improve
coordination. The Assessment recommended that efforts should be made to: establish
social protection systems that would function as a multi-program operational platform,
which would also create links between transfer programs and health and education
services; reduce program fragmentation and duplication; and improve coordination
between government ministries, departments, and agencies, local councils, NGOs, and
other service organizations implementing social programs.

The government also adopted a social protection strategy in 2012. This strategy
outlines the government’s priority of developing a national safety net system capable of
responding effectively to the needs of vulnerable groups both during periods of
crisis/shocks and in normal times, as well as improving their human capital over the
long term. The government plans to focus on greater allocation of budgetary resources
to increase the scope and coverage of the existing and limited social safety net system.
As a result, the NSPS, which is housed by the NaCSA and under the overall leadership of
the chief of staff in the Office of the President, has been created. The NSPS, which
includes representatives of the various line ministries, leads in technical discussions
among the government, the World Bank, and other partners on the development and
implementation of safety net systems.

The government launched the Third Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, the
Agenda for Prosperity 2013–18. This strategy includes a new social protection pillar
with the objective of strengthening the social protection delivery system to ensure the
poor and vulnerable in Sierra Leone afforded an equal opportunity to access basic
services while helping them cope and mitigate risks. This is also a major signal that the
political will exists to move beyond crisis support and build an social protection system
that can protect the poorest and most vulnerable, reduce poverty, and make growth
more inclusive and promote social cohesion.

Implementing the Emerging Social Protection Agenda
The government is implementing a number of Social Protection programs in the
Ministries of Health, Education, Social Welfare, and Agriculture, and many NGOs
are also active in the country. The government recognizes that there are challenges
with these programs with regard to coverage, targeting, leakage and program
administration. A more effective and efficient utilization of expenditures has the
potential to increase coverage of the Social Safety Net Project (SSNP) and mitigate the
impact of shocks for a large group of poor and vulnerable households. Projects to
support the government in its efforts to build an social protection system and to
provide timely income support to an increased number of poor households via a
consolidated approach are under implementation. A unified system of safety nets
administration would therefore help the government build both resilience and
opportunities for the poor.


II. The Evolution of NaCSA’s Operations
The NaCSA is a statutory body set-up under the National Social Action Act of 2001
as a successor organization to the National Commission for Reconstruction,


                                           9
Resettlement, and Rehabilitation, which was transformed from a ministry. It was
oriented toward

   Relief and humanitarian operations, including the resettlement of refugees and
    internally displaced persons
   The reconstruction of war-damaged infrastructure

The NaCSA legal mandate has remained the same since 2008
The mandate areas assigned to the NaCSA by law include the following:

   The provision of social protection services, which form the bedrock of the
    development of human capital, is assigned to the NaCSA under section 2 (e) of the
    NaCSA Act 2008 (Number 23).
   The Refugees Protection Act 2007 (Number 42) assigns to the NaCSA the
    implementation of the act under humanitarian assistance.
   War reparations, relief, and resettlement, which fall under humanitarian assistance,
    are also assigned to the NaCSA under the NaCSA Act 2008.
   Providing capacity-building support to chiefdom councils within capacity building
    for local council governance is also assigned to the NaCSA under Local Government
    Act 15 of 2004.

The mandate, which ended on December 31, 2010, was provided under the NaCSA
Act of 2008 (number 23). The roles and responsibilities of the NaCSA are stipulated in
the NaCSA Act of 2001 as amended in 2008 and include, under section (e) “to serve as a
recipient and manager of funds for social protection of disadvantaged families and for
liaising with the National Social Security and Insurance Trust for the use of the social
safety nets.?

The stipulated NaCSA roles, responsibilities, and accountability were detailed as
follows:

   Promote sustainable community-based development activities to reduce poverty
    and improve the speed, quality, and impact of development initiatives, with support
    and cooperation of NGOs, community-based organizations, ministries, private sector
    partners, and other interested parties. This mandate requires that NaCSA define and
    adopt a project cycle to guide project teams as they prepare specific interventions
    for funding by various sources.
   Assume the functions of the National Commission for Reconstruction, Resettlement,
    and Rehabilitation during transition: overall planning, coordination, supervision,
    and monitoring of humanitarian, reintegration, resettlement, and reconstruction
    activities; improve the nation’s capacity to absorb and utilize relief and development
    assistance effectively and in a transparent manner. This implies that the NaCSA will
    define processes for reinforcing the project cycle in practice.
   Undertake public education campaigns on post-conflict reconstruction,
    resettlement, and rehabilitation; the NaCSA articulates an information, education
    and communication strategy.
   Support service delivery.
   Seek funding from donors.


                                           10
   Develop and adopt operational and procedural framework – set out NaCSA policies
    and procedures including criteria for selection of subprojects as well as on financial
    and administrative arrangements necessary for the performance of NaCSA
    functions; It is under this mandate that the recommendation to undertake a massive
    exercise to develop standard program and project documents should be undertaken.


This mandate was broad, thereby stretching the NaCSA.
Extended NaCSA lifespan: The Cabinet reextended the NaCSA mandate to 2018, in line
with the Parliamentary Act of 2001 that established the institution, as amended for
appropriate responses, to conform to the changing NaCSA roles in promoting pro-poor
service delivery and ensuring sustainable poverty reduction interventions.

NaCSA Programs: Summary of Performance and Deliverables
Goal at initiation : NaCSA’s goal was to provide a transition from relief to sustainable
development, complete activities started by the National Commission for
Reconstruction, Resettlement, and Rehabilitation and, in a change on focus and
orientation, empower ordinary people to improve their lives and livelihoods through
support for community-driven development projects.

What programs and instruments were put in place to discharge NaCSA functions?

To fulfill its legal mandates, the NaCSA needed to develop programs and instruments as
well as source resources to finance those actions that would enable it to respond and
deliver. The first of those programs was the National Social Action Project, a social fund
with two main sources of financing, as follows:

   The World Bank provided funding through a community-driven development
    program. The program relied on direct community financing of subprojects.
    Subcomponents of the program included the construction of feeder roads through a
    public works and job creation approach.
   The African Development Fund and the Islamic Development Bank provided funding
    through the Social Action Support Project I and II.

Under these programs, the NaCSA, in conjunction with government ministries,
departments, and agencies, CSOs, NGOs, the private sector, and communities,
executed and facilitated the following interventions (see table 3):

   Providing temporary youth employment for rural youth
   Capacity building in microenterprise development and access to capital among
    vulnerable women
   The construction of markets, schools, community health facilities, community
    centers, communication centers
   Spot improvement of feeder and community roads
   Support for agricultural activities in, especially, cocoa, livestock, and rice value
    chains, and in farmer field schools
   The provision of safe drinking water and sanitation facilities



                                           11
   Reparations for war victims, social protection of vulnerable groups, and
    international protection of refugees and irregular migrants

The range of the interventions indicates that the NaCSA has been active across
sectors in the rehabilitation of infrastructure, the provision of relief and social services,
employment, access to capital, and support for agriculture and related services. The
NaCSA started implementing social protection programs in 2011 and has achieved
significant results since then.

Institutional Review
The last institutional review of the NaCSA was conducted in 2008 to establish how
the NaCSA was organized, performing and what results it had achieved. The review
recommended a simple organigram (figure 3). It is, however, not clear why, at the apex
of the NaCSA, the span of control was one-on-one at three levels, making it overly top
heavy, that is, commissioner, deputy commissioner, and executive director. Technical
advisors are shown as accountable to the commissioners as well as the executive
director. It is also unclear what skill sets the NaCSA would have given that heads of the
three technical departments would be the technical leaders of their respective program
and project areas. Three programs were being implemented: microfinance, community
development, and public works. The review reported the following main changes:

   Progressive devolution of functions to local and district councils
   Two government PRSPs—the Agenda for Change and the Agenda for Prosperity—
    have outlined national development priorities
   Public service reform, including a focus on youth through the Youth Commission and
    the Ministry of Youth, women’s empowerment, performance contracts in the civil
    service, the Anti-Corruption Commission to be granted prosecutorial powers, the
    Road Maintenance Act, and so on.

Figure 3: Organigram, 2008


                                         BOARD

                                   COMMISSIONER

                                  D-COMMISSIONER
          TECH ADVISORS
                                    EXEC. DIRECTOR              SUP. SERVICES



           Micro Finance                   CDP                       PWP


                                        Reg. Office


                                        Dist Office




                                             12
What NaCSA or related results have been observed since 2008?

   Though reasonable progress was made in promoting growth, there was need to
    balance it with equity – poor and vulnerable need to actualize benefits of growth,
    gaps in availability and access to basic social services for the poor.
   There was increased access to education, health and sanitation, income, livelihood
    and recreational opportunities for deprived rural communities through NaCSA
    efforts.
   The NaCSA led the process of preparing a national social protection policy and an
    implementation strategy and in the creation of space for social protection as one of
    the national development pillars in the National Development Plan.
   There has been greater attention to social protection since 2011 through the
    creation of livelihood opportunities that increase access to basic services; public
    works schemes through short-term jobs for youth; the introduction of the Self-Help
    Affinity and Livelihood Group (SAG) that organized poor women to undertake
    livelihood activities in education, health care, and water and sanitation in remote
    areas; and the building of a strong safety net system that includes targeting,
    identification, registry, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), e-payment systems,
    grievance redress, coordination, and the proposed piloting of a cash transfer scheme
    for extremely poor and labor-constrained households in four districts across four
    regions.
   The NaCSA Board (December 2013) endorsed a request by management for an
    Institutional Assessment whose findings would strategically position the NaCSA for
    an increasing leadership position in social protection.

The Social Protection Strategy 2013 aimed at helping households to graduate
from poverty. Priorities identified under it included the following:

   Harmonization and coordination of the different social protection interventions will
    be carried out by various government ministries, departments, and agencies as well
    as local councils.
   A basic social safety net package will be established, including predictable cash
    transfers for extremely poor households.
   Households in extreme poverty, but with some labor capacity will be provided with
    opportunities for skills development and inputs to work and earn incomes and
    create productive assets.
   Support will be provided to youth to develop skills in areas of high demand in the
    labor market as well as start their own businesses. This will be complemented with
    support for youth to save, access credit, and raise capital to run their businesses.
   Social security will be expanded to make it more attractive by introducing disability
    insurance and preretirement benefits.
   Laws on child labor, maternity provisions, sick leave, holidays, salary protection,
    health and safety in the workplace, employment of disabled people, and
    organization in the workplace will be strengthened and enforced.
   The resilience of households and communities to public health emergencies, natural
    disasters, and weather and climate-related shocks will be supported through early
    warning systems and emergency and disaster preparations.



                                           13
   The government will formulate policies, raise funds, and establish public-private
    affordable housing and assistance.
   War victims, such as amputees, war wounded, victims of sexual violence, and war
    widows and orphans, will be empowered with financial assistance, skills training,
    and livelihood programs to enable them to earn incomes and access services.
   The poor and vulnerable, especially children in need of care, the elderly, the
    disabled, and the homeless will be linked with enhanced complementary services.

The wide range of prioritized areas for interventions demonstrated the need for a
focused approach to social protection over the five-year period 2013 to 2018.
Interventions were identified to address the following four categories of beneficiaries:

   Moderately poor households with members able to do productive work
   Moderately poor households that are labor constrained and unable to respond to
    labor-based interventions, for example, elderly pensioners, children, and the
    disabled
   Extremely poor un- and underemployed households that require skills training or
    cash-for-work participation, such as fisherman and small-scale farmers
   Households suffering from extreme poverty that are labor constrained as a result of
    war, HIV/AIDS, members too old to work, single mothers, or the disabled require
    cash transfers and free access to health care and education

Donors have funded programs and projects designed to respond to these
priorities (table 2; box 1). The programs and projects have performed to various levels
of success (table 3).

Table 2: Donor Funded Projects Implemented by the NaCSA
                                         Cumulative                         Cumulative     Remaining
                           Total donor                    Disbursement                                    Loan
                                       disbursement at                     disbursement    balances at
Project, donor               budget                        for 2014/15                                  disbursed
                                          beginning                       end of 2014/15 end of 2014/15
                            $ million     $ million           $ million      $ million      $ million       %
YESP, World Bank              11.30         10.12               0.438         10.558          0.742         93
Habope, World Bank             2.68         2.015               0.428          2.443          0.237         91
SLCDD, Islamic                                                                                             101
                             17.31         16.204              1.346          17.550          0.240
Development Bank
                                                                                                           97
GPC I, KfW                   14.30         12.342              1.506         13.848          0.452
                                                                                                            3
GPC II, KfW                  16.07            -                 0.38          0.38          15.332
Relief and Resettlement,                                                                                  100
                             0.074           0.0               0.107          0.107           0.0
UNHCR
Reparation, UN Women          3.59          2.425              1.502          3.927          0.023         99
Irregular migration,
                             0.321          0.197               0.0           0.197          0.124         61
ECOWAS
SSNP, World Bank              7.00          0.0                0.518         0.518           6.482          7
Totals                       73.038        43.303              6.225         49.528         23.510         68
Note: ECOWAS = Economic Community of West African States. GPC = Growth for Peace Consolidation.
SLCDD = Sierra Leone Community-Driven Development Project. UNHCR = United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. YESP = Youth Employment Support Project.

Box 1: Earlier Programs and Projects Implemented by the NaCSA
Results of programs and projects implemented by the NaCSA



                                                         14
The primary objective of the Sierra Leone Community-Driven Development
Project (Islamic Development Bank) was to improve the socioeconomic conditions of
the communities in the targeted areas through interventions in basic social
infrastructure (schools, public health units, community centers, and feeder roads) and
through livelihood interventions.

The implementation of the first phase of the project was expected to end in December
2013. By the end of the year, surplus funds were reallocated that resulted in the
implementation of an additional 29 infrastructure subprojects in eight districts in the
first quarter of 2014.

Additionally, financial support in the form of microgrants to the tune of $177,000 was
provided to 118 social action groups with a total membership of 2,388 women.

A total of 640 women in 32 microenterprise groups were also given a grant of $32,000
to support proper documentation of the groups’ activities.

The Union Trust Bank is also contracted to manage a revolving fund of $1 million that
creates access to loans for at reduced interest rates for the women.

Based on the successes during the implementation of phase I, the Islamic Development
Bank agreed to fund a second phase with funds to the tune of $53.9 million in four
districts and seven chiefdoms across the country. Project implementation is expected to
commence in 2015.

Implementation of social protection programs and projects started in 2011.

The implementation of the Youth Employment Support Project: a cumulative total of
470 subprojects for the youth project and the cash-for-work component were
completed in December 2013. An additional 70 agriculture-based subprojects were
generated and implemented in 2014. The project and the component aimed to create
temporary employment for youth and women ages 15–35. As of December 2014,
34,275 youth across the country had benefited from the project, 5,033 from the final 70
subprojects.

Table 3: Programs and Projects Implemented by NaCSA, 2014
Donor                                       Programs implemented and achievements                                 Comments
              Promotion of Pro-Poor Growth for Peace Consolidation (GPC) - Phase I and II
              Phase I: focused on employment creation and income generation for vulnerable groups (youths
              and women) and improving access to markets in Kailahun and Koinadugu districts.
KfW           Spot improved151km of feeder roads
              Constructed 8 Grain stores fitted with accompanying milling machines and drying floors in
              Kailahun and Koinadugu Districts
              Phase II approval with a total of €12.3 million for four years, 2014–18
              Sierra Leone Community Demand-Driven Development I and II
              23 infrastructure subprojects completed in 8 districts in the first quarter of 2014 due to savings
              accrued from previous years’ subprojects.
Islamic
              Financial support in the form of microgrants and loans provided to 118 SAGs and 32 MEGs.
Development
              SLCDD phase was approved, with funding of $53.9 million for implementation in four districts:
Bank
              Moyamba: Ribbi and Bagruwa c/doms; Kenema: Lower Bambara c/doms; Port Loko: Dibia and
              BKM c/doms; and Tonkolili: Kholifa Mabang & Kunike Sanda c/doms); SLCDD II implementation
              commenced with participatory rural appraisal
              Youth Employment Support Project and Cash-for-Work component                                       $11.3
World Bank    Project implementation started in 2011 and closed in June 2015                                     million,
              Total portfolio of 540 subprojects completed (feeder & town roads, cultivation of short duration closed



                                                         15
               crops and IVS rice, and garbage collection)
               The World Bank agreed to provide additional funding of $1.5million. U.K. Department for
               International Development?
               Social Safety Nets Project
               The SSNP received funding of $8 million from the World Bank to implement a cash transfer scheme $7 million, 7
               for 13,000 extremely poor households for two years in four districts (Bombali, Kono, Moyamba, percent
               and Western Rural); each beneficiary household is to receive the equivalent of $15 a month        disbursed
               Management information system developed and operational
               Preimplementation activities completed with the support of the NSPS, the National Registration
               Secretariat, Statistics Sierra Leone, and the Anti-Corruption Commission
               Phase I beneficiaries (2,720) targeted, enrolled and first quarter cash transfer paid
               Rapid Ebola–Social Safety Net
               To tackle the Ebola virus disease, $4 million was provided to target 9,000 extremely poor Ebola-
               affected households in six districts not covered by the SSNP.
               Monthly and quarterly meetings of the NSPIAF and the SPTSC
               Technical support for organizations implementing cash transfer programs focused on the Ebola
               virus disease
               Rapid Response Growth Poles Project (HABOPE)
               Provided 54 kilometers of foot trails, four rowing boats, and four boat landings
               Cash-for-work for 120 youth and women
               food support to 1,200 at risk households
               6 communication centers with solar energy
               livelihood grants to 50 youth and women’s groups
               agricultural support to 8 Farmer Field Schools. on
               The NaCSA provided capacity building and mentoring to beneficiaries of grants and farmer field
               schools; continued to mentor the microenterprise groups that received livelihood grants after
               project closure December 2014;
               Capacity Building for Combating Irregular Migration funded by ECOWAS
               To help combat irregular migration, NaCSA with support from ECOWAS provided Logistical
               support to Sierra Leone Immigration Department
ECOWAS         Basic training in trans-border operations for 19 Border Officials at the 6 border districts and
               provided 1 laptop and 2 mobile phones for each border post
               provided reintegration allowance to 113 returning migrants and 6 victims of trafficking from
               Holland, Germany, the United Kingdom, Tunisia, the Russian Federation, and the United States
               War Reparations Program
               Secured Le 6.138 billion from the government and completed payment of rehabilitation grants to
               1,618 severely wounded war victims
Government
               Production of a documentary and a seven-year report is in progress
               Resource mobilization is on-going for payment of rehabilitation grant to remaining 894
               beneficiaries;
               Relief and Resettlement
               Relief and resettlement supports locally integrated Liberian refugees and asylum seekers with
               funds from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNHCR
               Coordinated the issuance of resident and work permits to 993 locally integrated Liberian refugees
               coordinated
               Trained 60 refugees and host community on psychosocial first aid
               Peace and Development Corporation
               27 interns were admitted into the NaCSA internship scheme. This provided three months practical
               work experience for young graduates from various tertiary institutions across the country
               Ebola Virus Disease Response
               the NaCSA, with support from its donor partners (Islamic Development Bank, KfW, and World
Islamic        Bank), implemented a range of activities including:
Development    sensitization and awareness raising,
Bank, KfW, and distribution of sanitary materials,
World Bank     donation of motor bikes for contact tracers,
               establishment of community call centers
               food and psychosocial support to affected persons.
Note: SLCDD = Sierra Leone Community-Driven Development Project.

Contributions of the Government
Whereas the bulk of the funding for the early community socioeconomic
rehabilitation and development and other subprojects came from donors as
shown above, the contribution of the government was also significant. In addition
to direct government contribution to projects, staff on salary worked on projects at
national, regional and district levels and public offices and facilities were availed
throughout the project cycle. Significant areas of support include: mobilization and
information dissemination among the communities and households, identification and
targeting of beneficiaries, training and orientation of potential beneficiaries, appraisal


                                                            16
participation and approval, and at start of activities, training and contracting of works
to CSOs and private contractors. The Pro-Poor Growth for Peace Program funded by the
government of Sierra Leone and the government of Germany is an example of co-
funding aimed at ‘primarily improving the livelihoods of beneficiary communities’ and
contributes to development and consolidation of peace, with specific focus on employment
creation and income generation for vulnerable groups (youths and women)2.
The government demonstrated its commitment to focus on social protection of
the poor and vulnerable groups across the country, by testing out a ‘cash transfer’
intervention. NaCSA secured a grant under the SSNP of $7 million from the World
Bank and $1 million from the government for cash transfers to 13,000 extremely poor
households for two years in four districts (Bombali, Kono, Moyamba, and Western
Rural) in each of the country’s four regions.3 Under the grant, beneficiary households
received a cash transfer in the equivalent of $15 per household per month, disbursed on
a quarterly basis over a two-year period. The grant provided for preimplementation
activities that funded, development of systems by the newly established NSPS and in
collaboration with other government ministries, departments, and agencies, such as the
National Registration Secretariat, Statistics Sierra Leone, and the Anti-Corruption
Commission. Direct transfers of cash to the poor have been demonstrated to be an
effective way of empowering the poor and vulnerable; a potential growth area for the
NaCSA post-2018.
The government of Sierra Leone has been increasingly allocating resources to
social protection as it takes over incomplete projects and programs from the
donor agencies at the end of the financing agreements. In 2014, the government
allocated $2.4 million to the NaCSA for implementing programs and to cover costs that
the government had taken over. Total expenditures for the year on eligible activities
were $1.5 million. This is important for ensuring future sustainability of social
protection programs.

In the interest of sustainability, the government should focus its resource inputs to Core
activities of NaCSA that would include remuneration for ‘Core Staff’ carrying out ‘Core’
NaCSA functions.


III. Institutional Set-up and Implementation Arrangements
a) Institutional Framework

The President declared that ‘social protection is anchored in my office and I have
designated my Chief of Staff as champion of it in 2011’, in the Foreword to the Social
Protection Strategy and Implementation Plan, 2013–18. The NSPIAF, chaired by the
chief secretary and comprised of ministers, CSOs, labor representatives, and the NaCSA,
is therefore the apex institution in social protection (table 4). As secretary to the
NSPIAF, the NaCSA through the commissioner, though accountable to the NaCSA Board,
becomes the key actor through the implementation of safety nets for extreme poor and


2   NaCSA Annual Report 2014, 16.
3   NaCSA Annual Report 2014, XII.


                                           17
vulnerable, coordination of sectoral social protection programs, and links to platforms
promoting economic growth, such as infrastructure, agribusiness, and microfinance.4

The social protection strategy placed the responsibility for the day-to-day
coordination and facilitation of the social protection programs and projects on
NaCSA and yet identifies a future National Social Protection Agency as the host for the
NSPS (table 4).




The chief secretary and minister of finance and economic development as the
cochairman have the overall responsibility for social protection policy (See
above). The Minister of Social Welfare, Gender, and Children’s Affairs is the vice
chairman and ministers of health, education, local government, as well as the NaCSA
commissioner are members of the NSPIAF. The NSPS, introduced under the national
social protection policy and housed in the NaCSA, takes the minutes of the NSPIAF. The
social protection strategy recognizes that respective government ministries, departments,
and agencies have the responsibility for implementing social protection interventions that
fall within their ministerial mandates.

It is notable that there is a Parliamentary Committee on Social Protection that
provides parliamentary oversight over NaCSA activities. The parliamentarians
conduct periodic field visits aimed at assessing whether projects are delivering per their
mandates. At the Constituency level, the Members of Parliament (MPs) also conduct on
site supervision and interact with the community management committees that manage
subproject implementation. Whereas these visits reinforce the need for accountability,
organizing them may be demanding on staff time, could disrupt operations and have a
cost. Reports prepared following these spot visits are presented to parliament and
followed up through the government channels. Clearly all these levels of authority do
have a bearing on the implementation of social protection activities. This is yet another
line of accountability and authority that would have a bearing on how NaCSA affairs are
conducted.



4   Minutes of the NSPIAF show that the NSPS takes the official minutes at NSPIAF meetings.


                                                    18
The institutional arrangements shown in figure 4 do not mention the NaCSA
under the Implementation pillar despite the day-to-day responsibility it has for
overseeing implementation.

Figure 4: Institutional Arrangements for Social Protection Policy, Coordination,
and Implementation




The proposed multiple accountability of the NSPS to NSPIAF, a National Social
Protection Authority, and NaCSA requires resolution. The arrangement of the two
current centers of authority—the NSPIAF and the NaCSA—above the NSPS poses
functional challenges that need to be addressed. Housing the NSPS in the NaCSA and
giving the NaCSA administrative oversight over the NSPS and assigning the NSPS
responsibility for providing secretariat functions to the NSPIAF places NSPS staff in a
conflictual position that may require them to exercise double loyalty, that is, to the
NaCSA Board and to the NSPIAF. Given its experience with coordinating social protection
projects and handling and accounting for large amounts of funds, its developed systems,
and the skills and reach of its staff and network, the NaCSA is in the best position to
manage the NSPS.

The institutional and operating context of NaCSA in delivering the SSNP
component of the social protection strategy is captured by the Institutional set-up


                                          19
in Diagram 2 below adopted for the implementation of the SSNP. The set-up reflects
the government’s policy and stewardship orientation and decentralized implementation
focus as shown by the three pillars that anchor NaCSA’s SSNP operating environment;
these are (1) policy/enabling authority, (2) coordination/collaboration and (3)
implementation pillars. Each of these pillars operates at three levels: national, sectoral,
and district levels. Though adopted for implementing the SNNP project, the institutional
framework embraces the features advocated by the social protection strategy and has
the potential to be adopted for all new projects (figure 5).

Figure 5: NaCSA Institutional Framework




Though fully articulated and adopted for the implementation of projects such as
the SSNP funded by the World Bank, the institutions involved are yet to achieve
full functionality as shown by attendance at the meetings of the NSPIAF and the
SPTSC. There is need for orientation of the various committees as to their roles and
functions if they are to add the value that was intended at design. A team and task
building program needs to be put together and implemented with the help of a leadership
development specialist.

b) Organization of NaCSA

The current organizational structure of NaCSA has the Board, the commissioner
and deputy commissioner, three main divisions, and the internal audit unit (figure
6). The three Divisions are (1) programs, strategic planning and resource mobilization;
(2) M&E, knowledge management and reporting, and visibility, and (3) support
services. The divisions are headed by senior directors.

Figure 6: NaCSA Organizational Structure


                                            20
The Programs, Strategic Planning and Resource Mobilization Division is
responsible for delivering on the NaCSA programs as well as the strategic planning
and mobilization of resources. As shown in the diagram, all the Units that manage the
projects fall under this Division in addition to the forward looking strategic planning
aspects. There is a case for separating these very important roles and responsibilities as
NaCSA moves beyond the post reconstruction into the development phase.

The M&E, Knowledge Management and Reporting and Visibility Division is
responsible for providing the needed feedback on the performance of the NaCSA,
government ministries, departments, and agencies, and other stakeholders and
the status of social protection service results. This is a specialized function that
draws analytical skills and systems development and support functions the importance
of which will grow because the NaCSA plays a pivotal role in social protection in the
development phase. The inclusion of units, such as information, education, and
communication, may need revisiting and reconfiguration to relate and link to
operations.

The Support Services Division houses the compliance units of the NaCSA. Its role
will increase with the demands and requirements of a larger social protection program
and refocused role for the NaCSA, especially as the links with government ministries,
departments, and agencies and nonstate actors become more specialized. This division
would be better defined as the corporate services directorate because it oversees the


                                           21
redefinition of roles and functions using memorandums of understanding on various
diversified activities.

NACSA Remains Relevant

Whereas there are/maybe some negative perceptions about NaCSA’s wide
coverage, the NACSA remains relevant as an executing agency that works
effectively, with speed and delivers. Its role is pivotal for the recovery phase that Sierra
Leone is entering at end of the Agenda for Prosperity 2018.

The NaCSA has the capacity to provide core services using core staff and systems
designed, owned, and managed by the government in support of government ministries,
departments, and agencies to implement social protection activities as well as broader
development interventions. Besides the technical ones such as participatory rural
appraisal, extended participatory rural appraisals, other appraisals, procurement,
accountability, M&E, GSM, and so on, these include the design and provision of standard
project and subproject cycles and defining and articulating qualification criteria.
Defining and adopting NaCSA core staff’ functions, appointing core staff as custodians of
the NaCSA mandate and institutional memory, and mobilizing funding should be a
government priority.

In the absence of standard NACSA documents – currently different project
agreements and operating guidelines are being used. As the NaCSA prepares to
support the government’s efforts in recovery, there is, a need to update, consolidate and
adopt standard key documents that define NaCSA operating systems, guidelines, and
procedures, that is, operational and implementation manuals and supportive
handbooks that set out detailed practices in administration, procurement, finance,
grievances, and so on.

NaCSA’s greatest asset is its staff whose aggregated knowledge and experience is
a critical factor to NaCSA’s success. All NaCSA staff are on annual, project-type
renewable contracts; among other issues surrounding tenure and benefits, there were
expressed concerns regarding: conditions of service, adequacy of pay scales, career
related insecurities, and so on. A systematic review of the documents governing staff
matters with the view to aligning them with other comparable agencies would go a long
way toward addressing some of the staff concerns. An exercise that would facilitate
incorporation of government best practice with other management units practice into
the terms and conditions of service should go a long way toward convincing staff that
they are getting a fair deal.

c) Sectoral Collaboration

Earlier programs implemented by the NaCSA, such as the Integration of Refugees
(funded by UNHCR as a pro-poor growth program by the German Development
Bank) and youth development initiatives (supported by Volunteer Services
Overseas and the government of Italy), helped define sectoral collaboration in
practice. Both of these projects were cofunded by the government in line with
government funding and reporting procedures.



                                            22
The NSPIAF and the supporting SPTSC provided the platform for social protection
policy consultation among the ministers, and CSO, NGO, and private sector
representatives (see figure 7). Chaired by the chief of staff in the Office of the President,
the NSPIAF meets periodically and provides the needed guidance that is then
communicated downward to the SPTSC and the NaCSA by the NACSA-based NSPS,
which takes the NSPIAF minutes and acts as the secretary to the SPTSC. The
representatives of government ministries, departments, and agencies on the organs
report back to their respective sectors and ensure that their respective implementation
units act as required.

At the sector level, Technical Committee meetings at national, regional and
district levels, are being held, minutes taken, disseminated and social protection
and respective related actions followed up by government ministries,
departments, and agencies and by NaCSA staff. Government ministries, departments,
and agencies and other stakeholders that are active in programs and projects ensure
that their staffs perform their respective roles and functions. Systems for ensuring
quality of performance and reporting on results are put in place often with the support
of the NaCSA, but sectoral staff remain responsible for overseeing delivery.

At lower levels, local councils were reintroduced in 2004 with the mandate to
deliver social services; their capacity and devolved functions were strengthened
through NaCSA involvement. The approval of the Sierra Leone Community-Driven
Development Project articulated the roles, functions, modus operandi, and deliverables
of the devolved local authorities and their working relationships with sectoral
ministries, CSOs, NGOs, service providers, communities, and households. The social
protection programs and projects piggyback on these structures and systems. However,
capacity building for social protection systems and other operational and reporting
requirements is provided and financed by NaCSA staff and the budget, respectively.

A standard subproject cycle was adopted for the identification, design,
preparation, appraisal, implementation, and M&E of the subprojects funded
under this type of intervention (see figure 9). The beneficiaries of the subprojects
funded under this intervention were required to meet the following objective criteria
that were developed in conjunction with all stakeholders:

   Identified by communities through the community committees as poor and
    vulnerable
   If able-bodied, enrolled in the cash-for-work program based on minimum quotas
   Handicapped, women, or youth
   Verified through the proxy-means test as eligible to participate in microprojects


d) Implementation Arrangements
The NaCSA mandate is meant to enable the respective sector ministries to
implement their social protection responsibilities, while it facilitates them by
providing the requisite systems support (figure 7). The NaCSA niche is to provide social
safety nets including to the extremely poor and vulnerable, and link them with
government ministries, departments, and agencies.



                                             23
Figure 7: Proposed Implementation Structure




                                 NaCSA Board,
                                 commissioner,
                              deputy commissioner




         Strategic
                                     Operations                    Corporate
      planning, M&E
                                                                    services


The proposed structure is function driven’ and ‘team based’, and is expected to be
lean and designed to deliver. At the apex is the Board whose function remains to
oversee implementation of the social protection interventions and activities that fall
under NaCSA. A chairperson, who is supported by a commissioner and deputy
commissioner, leads the NaCSA Board. The social protection interventions and activities
represent the third leg of the Institutional set-up that focuses on the implementation
arrangements for social protection.

The NaCSA structure would have a manageable span of control from the
commissioner and deputy commissioner and would have three directorates that
recognize the internal audit function as a direct report to the commissioner. It is
not clear why the deputy commissioner has all along been shown as off the line of
command of staff as the second in command. The restructured set-up, reflects her as a
direct report to the commissioner and a member of his top management team.

The institutional framework for implementing the social protection strategy
shows the link between the NaCSA and the SPTSC (see figure 7). It is the primary
responsibility of the Strategic Planning and M&E Directorate to oversee the strategic
linkages between the coordination pillar and the implementation pillar of the
institutional framework designed to implement the social protection strategy beyond
2018. Currently the M&E senior director represents the NaCSA on the SPTSC of the
NSPIAF. The role of the SPTSC is to promote the integration of interventions by
government ministries, departments, and agencies once the NSPIAF has provided the
guidance. The NSPIAF is the forum of senior implementing institutions where policy is
translated into actionable programs. At this forum, all actors share experience and
lessons learned to inform future directions of social protection programs and to ensure
smooth delivery. The NaCSA Strategic Planning and M&E Directorate actively
participates in the NSPIAF to ensure that the strategic plans it draws up are evidence
based and adequately forward looking. The SPTSC has the potential to be the distillation


                                          24
point for capacity building and knowledge sharing on social protection matters.
However, sectoral and NaCSA officials who attend the meetings tend to be the same
ones attending the NSPIAF in the absence of their ministers. The duplication of power
centers dilutes the quality of decisions and the guidance provided to operational arms of
the implementing organizations.

At initial design, the NSPS was to be responsible for several key implementation
functions, particularly those related to building the social protection systems. The
NSPS was to be headed by a director and supported by the following key staff: a SSNP
manager, a systems–management information system specialist, a grievance redress
officer, and an M&E officer. The NSPS specialists and officers would work closely with
and in some cases under the respective NaCSA directorates. It would perform, among
others, the following functions: lead the design of the SSNP and other related programs
for approval by the NaCSA Board and the NSPIAF; develop effective social protection
systems (for example, targeting); design and update program guidelines and
operational procedures; provide technical support for program implementation;
manage program data through a robust management information system; generate
evidence and utilize it to inform policy; receive and address grievances that have been
escalated to the national level; and facilitate training at various levels. Under the
restructuring, these functions are integral to the Strategic Planning and M&E functions
and should continue. However, functions related to receiving and addressing grievances
would fall under the Operations Directorate. Broader M&E functions remain under the
Strategic Planning and M&E Directorate; the specialists would be coopted as members
of the program/project teams as needed.

The proposed restructuring further separates the Operations functions from the
strategic thinking, planning and resource mobilization functions. The Operations
Division would be organized along the social protection service delivery
platforms of support to the poor, poorest and vulnerable, employment and skills
development, and access to markets, savings and credit. Each of the platforms would
have clear subproject cycles and results frameworks showing deliverables and expected
results from implementing the intervention activities. The intermediate outcomes from
the interventions implemented under those platforms would be stated in the respective
results chains. Performance reporting would be integral to the intervention while
accountability and grievance reviews would fall under monitoring to ensure
independent feedback, and checks and balances. Teams would be formed around those
interventions as needed from the pool of specialists. The current permanent
‘projectized’ Units promote silos, which by nature promote isolation and vertical
functioning and reduce organizational synergy. Coalescing operations around skill-based
teams maximizes product delivery.

The Operations Division would focus on managing project and subproject cycles
for the two emerging program thrusts: (1) the community-driven development
programs that include – infrastructure rehabilitation an reconstruction, development
initiatives, agribusiness and income earning programs, and (2) the programs that
benefit the extreme poor and vulnerable as envisioned under the social protection
strategy. The two emerging programs and projects thrusts share a common pool of
skills that include community mobilization and awareness creation, participatory
appraisals, program/project design, social and economic analysis, implementation,


                                           25
accountability, quality control and management of institutional relationships. NaCSA’s
top management in consultation with its funding partners has the prerogative to decide
on the configuration of the shared skills and processes; there are no hard and fast rules.

The community-driven development programs share a common subproject cycle
and can easily be grouped under a lead community development program
specialist whose main function is to implement the team-based approach in
project design and implementation. In collaboration with the lead strategic planning
specialist, the community program specialists will form teams from skills pools around
the specific intervention that is to be designed and implemented. Once designed, the
intervention would be led by an implementation specialist or program officer.

A menu of community-driven development programs that qualify for funding
under the social protection strategy either already exists or would need to be
developed and agreed. Existing community-driven development interventions may
run beyond 2018 or are likely to be extended when they expire before 2018.
Ccommunity-driven development programs are implemented by government
ministries, departments, and agencies in education, health care, water, public works
(including roads), local government, agriculture, and social services. It is the NaCSA’s
responsibility, under the social protection strategy, to develop and mainstream the
processes that government ministries, departments, and agencies utilize and adhere to
in the implementation and M&E of interventions. In performing this function, the NaCSA
would work through existing government mechanism and in close collaboration with
other ministries, local councils, chieftaincy, ward committees, and Community
Identification Committees at respective levels. In addition, the NaCSA provides
government ministries, departments, and agencies with the technical support and back
up throughout the subproject cycles as needed. It is NSPIAF’s role, via the SPTSC, to
define and oversee or modify the nature of the collaboration.

Programs and projects that benefit the poorest and most vulnerable—the
disabled, the widowed, people affected or infected by HIV/AIDs, orphans, woman-
headed households, children, and so on—use eligibility criteria that include
determination of eligible households through a nomination process by the communities
through an elected community unit committee (CUC) organized by the chiefs and other
traditional and local leaders; selection of direct at-risk beneficiaries using hunger
vulnerability index; or determination of other at-risk households using —lottery, “first
come first served,? or rotation methods. Once selected the beneficiaries are informed
and registered using IDs, and so on.

A recognized critical technical function is the management information system
system to facilitate the collection, processing, management, and dissemination of
performance monitoring data and other data essential for program operations
and monitoring. In the case of cash transfer and public works programs, the
management information system will incorporate data from the beneficiary registry
and will be capable of generating progress values on indicators as well as providing the
necessary information to the accounting and financial management system to generate
payment sheets and reconcile payments. The management information system will
build on the experience of the ongoing public works program, which has recently
introduced a similar system to record and manage program data such as payment


                                           26
information and beneficiary attendance. The management information system will
constitute a common interface for the following services:

   Beneficiary registry. The registry will include beneficiary information collected
    during the targeting process and will be linked to the national identification system.
    The information will be centrally updated to reflect any changes of the family
    composition.
   Household targeting information. The basic beneficiary data collected in the
    community identification stage and the PMT data collected by SSL for proxy-means
    testing will be fed into the system, and lists of final beneficiaries will be
    automatically generated.
   Payment system. The management information system will be linked to NaCSA’s
    accounting and financial management system to facilitate the delivery of transfers to
    beneficiaries. It will produce payment orders in the form of electronic files that will
    be sent to the accounting and financial management system, and ultimately to the
    payment service provider to execute payments. The system will also consolidate in a
    centralized database all the transaction reports from the service provider and
    produce statistics on transactional data at different geographical levels.
   M&E reports. The management information system will generate customized and
    standard reports on selected performance indicators. Attendance data on soft-
    conditions workshops, as well as information gathered during field visits and spot
    checks will also be fed into the system.
   Grievance redress mechanisms. Complaints and concerns will be stored in a
    centralized electronic logbook and made directly accessible to authorities in charge
    of the resolution.
   Dissemination of information. Standard and customized reports will be generated
    in various formats and for different audiences (e.g. periodic coverage reports for the
    media and the public).
   Enhanced implementation mechanisms. Email reminders will be sent to
    operators at the field level as well as to managers about upcoming deadlines (e.g.,
    submission of data, payment approvals).

The NaCSA Corporate Services Division that would be responsible for the
fiduciary compliance comprises of well established, experienced and tested units.
Donor Agencies have full confidence in NaCSA management hence the willingness to
pump financing via it. The cost/price of starting afresh and setting a new outfit would
neither be warranted nor is it in the interest of the government. Whereas there maybe
power struggles linked to the advocacy for a separate NSPS, there is no socioeconomic
justification for this. Carrying out a political, economic, social, technological, and legal
environment analysis would provide an objective assessment. However, that would
require the full participation and facilitation of a focus group discussion of that issue
with all the concerned sector leaders including the Ministers. It seems the main driver is
the ‘access to resources issue’. If the Office of the President developed an objective basis
for sharing the social protection resources among the sectors, would the need for the
removal of the NSPS be obviated? There is an interesting coincidence of interest between
the current staff of NSPS and the NSPIAF membership of government ministries,
departments, and agencies in having a freestanding NSPS driven by power dynamics and
access to resources. That soon falls away once government ministries, departments, and
agencies have a fair shot at the resources.


                                            27
Government ministries, departments, and agencies, though aware that it takes a
lot to attract the same donors funding the NaCSA to directly support their line
Units, should work to obtain the trust of the donors so that they directly fund
interventions they execute. Equally, the NaCSA ought to know that obtaining the full
support of government ministries, departments, and agencies is crucial for achieving
the desired results of providing benefit to the various categories of the needy, reaching
the poorest and improving their livelihoods. Achievement of long-term positive impacts
requires the NaCSA to collaborate with government ministries, departments, and
agencies that have the infrastructure to reach households and needy communities in the
rural areas and poor urban areas. One way could be an annual meeting of the NSPIAF
dedicated to allocating resources on an agreed formula to all the sectors involved in
social protection based on their roles and contribution to the strategy.

The restructured NaCSA configuration of roles and functions seems to obviate the
need, programmatically and organizationally, for establishing a separate social
protection authority. The NaCSA is already designated to provide day-to-day
responsibility over the NSPS. In addition, the NaCSA houses and has tremendous
experience with managing and implementing core social protection services efficiently
and very effectively. That makes it a natural home. Having said that however, the
institutional assessment team acknowledges that there are already policy documents
and pronouncements by government regarding the preferred location of the NSPS.


IV. Systems for Accountability, Transparency, Quality Control,
    Credibility and Staffing
Working with donor agencies such as the World Bank, the NaCSA has invested a
lot in developing accountability systems in the management of its projects .
Throughout the subproject cycle, mechanisms and tools for ensuring accountability are
built into the various phases of project to:

   Promote ownership of the community type asset created in the case of community-
    driven development subprojects
   Ensure sustainability of the initiative sponsored
   Ensure transparency
   Ensure adequate quality and cost control
   Promote fiduciary compliance, that is, financial and procurement
   Minimize corrupt practices

Fiduciary Compliance: Financial Administrative Effectiveness and Efficiency

Fiduciary compliance entails adhering to recognized international standards of
both accounting and procurement in utilizing approved funding. The Financial aspects
of NaCSA provide a typical example of what Core Functions of NaCSA should
incorporate. Complete proper instructions should be based on Treasury guidelines that
should stipulate all standing government financial guidelines, rules and regulations and
procedures for processing transactions. Individual programs and projects should


                                           28
indicate where their procedures depart from those guidelines and such deviations
should be incorporated into the Project Agreements to be signed by Minister of Finance
and the donor per the government laws. The quote below suggests that the documents
passed on to the consultant are based on a particular donor’s requirements, in this case
the World Bank ones. They are comprehensive and objective and are subject to periodic
review by the World Bank and the government to ensure that they are fully compliant.
The documents cover accounting procedures and record keeping, banking guidelines,
procurement procedures and petty cash management from national, regional to district
levels. They also provide detailed instructions on how contracted agencies should
maintain their books.

The NaCSA Manual of Finance, Accounting, and Procurement Operational
Procedures notes the following (on page 29):
   In terms of all financing Agreements for all Projects, the Borrower shall open and
   maintain a Separate and Counterpart Bank Account at a commercial bank. Into these
   accounts will be deposited the remittances of the donor and the government. These
   amounts shall be used exclusively for expenditures to be funded under the project.
   The financing agreements will stipulate the expenditures to be funded by each
   financing source’. There is provision for Regions and Districts to open accounts to
   facilitate payment of authorized local expenditures. Signatories to these accounts,
   authorized levels and methods of payment are stated in the agreements and a
   minimum accounting team reports on the expenditures regularly. It is the
   Directorate of Finance’s responsibility to ensure periodic replenishment on an
   imprest basis to keep activities at that level moving and to ensure full accountability
   for proper use of funds. In relation to subproject implementation, the Regional
   Finance Offices will submit its requests to HQ based on a summary of subproject
   disbursement schedules with supporting documentation attached for withdrawals
   on the previous transfer of funds.

The procedures apply to the operations of NaCSA headquarters, regional offices,
and district petty cash holdings. The procedures may, however, be adjusted where
necessary and be used by project management committees in subproject activities.

Reliance on documents agreed with donors has promoted confidence in NaCSA
systems among donors and led to increased flow of funds. Government ministries,
departments, and agencies would need to be supported to improve their ability to
account for funds, adhere to internationally acceptable procurement guidelines and
timely reporting on performance.

Internal Audit

This function is critical for top management oversight of the use of NaCSA’s
resources in accordance with the purposes for which they were intended. Direct
reporting to the commissioner ensures that the institutional assessment team does its
work with support from the top and without fear or favor. In some organizations, the
institutional assessment unit reports to the Board, which provides more latitude for the
auditor to carry out the functions. Programs implemented by the NaCSA have been
mostly donor driven with the government financing activities that were dropped when



                                           29
projects ended. The value of the institutional assessment unit needs to be appreciated
more and its relative positioning in the organization’s structure adjusted accordingly.

It is notable that the two Assistant Auditors’ positions are the only vacant ones of
the Head Office establishment. Besides jeopardizing the audit function, that state of
affairs is an indication that NaCSA does not place the role of audit in safeguarding social
protection resources that high. Reasons for failure to fill the position could range from
poor remuneration for the incumbents to unavailability of qualified personnel in the
country. If the former, NaCSA management should address the situation with speed.
Internal audit reports are key verification mechanisms that augur well for transparency
and accountability within an organization. Donors warm up to demonstrated
willingness to finance this position.

Alongside grievance redress mechanisms, the institutional assessment reduces
the potential risks of corruption in projects. The institutional assessment practices
demonstrated at project level should be built into the NaCSA core functions and
exported to the executing government ministries, departments, and agencies. The
institutional assessment reviews the compliance of programs and projects by
(1) assessing compliance with various stages of the program and project cycle, that is,
identification, preparation, submission, appraisal, approval, contracting, disbursement,
and financial controls, and (2) through the use of basic eligibility criteria that include
legal status, general organizational policy guidelines, project selection criteria (type of
projects to be funded, beneficiary criteria), the selection of target groups, financial
criteria (involving maximum project duration and funding limits), technical evaluation
criteria (including project feasibility and coherence with identified community
problems and solutions), sustainability, environmental and social issues, and so on. For
projects associated with the community-driven development program, such as the
Youth Employment Support Project, the Sierra Leone Community-Driven Development
Project, the Rapid Response Growth Poles Project (HABOPE), and the Promotion of Pro-
Poor Growth for Peace Consolidation (GPC), institutional assessments have ensured
that controls are in place to prevent the inclusion of a subproject in more than one
program.

NaCSA Staffing

For the period reviewed, staff evaluations are being carried out and action taken
based on the evaluation results as shown by human resource records of staff
movements (annex D). A few cases exist where the evaluation was not completed.
Management would need to work with human resources to resolve this issue.

During interviews, staff observed that it lags behind other projects in salaries and
incentives. Table 5 shows the salary comparators for NaCSA. Average salaries for
NaCSA are lower than those of three other World Bank financed projects in all eight of
the select categories reviewed.

Table 5: Sierra Leone Comparator, Monthly Salaries, World Bank Project, June
2015
U.S. dollars
Position           NaCSA Integrated Project   Public Financial   PRSDP, WAAPP   Average   Comment



                                               30
                               Administration Unit Management Project
                                                                                        Used senior
Project director,
                      3,000          4,500              4,500           5,102   4,275   director for
manager
                                                                                           NaCSA
                                                                                            Used
Deputy project
                      2,400          2,500                                      2,450     director
manager
                                                                                            level
M&E specialist        3,000          2,500                              2,894   2,947
                                                                                           May be
Procurement specialist 1,800         3,000                 800          7,500   4,933   international
                                                                                             hire
Financial management
                     1,800           3,000              2,500           5,000   3,075
specialist
Project officer      1,200           2,000              1,500           2,205   1,726
Project assistant     500             600                600             500     550
Project secretary     300                                450             400     383
Note: PRSDP = Rural and Private Sector Development Project. WAAPP = West Africa Agricultural
Productivity Program.

The staff designations are not necessarily totally uniform, for example, for project
secretary, NaCSA has administrative assistant, but their functions correspond.
Across the eight select categories, NaCSA staff is paid lees than the average. That is the
case even though NaCSA possibly has the wider coverage and highest number of
employees. The discrepancy is attributed, in part, to some of the staff being funded by
the government. The one-staff policy advocates for uniform conditions of service for
staff.

Overall staff numbers for the year 2012 were much larger, at 124, across regions
and districts. District staffing levels range from 5 to 11. There is substantively no
uniform leadership structure for districts, district coordinators lead in most districts,
but a few districts are led by officers –in-charge. 13 percent of the district coordinators
were transferred out of their districts and 3 percent were terminated for poor
performance; a good sign that there is actually performance based staff retention based
on annual evaluations.

In 2013, staff numbers declined to 105 perhaps a result of project closers.
Transfers in and out of districts were 18 percent of staff total, a high turnover. When the
figures are decomposed, district coordinators, who are the managers at district level,
and other high level technical staff, had the highest movements. These categories had
the highest level of transfers, which doesn’t augur well for performance and service
delivery. The disruptions arising from the movements show that all is not well with the
programs at that level. The analysis suggests that perhaps the NaCSA should not be
directly engaging staff or that its conditions of services are not competitive for that level
of staff. More significantly, it could be that the NaCSA should not be directly delivering
that range of services at that level. The NaCSA should not be engaging that level of staff;
someone is doing a better job of providing that service than the NaCSA. Or someone in the
same field is offering better conditions of service and therefore attracting staff from the
NaCSA.

There were further staff reductions in 2015, total regional staff was reduced to 78,
50 percent of whom are at the level of office assistant and lower; of the remaining 50
percent, 32 percent are manager level staff, that is, district coordinators and officers-in-
charge and only 32 percent are technical staff with 4 percent as support staff; a case of


                                                      31
too many senior staff. The staff ratio suggests that NaCSA staff provide high-level
support to other sector or agencies’ staff that actually execute.

Of the 68 staff nationwide, who consist of project officers, officers, and
administration staff, 27 (20 percent) are in the Support Services Division (annex
E). If the commissioner’s office and senior directors, who are essentially administrative,
are added, the share of staff rises to 47 percent (table 6). The share of the cost burden
by this division is high. There may be a need to look at the range of control issues
whereby too many manager designations are given to positions with functions that can
be performed by specialist officers. Manager positions where staff has only one direct
report could be transformed into specialist positions and may also be outsourced as the
need arises. Going forward, this division could be transformed into Corporate Services, a
core function of NACSA, the funding of which the government should consider taking over.

Table 6: Staffing Categories, 2015

 Staff category                 Number
 Commissioner's office             6
 Senior directors                  3
 Directors                         2
 Program manager                   9
 Professional/technical           11
 Coordinators                     10
 Project officers                  5
 Officers                         28
 Administration staff             35
 General workers                  33
 Total                            142

The proposed transformation to a Core Services Division would be complemented
by a similar reconfiguration of the current two divisions, first, Program
Development, Strategic Planning, and Resource Mobilization, and, second, M&E
Knowledge Management, Reporting, and Visibility. A Strategic Planning and Monitoring
Directorate and an Operations Directorate headed by senior directors to align the
designations to priority roles and functions of the transformed NaCSA would replace
the old divisions beyond 2018. The Strategic Planning and Monitoring Directorate
would lead the forward planning focusing on how social protection contributes to the
country’s growth trajectory as reflected in the PRSP IV, and ensuring policy consistency.
Advocacy for social protection, packaged by the information, education, and
communication team, which is evidence based, would rely on results flowing from the
performance monitoring that covers the NaCSA as well as the contributions of
government ministries, departments, and agencies to social protection. From this
strategic perspective, the Strategic Planning and Monitoring Directorate would mobilize
resources based on the clearly articulated outcomes of the social protection program.

Government ministries, departments, and agencies would take over the
implementation and execution of community-driven development and
rehabilitation and reconstruction programs and projects, thereby rounding off the
realignment of functions with the NaCSA. The NaCSA would provide specialized


                                           32
functions such as to the development and mainstreaming of social protection systems,
quality control, and nationwide accountability and verification functions with focal
points in government ministries, departments, and agencies. Retaining implementing
regional and district offices is inefficient, a heavy managerial and cost burden for the
NaCSA.

Staff contracts are not uniform with projects such as the World Bank ones issuing
own contracts for staff working on their projects – a potential source of staff discontent.
The concept of one staff needs to be promoted through the preparation and adoption of a
NaCSA Administrative Handbook with uniform conditions of service for all NaCSA staff.
Besides reducing the burden of administering multiple rules and regulations, the move
eliminates perceived staff differentiation that may affect staff performance. A NACSA
administered Handbook is a move closer to sustainability as government guidelines are
adopted.


V. Impact of NaCSA’s Work
Impacts are long-term effects of interventions that are best established through
evaluations usually at the end of the project life. The results of NACSA programs and
projects indicate that targets have been generally achieved (see table 3). Some projects,
such as the Sierra Leone Community-Driven Development Project and the Youth
Employment Support Project and the cash-for-work component, exceeded targets.
Though evaluations may not have been done consistently, the positive results point to
the achievement of positive impacts. Thus, a baseline survey was conducted during the
Youth Employment Support Project to facilitate an eventual project evaluation. In
addition, requiring timeliness in the results-oriented reporting (for example, quarterly
and annual reports) that informs the NaCSA and other actors on whether or not a
program is having the desired impact in the short, medium, and long term (such as the
effects on hunger, poverty, and vulnerability), allows the early detection of impacts.

Interventions of which the designs are robust have used tested subproject cycles
and apply results chains that uphold causality and adherence to the hierarchy of
results, and assure the achievement of desired impacts. Good project design
provides upfront assurance of good project performance and attainment of desired
results. Benchmarking and setting of milestones provides targets that can be monitored
during implementation, and that once attained, would lead to desirable impacts over
time. Ongoing projects would have to rely on routine reporting to establish the
trajectory of performance toward achieving the desired results.

On project coverage, the NaCSA chairman observed that the focus on intensified
impact is viewed as overriding the need for equity. Political and traditional leadership
are concerned about how uncovered communities are reacting to the seeming exclusion
and the impact it is having on the ground. A targeted approach that starts with worst
districts though objective leads to delayed access for those not covered so, consider
scaling-up fast to increase coverage. There is a general call that there be increased
collaboration with other projects so that they cover the balance of districts and program
activities.



                                            33
The Parliamentary Committee on NaCSA reaffirmed the relevance of the NaCSA
and applauded its contribution to overall local development. The committee
members, who carry out field visits, highlighted the following during discussions of
their assessment of NaCSA performance:

   The need to support women. Women are carrying a heavier burden since the Ebola
    outbreak.
   Chiefs have a role to play. They register people to access benefits. Though politicians
    can also play a role, they may confuse beneficiaries given their political biases.
   On roadwork, contract awards need to be more transparent.
   There needs to be a savings culture. Some constituencies are more well performing
    in this. The lessons learned from these experiences should be shared with those not
    yet on board.
   There was a general call to strengthen local institutions to ensure greater awareness
    of the services available and thereby promote greater community participation in
    local development programs.


VI. Funding and financing sources and spread
A total of US $24 million remained unutilized at the end of December 2014 to
which would be added about $58 million from the Islamic Development Bank for
community-driven development interventions. These resources are spread between
the reconstruction and socio-economic interventions and the social safety nets. For the
later, a second SSNP is on the books by the World Bank and similar support may be
coming from other donors.

NaCSA’s good track record in terms of fiduciary compliance attracts donor
funding for programs managed by it. However, targeted direct funding to the NaCSA
may cause other sectoral implementing agencies to become starved of funding and
thereby withholding of only partially committing their services. The NaCSA cannot do
everything.

Going forward, NaCSA’s effectiveness would be more pronounced if it f ocused on
the direct supports and areas it plays a lead role in, while strengthening its
capacity building outreach to sectoral management units. In addition, empowering
the fiduciary compliance and systems adherence of government ministries,
departments, and agencies would build the confidence of donor agencies in these
entities as well as nonstate actors and thereby fund them directly. It is felt that with
more funding, conflict over resources would decline and increased collaboration
between the social protection actors would improve social protection service delivery
and access.

Going forward

There is a need to unpack the implications of the various actors coming from
different operational levels that contribute to the implementation of the social
protection strategy converging at the NSPIAF platform (figure 8). The minutes of the



                                            34
NSPIAF meetings show poor attendance by the respective ministers, which results in
(1) senior officials attending both the NSPIAF and the technical committee meetings
and, (2) as a result, the quality of deliberations is diluted as policy and implementation
issues are discussed. The cochairpersons of the NSPIAF need to ensure that attendance at
their meetings is at the appropriate level if the NSPIAF is to provide its social protection
policy guidance role.

Figure 8: Participation in NSPIAF Meetings


                            NaCSA
                        commissioner,
                                                        CSOs and NGOs
                       social protection
                       strategy director



                                                                             Technical
                                                                           committee of
   Selected sectoral                                                      senior staff that
       ministers                                                         advises the social
                                     NSPIAF: chief of staff
                                        and minister of                 protection strategy
                                      finance (cochairs),                     director
                                       minister of social
                                     welfare, gender, and
                                       children's affairs
                                          (vice chair)




Standard Subproject Cycle
NaCSA’s strong contribution to the government’s post 2018 development thrust is
accentuated by its demonstrated ability to build capacity, coordinate social
protection systems deployment, oversee their use, execute and lead specific
social protection programs, and provide technical support to programs that lead and
fall directly under government ministries, departments, and agencies and nonstate
actors. NACSA’s role across these interventions would be provided using a common
subproject cycle (figure 9).




                                               35
              Figure 9: NaCSA Typical Subproject Cycle




                                     1. Office of the President, NSPIAF consultations and
                                          guidance
                                       - Social protection policy matters
                                       - Safety net priorities, norms, and standards
                                       - Sensitization, mobilization, monitoring and supervision




10. Commissioning
  - Receipt of subproject completion reports                                    2. Mobilization and sensitization
  - Issuing subproject completion certificates to the                              - Clarifying objectives, access criteria, and
community                                                                           implementation modalities
  - Formal handover of subproject assets to the beneficiaries                     - Encouraging stakeholder participation among the
  - Inauguration of maintenance committees                                          target population



 9. Supervision, M&E
   - Field visits to subproject sites                                           3. Identification and preparation
   - Providing technical support and guidance to                                  - Generating baseline data on the community
 implementers                                                                     - Identifying, prioritizing target community
   - Review of implementation reports                                             - Identifying existing resources and resource gaps
   - Reviewing implementation of previous                                         - Preparing community action plans
 recommendations                                                                  - Preparing subproject proposals
   - Documenting and reporting progress in implementation
   - Tracking progress toward meeting subproject objectives


                                                                                  4. Desk appraisal
8. Implementation
                                                                                    - Checking completeness of documentation
  - Subproject launch                                                               - Checking conformity with sector standards and
  - Implementation of approved subproject activities                              norms
  - Provision of technical support to communities                                   - Checking conformity with project guidelines
                                                                                    - Checking appropriates of budgets



7. Funds disbursement                                                             5. Field appraisal
                                                                                    - Verifying information on application form
  - Reviewing subproject approval process
                                                                                    - Checking appropriateness of targeting
  - Checking compliance with subproject budget ceilings
                                                                                    - Verifying participation of communities
  - Signing of financing agreements
                                                                                    - Verifying viability and sustainability
  - Providing basic training to subproject management
                                                                                    - Verifying environmental and social safeguards
     committees
                                                                                    - Ascertaining community contribution
  - Transfer of funds to district/subproject accounts



                                        6. Approval
                                        - Reviewing subproject documentation
                                        - Ascertaining conformity with sector norms and standards
                                        - Ascertaining compliance with Project guidelines




                                                                     36
The typical subproject cycle would strengthen NaCSA’s capability to develop common
social protection planning cycles and beneficiary qualification criteria for programs and
projects. Refining the mechanisms for processing social protection interventions that
NaCSA can engage in is critical if the NaCSA is to respond to the categories of poverty
identified under the social protection strategy, as follows:
   The extreme poor and labor-constrained poor, estimated at 60,000 people, who are
    supported through cash transfers. This includes pensioners, children, the disabled,
    the sick, and so on.
   Able-bodied, labor-endowed, poor, but productive households, which account for
    around 353,000 people, who are to be engaged in self-help–type project responses
    as well as microfinance initiatives.
   Conjectural poverty, which represents about 147,000 unemployed indiviudlas.
    These people typically require access to skills and cash-for-work programs. This
    includes farmers, fishermen, and so on.
   The least well off, including disabled and otherwise disadvantaged individuals,
    number about 60,000 people. This category of the poor would benefit from cash
    transfers.

NaCSA is best positioned to design systems for use by government ministries,
departments, and agencies and other stakeholders to implement social
protection interventions in the (a) and (d) categories of the poor. Though best
positioned to design the systems, the NACSA is not the only agency that delivers social
protection interventions. There is therefore a need to strengthen its ability to lead,
implement, collaborate and coordinate interventions in social protection as well as
other broader community development activities.
Table 7 indicates the other actors that work with the NaCSA throughout the subproject
cycle by level.


Table 7: Subproject Phase and Actors

Stage                                                        Responsible center
Office of the President, government
                                      Sectoral ministries, other ministries, departments, and agencies
guidance
Awareness raising and mobilization   District councils, chiefs, sectoral staff, NaCSA
Subproject identification and        Chiefs, local government and social welfare officer, sectoral
preparation                          specialists, CSOs, community-based organizations
Desk appraisal                       Sectoral specialist staff, district technical staff
Field appraisal                      Local technical staff, district technical staff
Subproject approval                  District technical staff, district executive committee
Fund disbursement                    NaCSA, district and local governments
Implementation                       Community committee, local government, local service providers
                                     Communities, local government staff, sectoral ministries, other
Monitoring and supervision
                                     government institutions and agencies
Commissioning                        Community committees, local governments, NaCSA
Post-subproject cycle: operation and Communities, local governments, sectoral ministries, and other
maintenance                          government ministries, departments, and agencies
Post-subproject cycle: subproject     Communities, local governments, sectoral ministries, and other



                                                   37
evaluation                       government ministries, departments, and agencies, NaCSA,
                                 Statistics Sierra Leone, NGOs, CSOs


About Traditional Structures – Chiefdoms: the country’s 149 paramount chiefs come
from hereditary ‘‘ruling houses’’; serve for life once appointed or elected (by a restricted
electorate); exert considerable control over resource allocation, including land and
labor; operate the local court system that presides outside the capital; and organize the
provision of many local public goods (such as road maintenance). This system largely
excludes both women (who are not eligible to serve as chiefs in much of the country)
and young men from decision-making. NaCSA has been working very well with these an
indication of its versatility when it comes to ensuring that it reaches its targeted
beneficiaries.


VII. Official Action Requires Official Sanction
Refining processes for officially instituting key management decisions and
actions should be an integral process and function of core staff. These actions
define organizational growth and formalization of its existence, processes and
procedures. Often the government uses ministerial statutory instruments to legalize
those actions and embody them in the organization’s enforceable structures. In some
instances, the ministry responsible for the public service is empowered to institute
these changes following a structured review and approval process.

Organizational Structure

Discussions with the NaCSA management indicate the outlines of the
organizational chart with which they are working (figure 10). It is not clear that
there was any official adoption of this structure, nor is there any indication of the
process that was embarked on to authenticate it. Does it make it any less official? May
be not. However, besides filling all the positions to make NaCSA fully functional, there
are elements of this structure that require clarification, for example the relationship of
the NSPS with the rest of the structure.

Figure 10: NaCSA’s Current de facto Organizational Structure




                                            38
The NSPS is shown under the Programs Division that is headed by a senior director.
Whereas this NSPS is housed at the NaCSA, it remains under the Office of the President,
which is headed by the chief of staff, and its functions mainly involve the coordination of
broader social protection and servicing the NSPIAF and the multisectoral SPTSC.

A discussion of the NSPIAF should also make reference to the SPTSC, which takes
responsibility for briefing authorities of their ministries, departments, or agencies on
discussions of the SPTSC and one page brief submitted to the NSPIAF for the records. How
is the SPTSC linked to NaCSA staff and structures? Does it have a strong role to play going
forward?

The organizational structure shown in figure 11 was agreed on and adopted by
NaCSA and the World Bank when the SSNP was approved and is reflected in the
Implementation Manual of the NaCSA. The manual is the document of reference
regarding NaCSA organizational functions and structure, and, yet, it mostly refers to
project related processes and procedures. To be complete and fully applicable to the
range of programs and activities executed by the NACSA, it would require supportive
handbooks. The institutional assessment recommends follow-up work to develop these
handbooks.

Figure 11: NaCSA Organizational Structure




                                            39
Going Forward

Programs which may require reconfiguring should be placed elsewhere and
redefine what role the NaCSA continues to play vis-à-vis them, e.g. Reparations –
winding up next year, current support is to three categories – amputees, severe war
wounded and some sexually violated individuals. NaCSA would provide refined systems
as well as specialist support to execute.

Units doing similar work should be grouped together, for example, infrastructure
type social protection projects such as local community driven development projects
and growth for peace consolidation projects have rural infrastructure orientation, to
have one directorate, instead of various separate ones contributing to livelihoods.
Answer could be to ensure that the Director has the technical skills to incorporate and
lead various interventions that add up to the social protection livelihoods agenda.
Director’s job would be redefined so as to focus on integrating related programs
managed by the respective managers who are the technical heads.

Meetings with the chief of staff and the NaCSA board chairman were revealing (boxes 2
and 3).

Box 2: Meeting the Chief of Staff

Historically, the NaCSA has a 10-year mandate starting in 2008, when the first


                                          40
institutional assessment was conducted. What were its findings and to what extent
were these implemented? The chief of staff in the Office of the President observes as
follows:

   An organization has to keep reinventing itself.
   Consultancy appointments were important to attract good staff, remunerate them,
    and shield them from the pay-as-you-earn taxation revenue scheme, a win–win for
    the government and staff.
   The NaCSA remains pivotal for the fulfillment of the Agenda for Prosperity, which
    ends in 2018. The NaCSA should also lead in the application of the next development
    strategy.
   The NaCSA should prepare for the end of its current mandate in 2018. It should
    focus on the cash transfer program, which is critical for poverty reduction in the
    country.
   The NaCSA should continue to drive the social protection agenda through systems
    development and the coordination of interventions with the various sectors that
    have roles to play in contributing to social protection through the NSPS.
   The NaCSA should transform itself to be more nimble in responding to and
    positioning itself for changing roles as other the performance of other sectors
    improve and begin delivering their mandates more effectively. Thus, if health
    service delivery improves, the NaCSA could then include health conditionality in the
    cash transfer program to promote antenatal visits at clinics.
   The NaCSA should build and support the capacity of other sectors to deliver social
    protection interventions with the support of the NSPS, which should also include
    representatives of other sectors.
   The skill mix among NaCSA staff should respond to the organization’s changing
    roles. For example, staff proficient in social protection, social scientists, and so on
    should be recruited.

Box 3: Meeting the NaCSA Board Chairman

The chairman, though less than a year in the position, was the former NaCSA
Parliamentary Committee chairman. He brings a wealth of experience to the Board. The
Board visits sites, meets twice a year, approves work-plans and budgets, and receives
the annual report.

Among the questions discussed with the chairman are the following:

How does the NaCSA Board assess the NaCSA’s performance? Staff and consultant
performance contracts are signed with the NaCSA; does the NaCSA Board receive some
of these and evaluate them?

Does the chairman sit on the NSPIAF?

NSPIAF has met a number of times under the Chairmanship of the Chief of Staff, has the
Chairman reviewed the level of discussion and nature of decisions taken by the NSPIAF?
Do the levels of deliberations warrant the level of membership formally stated?
Does the attendance record support retaining the current level of membership,


                                            41
that is, ministers?

With a Parliamentary Committee on NaCSA in place too, are there any overlapping roles
and functions between the NSPIAF, NaCSA Board and the NaCSA Parliamentary
Committee?

Do these policy level organs meet and exchange notes?

Considering that these bodies go on field visits – how cost effective is retaining them?

On return from these visits, with whom does the NSPIAF and Parliamentary Committee
confer? Is it the Board chairman or the commissioner? Is there potential for replication
and duplication here?

On project coverage, the chairman observed that the focus on intensified impact is
viewed as overriding the need for equity. Political and traditional leadership are
concerned how uncovered communities are reacting to this and the impact it is having
on the ground. Use of targeting as objective but consider scaling-up fast to increase
coverage. There is a general call that there be increased collaboration with other
projects so that they cover the balance of districts and program activities?


VIII. Conclusion: Findings, Recommendations and Next Steps
NaCSA remains a strong, relevant and a lead Institution for the post 2018
development phase of Sierra Leone. As the government continues to implement the
Agenda for Change (PRSP II) 2014–18 NaCSA’s role has coalesced around two priority
areas: (1) continued implementation of inherited resettlement, rehabilitation and
reconstruction programs transiting to development, and (2) intensified social
protection programs in line with the adopted social protection strategy launched by the
president in May 2015. The NaCSA needs to decide and reposition itself in order to
define and distinguish its areas of focus, within its mandate, where it would play a lead
role and where it would play a supportive but nevertheless important role.

The review of programs has shown where government ministries, departments,
and agencies, NGOs and CSOs, and private sector stakeholders have been leading
implementation, while the NaCSA provided specialized support services (annex F).
Going forward, enabling institutional and organizational adjustments need to be put in
place to strengthen that operational shift. NaCSA’s focus on developing, implementing
and monitoring social protection systems financed under the SSNP in support of the
operations, e.g. funded by the Islamic Development Bank, being implemented by
government ministries, departments, and agencies, CSOs, NGOs, and the private sector
represents a growth area post 2018. Proposed institutional and organizational changes
that advocate for a decision to define and adopt the NaCSA’s core functions and staff’
financed by the government would be consistent with that thrust.

Specific Findings and Recommendations

Legal Status and Strategic Focus


                                            42
   There may be a need to revisit NaCSA’s legal mandates to reflect the successor to the
    PRSP III and the country’s next development priorities as the Agenda for Prosperity
    draws to an end in 2018.
   NaCSA’s mission and objectives should be articulated clearly in the agency’s core
    documents as they are refined following the envisaged changes post-2018.
   Whereas the government has spelled out NaCSA’s strategic focus as resettlement,
    rehabilitation, reconstruction, and broadbased social protection, including safety
    nets for the extreme poor and vulnerable, PRSP IV may call for a sharper focus on
    social protection and streamlined programs to achieve greater impact.
   While focusing on defining and supporting interventions that address the needs of
    the extreme poor and vulnerable, NaCSA’s role in promoting economic growth
    requires that NaCSA also coordinate and rationalize its implementation
    responsibilities and accountabilities among various active sectors (government
    ministries, departments, and agencies). This coordinating role would include
    oversight in poverty targeting, the management of payment systems, including to
    remote areas, capacity building, promoting greater accountability, and overseeing
    mechanisms for grievance redress.
   A champion is needed to foster NaCSA’s strategic vision, which is acknowledged as a
    function of the designated core staff who are government funded as custodians of
    the institution.

Institutional Framework and Organization for Social Protection

   The president declared that “social protection is anchored in my office and I have
    designated my chief of staff as champion of it in 2011,? in the Foreword to the Social
    Protection Strategy and Implementation Plan, 2013 to 2018. The NSPIAF, chaired by
    the chief secretary and comprised of ministers, CSOs, labor representatives, and the
    NaCSA, is therefore the apex body in social protection (see table 4). As secretary to
    the NSPIAF, the NaCSA, though accountable to a Board, becomes the key actor
    through the implementation of safety nets for the extreme poor and vulnerable and
    the coordination of sectoral social protection programs and through links to
    promotion platforms of economic growth such as infrastructure, agribusiness,
    microfinance,. and others.
   The social protection policy review exercise under way will resolve the institutional
    issues, which include the current dual accountability to the NSPIAF and the NaCSA
    by the NSPS.

Organization of the NaCSA

   Whereas there may be some negative perceptions about NaCSA’s wide coverage,
    NACSA remains relevant as an executing agency that works efficiently, effectively,
    and with speed. Its role is pivotal for the recovery phase that Sierra Leone is
    entering at the end of the Agenda for Prosperity 2018.
   Defining NaCSA core staff functions, appointing core staff as custodians of its
    mandate and institutional memory, and mobilizing funding for them should be a
    government priority. The staff would include the finance director, human resources
    manager, procurement director, and administrator.



                                           43
   The NaCSA has the capacity to provide core services using core staff and systems
    designed, owned and managed by the government in support of government
    ministries, departments, and agencies in implementing social protection activities as
    well as broader development interventions. Besides the technical ones, such
    participatory rural appraisals, extended participatory rural appraisals, appraisals,
    procurement, accountability, M&E, GSM, and so on, these include the design and
    provision of standard project and subproject cycles, defining and articulating
    qualification criteria, and so on.
   In the absence of standard NACSA documents (different project agreements and
    operating guidelines are currently being used), there is a need to develop and adopt
    key documents that define NaCSA operating systems, guidelines, and procedures,
    that is, operational and implementation manuals and supportive handbooks that set
    out detailed practices on administration, procurement, finance, grievances, and so
    on.
   All NaCSA staff are either on annual government or project-type renewable
    contracts; issues surrounding tenure and benefits need to be revisited to consider
    concerns over conditions, pay, and so on.

Sectoral Collaboration

   The district, regional, and national meetings of the NSPIAF and the SPTSC are being
    held, minutes taken and distributed, and follow-up actions initiated by NaCSA staff.
    Staff performance in carrying out these roles and functions are valued by sectoral
    stakeholders and other stakeholders.
   The NaCSA’s strong contribution to the government’s post-2018 development thrust
    is accentuated by its demonstrated ability to build capacity, coordinate social
    protection systems deployment and oversee their use and provide technical support
    to government ministries, departments, and agencies and other stakeholders to
    execute social protection activities using the subproject cycle.

Program Delivery

   The NaCSA is pivotal to the attainment of the outcomes of the social protection pillar
    of reducing extreme poverty and vulnerability under the Agenda for Prosperity. To
    this end, the NaCSA should adopt a standard planning and programming cycle for
    use in short-, medium-, and long-term project and subproject cycles of social
    protection interventions to tackle extreme poverty and vulnerability. The cycles
    would be available for use in the design of social protection projects that
    government ministries, departments, and agencies and nonstate actors would use in
    developing their own interventions.
   The NaCSA has a strong comparative advantage and therefore should sharpen its
    focus on social protection interventions, including safety net interventions where it
    plays a direct leadership role, such as cash transfers, cash for work, social protection
    systems and related accountabilities, while continuing to strengthen its coordination
    and linkages roles of activities falling directly under government ministries,
    departments, and agencies, nonstate actors, the private sector, and so on (annex F).

The impact of the work of the NaCSA



                                            44
   Impacts are long term effects of interventions that are best established through
    evaluations usually at the end of the project life. Only the Youth Employment
    Support Project has had an evaluation done with positive results.
   Where an intervention was designed and implemented following robust results
    chains that uphold causality and adherence to the hierarchy of results, achievement
    of desired impacts is reasonably assured.

Funding and financing sources and spread:

   NaCSA’s good track record in terms of fiduciary compliance attracts donor funding
    for programs managed by it. However, this leads to other sectoral implementing
    agencies being starved of funding and thereby withholding their services.
   The NaCSA needs to standardize its accountability, fiduciary compliance and
    reporting documentation based on government legal and operating requirements
    and move from individual donor reporting formats.
   The NaCSA cannot do everything; there is need for it to strengthen its capacity
    building outreach to sectoral management units to empower the fiduciary
    compliance of government ministries, departments, and agencies and thereby build
    the confidence of donor agencies in funding them directly.


IX. Next Steps
Table 8: Next Steps

Step                                               Action                    By whom            When
Appoint an institutional assessment
                                    Provide terms of reference         Commissioner        May 7, 2015
follow-up team
                                    Prepare list, obtain soft copies
Collect and forward documents to                                       Team and Abu
                                    and scan hard copies for                              Ongoing
consultant                                                             Kargbo, World Bank
                                    forwarding
Divisions and units respond to
                                                                       Senior directors,
questions on, for example, number Gather data, information and                             Ongoing, until
                                                                       directors, and
of established vs filled positions, provide to Team                                        May 30, 2015
                                                                       managers
government financing
Draft institutional assessment                                         Consultant,         June 15–August
                                    Send written Draft for comment
report                                                                 commissioner        31, 2015
Develop strategy to integrate       Working group deliberates and
                                                                       Commissioner,
programs into sectors, SSNP and     recommends to NaCSA                                      September
                                                                       Senior directors,
obtain NSPIAF and Board buy-in and management, the commissioner,                             2015
                                                                       director, reparations
approval                            and NaCSA Board
Resource mobilization and
                                    Advocacy with NSPIAF, NaCSA
deployment strategy in support of                                      Commissioner, Board Ongoing
                                    Board
above
                                                                     Senior directors,
                                                                     institutional
Develop rationale for Core Staff for Legal review and mandate,
                                                                     assessment team,  March 2016
NaCSA                                define posts TORs
                                                                     NaCSA management,
                                                                     Board
                                     Appoint Team- TORs for study of Board,
Review NaCSA Staff conditions of
                                     comparator of benefits in other commissioner,     March 2016
service including benefits
                                     Agencies                        government



                                                   45
                                                                Commissioner,
Develop OM/IM and Handbooks for Terms of reference: prepared by Senior directors,
                                                                                    December 2015
NaCSA                            consultancy and the team       World Bank task
                                                                team leader
                                                                Commissioner,
Team Building for NaCSA, NSPIAF,                                                    September
                                 Appoint Leadership consultant  World Bank task
SPTSC and NaCSA Board                                                               2015
                                                                team leader




                                                 46
X. Annexes
Annex A: Documents Reviewed

1. Aide-Mémoire, June 8, 2014, Youth Employment Support Project (21052)
    supervision support mission, May 12–23, 2014
2. Aide-Mémoire, September 2013, Youth Employment Support Project, September
    16–24, 2013
3. NaCSA: Fourth Quarterly Report (October–December 2013): Youth Employment
    Support Project and the labor-intensive Cash-for-Work project component
4. NaCSA: Third Quarterly Report (2013), Youth Employment Support Project
5. Public Works as a Productive Safety Net in a Post-Conflict Setting: Evidence from a
    Randomized Evaluation of Sierra Leone’s Cash-for-Work Program
6. Splash Report on NaCSA cash-for-work payments (May 20, 2015): Payment of
    Wages through Mobile Phones to Beneficiaries of the Cash-for-Work Component of
    the Youth Employment Support Project
7. Female Participation Study (2014): Cash-for-Work Program
8. National Commission for Social Action (Amendment) Act 2008
9. National Commission for Social Action (2001)
10. National Youth Commission Act, 2009
11. Refugee Protection Act 2007; Ministry of Foreign Affairs chairs the commission
12. Truth and Reconciliation Act 2000
13. Anti Corruption Commission Act 2008
14. NaCSA Annual Report, 2014




                                         47
Annex B: People Met

1.  Hon. Alhaji M. Kai Kai, Minister of Social Welfare, Gender, and Children’s Affairs
2.  Hon. Alimany Karama, Minister of Youth (MOY)
3.  Hon. Ms. Fereh Musu Conteh, Deputy Minister of Youth (MOY)
4.  Anthony A. Korona, Commissioner, National Youth Commission (NAYCOM)
5.  Hon. Karako, Deputy Minister of Local Government
6.  B. M. Foh, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender, and Children’s
    Affairs
7. Khali, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Youth
8. M.K. Magba-Kamari, Ministry of Local Government
9. Mohamed U. Koroma, Program Manger, NaCSA
10. Ahmadu Bangura, Program Manger, NaCSA
11. Haja Isatu Kamara, Deputy Commissioner, NaCSA
12. Charles B. Vandi, Director of Gender Affairs, Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender, and
    Children’s Affairs
13. Franas Kabia, Director of Social Welfare,
14. Osman Kanu, Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender, and Children’s
    Affairs
15. Tina Davies, Consultant, Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender, and Children’s Affairs
16. Adams Kayers, Acting Project Coordinator, Integrated Project Administration Unit,
    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
17. Momodu Wudie, National Youth Commission
18. Yusuf Kamaro, M&E Manager, NAYCOM
19. Sheku Sesay, PMO, Integrated Project Administration Unit, Ministry of Finance and
    Economic Development
20. Andrew Williams, Integrated Project Administration Unit, Ministry of Finance and
    Economic Development
21. Emmanuel Saidu, Integrated Project Administration Unit, Ministry of Finance and
    Economic Development
22. Gershon Saffa, Integrated Project Administration Unit, Ministry of Finance and
    Economic Development




                                           48
Annex C: NaCSA Staff Consultation Schedule, May 2015
                                       Date
Designation
                         Contract   Evaluation Completion Funding                                         Comment
Senior director,                                                    NaCSA conditions of service, personnel manual, establishment status, register of
Support Services                                                    committees and attendance registers, resolutions follow-up and implementation,
Division, Kevin Dixon                                               compliance register donor government funding ratios
                                                                    Shared consultancy, SSNP higher percentage, Islamic Development Bank, functional
Senior director, M&E,                                    World
                      2010                                          consistency of the divisions; elaborate information, education, and communication
Susan Robett                                             Bank
                                                                    function as program awareness; should procurement remain under finance?
                                                                    NaCSA operational and implementation manual (status unclear); administrative
                                                                    manual in draft from 2000; 2014 SSNP manual approved and in use, applicability
Human resources                                                     more to project mode than government systems, for example, on procurement;
manager, Sorie                                                      conditions of service standardization applauded, but finalize the instruments and
Ibrahim Turay                                                       make them available to divisions and units; maintenance of same critical function of
                                                                    human resources; incomplete staff files; what is the practice to ensure they are
                                                                    complete?
Senior director,
                        Vacant                                      Includes strategy and policy development; procurement may be included
programs
                                                                    United Nations funding ended 2013; government financing and possible role
                                                                    transformation from 2016; need for updated terms of reference, principal policy
Director, reparations,
                       2008                                         advisor on reparations to the commissioner? Approval of annual plans and
Haija Isatu Kamara
                                                                    reporting on progress, transmittal of report to donors; secretary to the National
                                                                    Steering Committee for Reparations; who sits on it? to whom does it report?
Director, refugees
Director, Social
Organization of
Educational Practice
Project
                                                                    Social protection systems custodian: suggestion that the custodian report to the
                                                         World
Director, NSPS          Vacant                                      chief secretary superseded by the need to capitalize on NaCSA experience and
                                                         Bank
                                                                    institutional memory, expertise, and resource base
                                                                    Procurement officer: vacant; two assistants; first, 2008 as procurement officer;
Procurement         December
                                              2015                  location of the unit is appropriate in light of the procurement system safeguards,
manager, Musa Sesay 1, 2012
                                                                    including requests origination, committee review, and provisions by funders
Accounts and finance                                                World Bank project contract: consultant terms, Sun System maintenance
manager, Saidu                                                      challenges; program managers improve lead time for requests, ensure use of
Lawrence Sesay                                                      authorized request forms
                                                                    15 staff in five districts; sectoral collaboration challenges, Ministry of Social Welfare,
Regional coordinator,               January
                      2001                                          Gender, and Children’s Affairs, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of
North, Ousman Turay                 2015
                                                                    Agriculture, Ministry of Works
Regional coordinator,
                                    January
South, Farama         2001                                          12 staff: district coordinators, capacity building specialists, officers, facilitators
                                    2015
Bangura
                                                                    8 technical staff; innovative approaches to obtain collaboration and operational
Regional coordinator,
                                    January                         support from sector staff, social welfare psychosocial support activities illustrative
Southern, Ousman      2001
                                    2015                            of practical limitations to collaboration and timely delivery; reports still awaited two
Jalloh
                                                                    months after activities
Internal audit,                                                     Head and two assistants, accountable; staff audit in 2012 and systems review; staff
                        2012
Ousman Bangura                                                      contracts, administrative handbook, and so on
Chairman, NaCSA                                                     More on-the-ground oversight and collaboration with the Parliamentary
                        2014
Board                                                               Committee; advocacy for a scale-up in coverage of subprojects across all chiefdoms
Deputy minister,
                                                                    Build ministry capacity to manage funds nationwide and to execute at all levels with
Ministry of Local       2008
                                                                    respect to specific functions and to mobilize financing from potential funders
Government
                                                                    Execution of youth programs to be moved to the National Youth Commission;
Minister of youth       2014
                                                                    NaCSA will provide technical guidance and support
                                                                    During meetings with the two ministers (Social Welfare, Gender, and Children’s
                                                                    Affairs; Youth) and the deputy minister of agriculture, she delivered the powerful
Deputy commissioner,
                                                                    message that the NaCSA commissioner status was conferred to facilitate execution
Haija Isatu Kamara
                                                                    of an urgent mandate to reach the poor and vulnerable through assigned tasks, a
                                                                    role the status of ministry would not have permitted equally effectively
Administrative
                                                                    Conditions of service and staff benefits are important for staff morale and
assistant, KfW project, 2004
                                                                    performance
Abigail Seisay
                                                                    Advocate for a structure that is less cumbersome in operations and in providing
Director, Social                                                    services; the NaCSA provides support as policy secretariat to the NSPIAF, to which it
Organization of                                                     gives strategic guidance. The Social Organization of Educational Practice Project
Educational Practice                                                receives program management guidance and administrative support from the
Project                                                             NaCSA. These arrangements challenge the sources of authority: the NSPIAF, the
                                                                    Parliamentary Committee, and the NaCSA Board.




                                                                       49
Annex D: Regional and District Staff Movements, 2012–15

                                                                                    Transfer Transfer              Staff
Year         Designation          Region     District   Terminated       Resigned                     Vacant                        Reason
                                                                                      out       in                 total
2012 Regional Coordinator         East     Kenema     1                                                        7           Performance
     Regional Engineer            East     Kenema                               1                                          Performance
     Adminstragie Assistant II    East     Kenema                                                                          No Comment
     Regional Engineer            South    Bo                                   1                              6           Performance
     Adminstrative Assistant II   South    Bo                                                                              No Comment
     Regional Coordinator         North    Makeni                               1                              7           Performance
     Regional Engineer            North    Makeni     1                                                                    Performance
     District Coordinator                  Kambia                               1                              14          Promotion in Place
     Community Based Spec                  Kambia                               1                                          Performance
     Comm Based Facilitatir                Kambia                               1                                          Performance
     Comm Based Facilitatir                Kambia                               1                                          Performance
     Comm Based Facilitatir                Kambia                               1                                          Performance
     District Coordinator                  Port Loko 1                                                         10          Performance
     Comm Based Specialist                 Port Loko 1                                                                     Performance
     District Coordinator                  Bombali                              1                              10          Performance
     Nil Movement                          Koinagudu                                                           5
     Districct Coordinator                 Tonkolili                            1                              8           Performance
     Comm Based Facilitator                Tonkolili                                                                       No Action
     Comm Based Specialist                 Kono                                                                7           No Action
     District Coordinator                  Kallahun   1                                                        5           Performance
     District Coordinator                  Kenema                               1                              10          Performance
     District Coordinator                  Bo                                   1                                          Performance
     Comm Based Specialist                 Bo                                                                  8           No Action
     Comm Based Specialist                 Bonthe                                                              8           No Action
     District Coordinator                  Moyamba                              1                              8           Performance
     Comm Based Specialist                 Moyamba 1                                                                       Performance
     District Coordinator                  Pujehun    1                                                                    Performance
     Comm Based Specialist                 Pujehun                              1                                          Promotion
     District Coordinator                  Western Area                         1                              11          Performance
     Comm Based Specialist                 Western Area                         1                                          Performance
                                  3        15         7            0            16          0        0         124
2013 Regional Coordnator          East     Kenema     Clerk of works postion excluded                1         6           Transfer
     Regional Engineer            East     Kenema                                           1                              Performance
     Regional Engineer            South    Bo                                               1                  6           Transfer
     Adminstragie Assistant II    South    Bo                                               1                              Transfer
     Regional Coordinator         North    Makeni                                           1                  6           Transfer
     Regional Engineer            North    Makeni                                           1                              Transfer
     District Coordinator                  Kambia                                           1                  11          Transfer
     Comm Based Facilitator                Kambia                                           1                              Transfer
     Comm Based Facilitator                Kambia                                                                          No Action
     District Coordinator                  Port Loko                                        1                  10          Transfer
     Community Based Spec                  Port Loko                                        1                              Transfer
     Comm Based Facilitator                Port Loko                                                                       No Acton
                                                                                                                           From refugee and
       District Coordinator       North    Bombali                                          1                  9
                                                                                                                           resettlement headquarters
       Comm Based Facilitator     North    Bombali                                  1                                      Promoted
       Nil                                 Koinadugu                                                                       Nil
       National Coordinator                Tonkolili                                1                          8           To HQ?
       District Coordinator                Tonkolili                                        1                              From HQ
       Nil                                 Kon                                                                 9           Nil
       District Coordinator                Kailahun                                         1                  5           Transfer ex-Bo
       District Coordinator                Kenema                                           1                              Transfer in ex-Moyamba
       District Coordinator                Bo                                                        1                     Vacant
       Community Based Spec                Bo                                               1                  8           Promoted from SAG
       Officer -in - Charge                Bonthe                                           1                              Retained
       District Coordinator                Moyamba                                          1                  7           Transfer from Bombali
       Officer -in-Charge                  Pujehun                                          1                  10          Promotion form Specia
       District Coordinator                Western Area                                     1                  10          Transfer Kenema
       Program Manager                                                                      1                              Retained
                                                                     0              2       19       2         105




                                                                         50
Annex E: Changing Organizational Structures

Figure E.1: NaCSA Organizational Structure, at the Institutional Review, 2008


                                                BOARD

                                           COMMISSIONER

                                          D-COMMISSIONER
         TECH ADVISORS
                                           EXEC. DIRECTOR                 SUP. SERVICES



         Micro Finance                            CDP                         PWP


                                               Reg. Office


                                                Dist Office




Figure E.2: Institutional Review 2008 Recommended

                                       NaCSA: ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE



                                                        BOARD




                                                    COMMISSIONER


                 DEPUTY COMMISSIONER                                        INTERNAL CONTROL




           PROGRAMMES DIVISION                   STRATEGY& PI DIVISION        SUPPORT SERVICES DIVISION




              SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC                     POLICY PLANNING &           ADMIN / HUMAN RESOURCES
               OPPORTUNITIES UNIT                    RESOURCE MOB. UNIT                      UNIT




                  HUMANITARIAN                          MONITORING &                     FINANCE &
                 ASSISTANCE UNIT                       EVALUATION UNIT               PROCUREMENT UNIT




               LOCAL GOVERNANCE                      PUBLIC INFORMATION           INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
              CAPACITY BUILDING UNIT                         UNIT                           UNIT




                                                      REGIONAL
                                                     OPERATIONS




                                                      DISTRICT
                                                     OPERATIONS




                                                     51
Annex F: Schedule of NaCSA Direct and Indirect Social Protection Program
and Project Interventions

Program,
                    Intervention                  Activities                           Direct                   Indirect
project
                                                                        NaCSA implements and leads
                                                                        (coordinating role), common targeting
                                                                        mechanisms and tools explained by       Proxy-means testing
SSNP, $7                                                                contract service provider, which        by Statistics Sierra
               Human capacity         Cash transfers-targeting,
million, World                                                          selected and engaged, beneficiaries     Leone; the contract
               investment             capacity building
Bank                                                                    identified and registered, district     service provider is
                                                                        coordinating teams participate, Anti    to effect transfers
                                                                        Corruption Commission participates,
                                                                        skills training for youth
Rapid Ebola–                                                                                                    Contracts service
              Human capital           Cash transfers, capacity          NaCSA implements and leads
Social Safety                                                                                                   provider to effect
              investment              building                          (coordinating role)
Net                                                                                                             transfers
                                      Social mobilization, provide
Sierra Leone    Community capacity
                                      support for education, health
Community-      building,                                                                                       Contract service
                                      care, agriculture, microfinance,
Driven          development of                                         NaCSA leads (coordinating role)          providers to
                                      microenterprises, roads and
Development     physical                                                                                        implement activities
                                      bridges, water supply, rural
Project II      infrastructure
                                      electrification
Pro-Poor                                                               NaCSA leads: targeting and screening
                Infrastructure        Spot improvement of feeder
Growth for                                                             of youth for the program,                Contract service
                development, job      roads, construction of grain
Peace                                                                  identification of the works using        providers to
                creation among        stores and drying floors, water
Consolidation                                                          screening criteria, targeting            implement activities
                youth                 supply and capacity building
II                                                                     beneficiaries (coordinating role)
Youth
                                                                                                                Contracts
Employment
                                                                                                                community
Support         Job creation among    Provision of cash for work,
                                                                        NaCSA leads (coordinating role)         oversight
Project and     youth                 capacity building
                                                                                                                committees to
cash-for-work
                                                                                                                implement activities
component
Combating       Provide assistance to
                                      Provision of allowances,          NaCSA implements and leads
Irregular       returnees and victims
                                      capacity building                 (coordinating role)
Migration       of trafficking
                                                                                                                Contract service
                Provide assistance to Provide rehabilitation, grants,   NaCSA implements and leads              providers to
Reparations
                war victims           capacity building                 (coordinating role)                     implement some
                                                                                                                activities
                                                                                                                Contract service
                Provide protection to Provision of shelter, support,
Relief and                                                              NaCSA implements and leads              providers to
                refugees and asylum medical assistance, capacity
resettlement                                                            (coordinating role)                     implement some
                seekers               building
                                                                                                                activities
Peace and   Employment creation
                                                                        NaCSA implements and leads
Development among young         Internship, capacity building
                                                                        (coordinating role)
Corporation graduates




                                                                  52
