     STRENGTHENING COORDINATION
     OF SOCIAL PROTECTION POLICY
     AND INTERVENTIONS IN SIERRA
     LEONE


     INSTITUTIONAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR IMPLEMENTING
     SOCIAL PROTECTION: A REVIEW OF THE ROLE AND FUNCTIONS OF THE INTER-
     AGENCY FORUM, ITS AGENCIES AND THE SOCIAL PROTECTION SECRETARIAT


     June 2016.




A consultancy report by: Norbert O. Mugwagwa, PhD
Abbreviations and Acronyms

ACC      Anti-Corruption Commission
AFS      Annual Financial Statements
AGD      Attorney General’s Department
ASC      Audit Service Commission
AWP      Annual Work Plans
BD       Bid Document
CIC      Community Identification Committee
CQS      Consultant’s Qualification Selection
CSO      Civil Society Organization
CT       Cash Transfer
CDD      Community Driven Development
DA       District Administrator
DA       Designated Account
DC       District Council
DGRC     District Grievance Resolution Committee
DTC      District Technical Committee
DFID     Department For International Development
EVD      Ebola Virus Disease
FM       Financial Management
FY       Fiscal Year
GBAA     Government Budgeting and Accountability Act
GoSL     Government of Sierra Leone
GRM      Grievance Redress Mechanism
HDI      Human Development Index

IAS      Internal Audit Services
IBRD     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IC       Individual Consultant
ICT      Information and Communication Technologies
IDA      International Development Association
IE       Impact Evaluation
IEC      Information, Education & Communication
IFRs     Interim Financial Reports
IPF      Investment Project Financing
IPFMRP   Integrated Public Financial Management Reform Project
IPSAS    International Public Sector Accounting Standards
ISA      International Standards on Auditing
ISP      Implementation Support Plan
IDB      Islamic Development Bank
IPAU     Integrated Project Administration Unit
JCAS     Joint Country Assistance Strategy
KFW      Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
LTPC     Local Technical Planning Committee
MLSS     Ministry of Labor and Social Security


                                      2
M&E       Monitoring and Evaluation
MDAs      Ministries, Departments, and Agencies
MDGs      Millennium Development Goals
MHS       Ministry of Health and Sanitation
MIS       Management Information System
MoFED     Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
MSWGCA    Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender and Children Affairs
MOU       Memorandum of Understanding
NASSIT    National Social Insurance Trust
NaCSA     National Commission for Social Action
NGO       Non-Governmental Organization
NRRA      National Revenue Authority Act
NRS       National Registration Secretariat
NSPA      National Social Protection Authority
NSPIAF    National Social Protection Inter-agency Forum
PAD       Project Appraisal Document
PAM       Project Accounting Manual
PDO       Project Development Objective
PFM       Public financial management
PMT       Proxy Means Test
PPT       Power Point Presentation
RE-SSN    Rapid Ebola Social Safety Net
SLIHS     Sierra Leone Integrated Household Survey
SOCEP     Social and Economic Opportunities Directorate
SP        Social Protection
SSL       Statistics Sierra Leone
SPS       Social Protection Secretariat
SPTSC     Social Protection Technical Steering Committee
SAs       Sector Agencies
SPRINT    Social Protection Registry For Integrated National
          Targeting
TTL      Task Team Leader
UNICEF   United nations Children’s Fund
WB        World Bank




                                         3
Table of Contents

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS                                                        2

FOREWORD                                                                          6

1.   INTRODUCTION                                                                 7

CONTEXT OF THE REVIEW                                                             7

METHODOLOGY                                                                       7

SCOPE OF WORK                                                                     8

2.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY AND FINDINGS                                               9

3. OVERALL PERFORMANCE OF THE SOCIAL SAFETY NETS PROJECT (SSNP) IN
STRENGTHENING COORDINATION OF THE SP POLICY AND INTERVENTIONS IN THE
COUNTRY                                                                          10
BACKGROUND                                                                       10
PROJECT OBJECTIVE                                                                11
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION AND ACHIEVEMENTS                                          11
ACHIEVEMENTS                                                                     11
SSNP BUILDING BLOCKS                                                             12
ROLES AND FUNCTIONS OF SP ACTORS AND STAKEHOLDERS UNDER THE SNNP                 13
TABLE 1: TARGETING AND ENROLMENT OF SP BENEFICIARIES                             13
TABLE 2: PAYMENTS TO CASH TRANSFER BENEFICIARIES                                 14
TABLE 3: MANAGEMENT OF THE REGISTRY OF COMPLAINTS                                15
SNNP CHALLENGES                                                                  15

4. THE FUNCTIONS AND PERFORMANCE OF THE INTER AGENCY FORUM (IAF) AND ITS
SUPPORTING AGENCIES;                                                  17
BACKGROUND                                                                        17
SOCIAL POLICY DOCUMENT INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS                                 17
TABLE 4: SP POLICY DOCUMENT SP (2011) INSTITUTIONAL SET-UP                        18
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR SP UNDER THE SSNP                                  18
DIAGRAM 1: INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR SP POLICY, COORDINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
UNDER THE SSNP AND SP STRATEGY                                                    19
TABLE 5: SP INTERVENTIONS, MDAS AND OTHER PROVIDERS                               20

5. THE FUNCTIONS AND PERFORMANCE OF THE SOCIAL PROTECTION SECRETARIAT
(SPS)                                                               22
SPS’S LEGAL MANDATE                                                              22
SPS ROLE AND FUNCTIONS                                                           22
DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING THE SAFETY NETS SYSTEMS COMPONENT OF THE SSNP        23
DIAGRAM 2: SP SECRETARIAT ORGANOGRAM                                             25
DIAGRAM 3: SOCIAL SAFETY NETS PROJECT SP INSTITUTIONAL SET-UP                    26
DISCUSSION OF THE ORGANOGRAMS                                                    27
NACSA’S PERFORMANCE                                                              28



                                          4
TABLE 5: SSNP PERFORMANCE                                                             28

6.   OPTIONS FOR HOUSING THE SOCIAL PROTECTION SECRETARIAT                            29
A) REMAIN UNDER NACSA – EXISTING ARRANGEMENT;                                          29
B) MOVE THE SP SECRETARIAT TO THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT UNTIL THE THE NATIONAL SP
AUTHORITY IS ESTABLISHED                                                               30
C) MOVE THE SECRETARIAT AND THE SAFETY NETS PROJECT TO THE CHIEF OF STAFF’S (COS) OFFICE32

7.   FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                                     33
DIAGRAM 5: SOCIAL PROTECTION SECRETARIAT PROPOSED ORGANOGRAM                          34
ANNEX 1: PEOPLE MET: INSTITUTIONAL ASSESSMENT OF THE SOCIAL PROTECTION SECRETARIAT    37
ANNEX 2: SCHEDULE SP PROGRAMS: SOURCES OF SP DATA                                     38
JOB DESCRIPTIONS SUMMARY                                                              39




                                            5
Foreword

This Review was authorized by the World Bank Social Safety Nets Project Task Team
Leader (TTL) at the request of the Sierra Leone Inter Agency Forum, to advance the
dialogue on the status of Social Protection interventions, and the institutional set-up
and organization in support of them. The objectives of the exercise are to:

   •   Assess the overall performance of the SSNP in strengthening coordination of the
       SP Policy and interventions in the country;
   •   Review of the functions and performance of the IAF and its supporting agencies;
   •   Review performance and functions of the SP Secretariat; and
   •    Recommend institutional and organizational changes to strengthen and
       facilitate the Secretariat’s role in the development, establishment and
       implementation of the SP systems across the SP programs

The Consultant visited Sierra Leone from March 12 to 19, 2016 and presented the
preliminary findings in the Implementation Support Mission (February 25 to March 9,
2016) Aide Memoir in addition to sharing the Power Point Presentation (PPT) made to
the Social Protection Technical Steering Committee (SPTSC) of the Inter Agency Forum
(IAF). The list of people met is attached as an Annex 1. Follow-up work has included the
distribution of the revised PPT and follow-up discussion with the Chief of Staff,
incorporation of comments therefrom by the Consultant into a preliminary Draft
Report, and further guidance from the TTL. This Draft Report incorporates most of the
comments while highlighting the Consultant’s findings.




                                           6
   1. Introduction

The Review was requested in order to assess the overall performance of the ongoing
Social Safety Nets Project in strengthening coordination of the SP Policy and
interventions in the country. The SNNP was granted Additional Financing of $10 million
with support from Department for International Development (DFID) of $4.3million
following the exhaustion of the initial $7 million dollars allocated by the World Bank.
The Review went further to assess: the functions and performance of the Inter-Agency
Forum and its supporting Agencies, the performance and functions of the SP Secretariat;
and institutional and organizational changes needed to strengthen and facilitate the
Secretariat’s role in the development, establishment and implementation of the SP
systems across the SP programs.


Context of the Review

The Government of Sierra Leone made a conscious decision to focus on social
protection (SP) in part as commitment to accelerating the eradication of extreme
poverty, a response to the Ebola outbreak and the resultant strain on the
country’s resources. The focus on SP came as the country was battling high levels of
poverty arising from a poorly performing economy characterized by high
unemployment among the youth and adults, poor health among women and children,
problems of orphans, the disabled, and HIV/AIDS infected and affected. In addition, the
legacy of displacement, war refugees and victims, continued to adversely affect delivery
of services to these disadvantaged households and groups.

The President issued Executive Order 90 that provided guidance on the institutional
set-up and organization to lead and coordinate the implementation of the policy and
accompanying interventions. In 2015, the President launched the SP Strategy that
articulates the social protection policy and programs, and institutions to implement
them.


Methodology

The consultant used the Appreciative Inquiry Approach with its emphasis on analyzing
organizational strengths and performance results, and envisioning positive future
results to which the Social Protection Secretariat would contribute. In the process, the
following activities were carried out to obtain the information and insights used to
arrive at the conclusions and recommendations made:

   1. Interviews and consultations with ministers, deputy ministers, ministry officials
      of the relevant ministries; National Commission for Social Action (NaCSA)
      Commissioner, his Deputy and senior directors; and NaCSA technical staff (see
      List of People Met Annexes);



                                           7
     2. One day workshop with the SP Technical Steering Committee members and the
        NaCSA staff;
     3. Formal discussions with the SP secretariat staff and written exchanges with the
        Director of the SPS ;
     4. Documents review including the SSNP Credit Agreement, Project Appraisal
        Document (PAD) and Operational Manual; IAF meetings’ minutes; quarterly and
        annual reports of NaCSA and the Secretariat; and
     5. Written exchanges and formal discussions of preliminary findings with the SSNP
        TTL and Bank Team.


Scope of Work

The Terms of Reference1 of the assignment required that the following be reviewed:

     •   overall performance of the Social Safety Nets Project (SSNP) in strengthening
         coordination of the SP Policy and interventions in the country be reviewed in
         order to set the stage for determining whether the project, as designed, is
         delivering the expected outputs and outcomes;
     •   functions and performance of the National Social Protection Inter Agency Forum
         (NSPIAF) and its supporting agencies; and
     •   performance and functions of the Social Protection Secretariat (SPS);

Recommendations on institutional and organizational changes to strengthen and
facilitate the Secretariat’s role in the development, establishment and implementation
of the SP systems across the SP programs, would then be made.

It is notable that the SSNP was implemented during the pre-Ebola period and its
coverage was expanded during the Ebola outbreak. The project was meant to provide
the platform for the coordination of the Social Protection Strategy and Strategic Plan
(2013 to 2018). Among questions to address is how well the SSNP carried out that
function and what factors interplayed to influence and affect the project performance?
The responses to those questions would require an assessment of the institutional set-
up and organization of the National Social Protection Inter-Agency Forum (NSPIAF) and
the SPS as well as how well both delivered on their mandates.




1   See Annex 2


                                           8
    2. Executive Summary and Findings

The assessment examined the challenges that the SP program, at its inception, sought to
address. Whereas some of the challenges were external to the SSNP program, a number
of them were directly linked to how the program was designed, rolled out and how the
institutions that were set up to implement it performed. Besides the challenges, the
assessment also highlights the significant achievements that the program made and
how these lay the basis for future program direction.

The following challenges were noted:

    a) concerns over perceived weak coordination of the program;
    b) slow adoption and effectiveness of SP systems developed under the SNNP by the
       other Sector Agencies (SAs);
    c) refusal by the SAs to submit reports of the SP activities of their Agencies to the
       Secretariat for wider dissemination;
    d) need to resolve the location and institutional set-up of the SP Secretariat on the
       expiry of the two year period during which it was housed at the National
       Commission for Social Action (NaCSA) in accordance with the stakeholders
       decision on the 10th May, 2013 meeting; and
    e) Sectors’ demand that IAF and Chief of Staff oversee the SP Secretariat per the
       Presidential Executive Notice number 90;

Summary Findings

•      The SSNP undertook some very successful interventions which produced results
       such as:
          • Recruitment and placement of SP staff
          • Adoption and application of the system for identification, registration and
              payment of cash transfer and cash for work beneficiaries;
          • Selection of the Implementing Agency/Service provider for the Cash
              Transfers
          • Oversight and monitoring of the cash payout for the beneficiaries
          • Initiated employment creation and income generation among youth and
              unemployed;


•      SP secretariat’s services and coordination roles vis-à-vis other SP actors are
       essential and clearly articulated;
•      SP actors feel that the SP Secretariat needs to step up its services to Ministries
       Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and other Non State SP actors besides
       NaCSA;
•      the IAF which is now functional would like the SPS to fall under an independent
       National SP Authority as originally intended (Option 2);
•      Given that the SSNP ends in September 2019, there maybe practical challenges to
       moving the secretariat from NaCSA especially with regard to financial
       accountability and disbursement of cash to beneficiaries;


                                            9
•        An independent Secretariat would need to strengthen its technical capability
         with respect to financial management and reporting, MIS, IEC and procurement;
•        A bill formalizing the secretariat’s legal status, roles and functions would need to
         be steered through the Cabinet and parliament, a process that takes over six
         months. The Bill is being prepared by the subcommittee of the SPTSC and will be
         steered by Ministry of Labor and Social Security (MLSS) through Cabinet and
         Parliament.

Recommendations

        GOSL should adopt measures to formalize adoption of the Option it chooses and
         implement it during the remaining life of the SSNP – to 2019;
     •   IAF should formally endorse MLSS’s efforts to steer the SP Bill with the proposed
         changes through Cabinet and Parliament. The Ministry took the lead with the
         tabling of the earlier SP programs under NaCSA Act of 2008;
     •   Formalize institutional and organizational changes needed to place the
         Secretariat under the National Social Protection Authority (NSPA). Critical staff
         needed for the Authority to perform its functions including reporting to the
         Donors in time, etc. IAF to engage NaCSA and agree a schedule of transfer of
         responsibilities to SP Authority.
     •   IAF to engage NaCSA and agree a schedule of transfer of responsibilities to SP
         Authority;
     •   Identify gaps in SPS capacity to carry out its full functions, i.e. collection and
         compilation of data and information on performance, technical staffing, financial
         management, and agree next actions to fill that;
     •   IAF should actively oversee the performance of respective Actors per the Tables
         1 to 3 in the text;
     •   Chairman IAF convenes briefing meeting to clarify mandate and reporting issues;
     •   SPTSC proposes staffing needs – strengthen monitoring, IEC - information
         dissemination, and training on use of systems; and
     •   Location – Chief of Staff finds office space that need not be physically within the
         President’s office, etc.
     •   A timetable be prepared for varying out the above.


3.       Overall performance of the Social Safety Nets Project (SSNP)
         in strengthening coordination of the SP Policy and
         interventions in the country
Background

The SSNP is a Government of Sierra Leone (GOSL) SP Project approved in 2014. The
GOSL (USD $2.5 million Counterpart funds) and WB (USD $7 million) financed the
Project to benefit 13,000 households. In 2015, the World Bank approved Additional
Financing of USD $10 million to which DFID added USD $4.3 million. The injection of
fresh finances enabled 30,000 households to benefit from the project until 2019. New as
well as old beneficiaries that met specific criteria would receive the income support via
cash transfer.


                                             10
Project Objective

The objective of the SSNP was to establish the key building blocks for a basic national
safety net system and to provide income support to extremely poor households in
Sierra Leone.


Project Implementation and Achievements

NaCSA implements the Social Safety Net Project in close collaboration with the Anti-
Corruption Commission (ACC), Statistics Sierra Leone (SSL), National Registration
Secretariat (NRS), Splash Mobile Money doing the payment of beneficiaries; and the
Communities through the Community Identification Committees (CICs) and community
representatives who play a pivotal role in the identification of beneficiaries. Local
Councils will be involved in the monitoring of project activities.

A Basic national safety net system will include: (i) tools and a functioning targeting
system; (ii) beneficiary registry; (iii) management information system; (iv) payment
system, and (v) grievance redress mechanism and anti-corruption measures; and

A national cash transfer program for the extremely poor households, as these are
also the most food insecure and likely to have the highest risks of malnutrition and poor
maternal health.

Achievements

   •   Phase I beneficiaries (2,720) targeted, enrolled and first quarter cash transfer
       paid; by end Phase III, Dec. 2015, total beneficiaries were 12917;
   •   MIS system developed and operational
   •   Implementation activities ongoing with support from National Social Protection
       Secretariat (NSPS), National Registration Secretariat (NRS) Statistics Sierra
       Leone (SSL) and Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC).
   •   In collaboration with United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), ACC and World
       Bank, IEC strategy for implementation of the SSN has been developed.
   •   Dissemination of information to stakeholders regarding progress of SSN and its
       roll- out activities.
   •   Cash transfers made under the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) Response

Ebola Virus Disease Response

NaCSA with support from its donor partners (Islamic Development Bank (IDB),
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) and World Bank), and using the SP systems
under development, implemented a range of activities, i.e. in support of the Ebola
response including:




                                           11
   •   Applied the targeting tools, set up the beneficiary register and registered
       beneficiaries - integration into SPRINT of eligible RE-SSN beneficiaries;
   •   Authorized beneficiary payments through the Management Information System
       (MIS).
   •   Coordinated Splash, the payment agency, to process and deliver payments to
       beneficiaries;
   •   Received from Splash monthly financial reports through the Management
       Information System (MIS);
   •   NaCSA reconciled monthly financial reports from Splash after payments;
   •   Collected data on beneficiaries, analyzed it and disseminated information on the
       EVD;

NaCSA’s additional support to the EVD efforts included:

   •   Sensitization and awareness raising of HH, distribution of sanitary materials and
       donated of motor bikes for contact tracers,
   •   Establishment of call centers at community level, and provision of food and
       psychosocial support to affected persons.


SSNP Building Blocks

The building blocks of ‘a basic national safety net system’ constitute the SPS
mandate and would include: (i) tools and a functioning targeting system; (ii)
beneficiary registry; (iii) management information system; (iv) payment system, and
(v) grievance redress mechanism and anti-corruption measures.

In essence, these building blocks financed under the SSNP constitute the SPS
deliverables and are detailed in Chapter 5. The deliverables have the potential to be
‘free standing’ provided: a) the overlapping roles and responsibilities of key actors such
as NaCSA, ACC, SSL and the SP (SPRINT), are well articulated and synchronized (Tables
1 to 3), and b) the SPS is well staffed with the technical staff that execute the key
functions of finance, procurement, M&E and MIS (See SPS organogram).

The design of this ‘basic system’ required the collaboration of the key SP actors
that included: Ministries of Social Welfare, Labor and Social Services, NaCSA, ACC,
Statistics Sierra Leone (SSL) and ‘Other’ actors. The Design Team appreciated the
complexities of developing the ‘building blocks’ hence the decision to locate the
proposed SPS in the already functional NaCSA for an initial period of two years.

The ‘safety nets system building blocks’ freestanding component was executed
independently of the cash transfer to beneficiaries even though it (a) provided the
platform on which the ‘cash payment’ would be made and monitored, and (b) required
collaboration among the actors. The two year allowance for NaCSA to ‘house’ the SPS
was meant to provide ‘a period of learning and consolidation’, and ‘testing the systems’.




                                           12
Roles and Functions of SP Actors and Stakeholders under the SNNP

Below is the current allocation of roles and functions between the SPS, NaCSA, ACC,
Statistics Sierra Leone (SSL) and ‘Other’ actors as they implement the SSNP. The roles
and functions cover both the establishment of the Safety Nets System and execution of
cash transfers to beneficiaries. Areas of collaboration between the stakeholders are
highlighted by phase throughout the project cycle.

Table 1: Targeting and Enrolment of SP Beneficiaries




NSPS: National Social Protection Secretariat, NaCSA: National Commission for Social Action, ACC: Anti Corruption
Commission, SSL: Statistics Sierra Leone, TSC: Technical Steering Committee, NRS:




                                                      13
Table 2: Payments to Cash Transfer Beneficiaries




Key Staff: Financial Management, MIS Officer/TA, Systems/Data Clerk, IEC Officer/TA.




                                         14
 Table 3: Management of the Registry of Complaints




Whereas the SPS houses, secures and maintains cash beneficiary data, NaCSA draws on
the data at the operational levels, i.e. district and chiefdom levels. ACC does the same
regarding complaints from beneficiaries. The other actors, i.e. SPLASH, SSL and NRS may
also upload the data. SPS verifies and ensures the integrity of the data.

SSNP Challenges

As implementation of the SSNP has proceeded, challenges have emerged which need to be
addressed. These include

     •   Delays in the transfer of funds to the Payment Service Provider led to delay in
         the payment of beneficiaries.
     •   Delay in the reconciliation files submitted by the payment provider into the MIS.
     •   Beneficiaries in most payment points do not know how to count money,
         especially large notes; and in some cases they don’t even know how much they
         are supposed to get per quarter; and
     •    Delay in payment in some communities has created anxiety and mistrust in the
         minds of some beneficiaries



                                            15
These challenges are considered normal for this type of program as experience from
countries that have implemented similar projects (Dominican Republic, Tanzania) have
shown. The project design has built in orientation for sector frontline staff and training
for HH, communities and committees that work with the project staff. The mitigation
measures taken by NaCSA, the Secretariat and SPLASH are paying off as turn around time
has been reduced and reconciliations are taking shorter time to be done.




                                            16
4.     The Functions and Performance of the National Social
       Protection Inter Agency Forum (NSPIAF) and its Supporting
       Agencies;
Background

The National Social Protection Inter-Agency Forum (NSPIAF) was formed to provide a
platform for the coordination of the SP programs. It is chaired by the Chief of Staff and is
located in the President’s Office. It is a high level policy making body with a lot of clout
and leverage that derives its authority from the President’s Executive Notice No. 90, of
2011.

Social Policy Document Institutional Arrangements

The (NSPIAF) in the Office of the President is responsible for guiding and setting SP
policy. The Social Policy document established the NSPIAF as the National Social
Protection Authority and reaffirmed its responsibilities as including monitoring and
evaluation and setting of standards (2011). The NSPIAF membership comprised: Chief
of Staff (Chair) Minister of Finance and Economic Development as Co-Chair, State
Actors/MDAs coopted as needed, and Non State Actors. A National Social Protection
Coordinating Agency hosting the Social Protection Secretariat would provide the day-
to-day coordination and facilitation, a responsibility given to NaCSA. Changes were
made to the original arrangement during implementation of the Policy. The Minister for
Social Welfare became the Co-Chair and NaCSA assumed the responsibility for housing
the SP Secretariat.




                                            17
Table 4: SP Policy Document SP (2011) Institutional Set-up




Institutional Arrangements for SP Under the SSNP

The institutional arrangements and design for implementing the SSNP (2014) modified
and detailed the three pillars essential for SP policy authorizing environment, co-
ordination and implementation as shown in Diagram 2 below.

Under the Policy and Authority pillar, three levels of interaction were identified
at national level, Chief of Staff’s Office in the President’s Office, and sector ministries
and agencies; and local councils. The pillar has the responsibility to authorize, endorse
and adopt SP related decisions from the SP coordinating agencies at the respective
levels, i.e. national, sectoral and local authority.

Ensuring SP policy coordination at national level is the NSPIAF comprising of the
sector ministers and heads of agencies supported by the NSP Steering Committee
comprising of the SP Secretariat and sector directors. The pillar coordinates SP
interventions across MDAs and other agencies providing SP services.




                                            18
Diagram 1: Institutional Arrangements for SP Policy, Coordination and
Implementation under the SSNP and SP Strategy




Responsibilities, Actions and Achievements

Below is a summary of the responsibilities, actions and achievements of the IAF and
other collaborating actors in SP.

National Social Protection Inter-Agency Forum (NSPIAF): The Forum was formed
and met quarterly in 2013 during the pre-Ebola period as shown by the compiled
minutes. Because of the Ebola imperatives and recovery demands, the Ministers
attended regularly. Ministers attended the meetings to allocate resources and approve
budget and work-plan followed by the annual review (twice a year imperative). Sector
Ministries provide SP policy guidance for programs within their ministries and set their
respective norms and standards.

The NSP Technical Steering Committee (NSPTSC) comprises of technical
representatives of the Sectors and Agencies that work on SP. It coordinates technical
aspects of the SP program across sectors and leads processing of interventions.

A sub-committee of the NSPTSC is drafting the legislation that seeks to set-up the SPS
to report to an SP Authority/Agency; it is led by the representative of the MLSS who has




                                          19
a legal back ground and will refer tis proposal to the Government Legal Drafting Team
once it is approved by the IAF and signed off by Cabinet.

SP Secretariat provides day to day coordination of SP programs and overlaps with
other stakeholders (see Diagram 1) in areas of: targeting and enrolment, payment,
communication, MIS, M&E, finance, complaints and program reporting.

At local level, the district technical committees work with the extension officers
and NaCSA staff as they implement the interventions.

Table 5: SP Interventions, MDAs and Other Providers




NaCSA Performance

NaCSa is the leader, and biggest Agency and actor, in SP. The NaCSA Institutional
Assessment (2015) demonstrated that NaCSA has:

   a) demonstrated ability to build capacity, coordinate SP systems deployment and
      oversee their use;
   b) provided technical support to MDAs and other stakeholders to execute SP
      activities using the sub-project cycle;
   c) a good track record in terms of fiduciary compliance;
   d) the ability to attract donor funding for programs managed by it; and
   e) a strong institutional memory on operational aspects of SP.

The discussion in Chapter 3 demonstrated that the SSNP strengthened NaCSA’s ability
to perform the above roles and functions well with the approval of the IAF and
endorsement of the other actors.




                                         20
However, over the two-year period, other sectoral implementing agencies have
complained that NaCSA dominance has led them to claim that they are being
starved of funding. That claim breeds resentment and the tendency by those actors to
withhold their services. In addition, negative tensions between the SPS staff and the
NaCSA management have been highlighted which include suspension of the Director of
the Secretariat and differential salaries to other NaCSA staff. Going forward, the call for
NaCSA to relinquish some of its oversight and management role and functions over the
SP Secretariat have grown louder.

Operationally, NaCSA has confronted implementation challenges that may militate
for an institutional and organizational course correction:

   •   Delay in the transfer of funds to the Payment Service Provider led to delay in the
       payment of beneficiaries.
   •   Delay in the reconciliation files submitted by the payment provider into the MIS.
   •   Beneficiaries in most payment points do not know how to count money,
       especially large notes; and in some cases they don’t even know how much they
       are supposed to get per quarter.
   •   Delay in payment in some communities has created anxiety and mistrust in the
       minds of some beneficiaries.

Whereas that may mean that NaCSA may cease to have a role in overseeing the
Secretariat’s operations, it would continue to collaborate with the Secretariat as a
member of the IAF and throughout the SNNP subproject cycle. The collaboration
between the two organizations is critical for the success of the SP Policy and Strategy as
well as the implementation of the SSNP.

The NaCSA mandate also provides for it to have a pivotal role. The roles and
responsibilities of NaCSA are stipulated in its Act 2001 amended in 2008, which include
under section (e) ‘to serve as a recipient and manager of funds for social protection of
disadvantaged families and for liaising with the National Social Security and Insurance
Trust for the use of the social safety nets’. Did the Presidential Executive Note modify
that mandate by proposing an SP Authority? Did the Executive Note rather give NaCSA
the ‘impetus’ and framework to implement the mandate? For NaCSA to continue to play
the role stipulated in the Act and under the Executive Authority would mean that NaCSA
falls under the new SP Authority.




                                            21
5.       The Functions and Performance of the Social Protection
         Secretariat (SPS)
SPS’s Legal Mandate
Funded by the Social Safety Nets Project, the Social Protection Secretariat (SPS) was
established by the Inter-Agency Forum and housed at NaCSA for an initial period of two
years. It is accountable to the IAF and acts as an independent SP interventions
coordinating platform.

SPS Role and Functions
The SPS has both broad roles as well as specific technical functions. Among its broad
roles are: a) systems development, and b) coordinating the planning, designing, delivery
and reporting of SP Interventions.

a) Systems Development includes:

     •   Developing SP systems and tools (MIS, beneficiary registry, common targeting
         tools, payment mechanism, delivery assurance, compliance and Grievance
         Redress Mechanism/GRM)
     •   Establishment of an integrated SP MIS;
     •   Analyzing, storing and disseminating of SP data and information supported and
         in collaboration with other agencies;

b) Coordinating the planning, designing, delivery and reporting of SP Interventions

     •   Mobilize resources by supporting fund raising for social protection activities;
     •   Build capacities of social protection partners for effective social protection
         delivery by:
             • Procuring equipment & tools for use in performing Secretariat functions;
             • Recruitment and training of technical staff;
             • Development of SP Operational Guidelines
     •   Supervise and Monitor compliance including program implementation and
         adherence to standards and procedures;
     •   Provide secretarial services to the NSPIAF by taking, circulating and following up
         on minutes of its meetings;
     •   Collate and submit periodic status reports to the NSPIAF .




                                             22
Developing and Implementing the Safety Nets Systems Component of the
SSNP
The SPS’s specific technical function is to develop the ‘building blocks of a national
safety net system’ and in the process, implement the systems development component,
which includes:

   targeting and verification of beneficiaries using Proxy Means Test (PMT) system;
   building a beneficiary registry linked to the national registry;
   developing and managing an Integrated MIS;
   setting-up a payment system, electronic and outsourced to a private service
provider (SP);
   developing a mechanism for uploading data from the Grievance Redress Mechanism
(GRM) and anti-corruption measures data base for routing to the Anti Corruption
Commission (ACC); and
    facilitating other SP programs to reach extremely poor beneficiaries using the
beneficiary registry.

Design of a targeting system. The activity would involve development of tools for a 3-
stage common targeting system combining geographical, community identification of
potentially eligible beneficiaries, and verification by proxy means testing (PMT).

Building of a beneficiary registry. A beneficiary registry containing information of
beneficiaries of social programs in the country will be built. The Social Protection
Registry For Integrated National Targeting (SPRINT) is set-up as a transparent,
objective tool that serves to identify, prioritize and select households living in poverty
and vulnerable conditions, i.e. the beneficiaries. This tool aims to ensure that the
resources allocated to the different social programs as implemented by Ministries,
Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and other stakeholders effectively reach the people
with greatest need, preventing their diversion into geographical areas and/or
socioeconomic groups not prioritized. It will be linked to the national identification
system once it is developed. The registry is housed at the SPS. SPRINT would be
accessible to other social programs for targeting purposes.

The SPS is responsible for providing technical assistance for program implementation
as well as managing SP systems and related data.

The registry will be integrated with the broader SP program MIS and will
facilitate the collection, processing, management, and dissemination of data on
potential beneficiaries of safety nets interventions as well as actual SSN Program
beneficiaries. The registry will include:

1) basic beneficiary information gathered during community identification of potentially
eligible households;
2) national identification numbers generated through the production of national IDs for HH
representatives and other key information collected by NRS;
3) detailed information on households’ socioeconomic condition collected during the proxy
means test verification; and
    information on households’ final eligibility (as verified by the PMT scores) and
enrolment status in the program.



                                           23
All procedures related to the use and maintenance of the registry are described in detail in
the handbook (refer to the MIS/Registry Guide), which serves as a guide for the
implementing agency and partners.

Development of a Management Information System (MIS): An integrated MIS, which
facilitates the collection, processing, management, and dissemination of data essential
for program operations and monitoring, will be built. The MIS will incorporate data
from the beneficiary registry and will be managed by the SPS.

Payment system. An electronic Payment will be outsourced to a payment service
provider (SPLASH) who can guarantee the required payment delivery and security
standards. NaCSA oversees the Payments using its Regional Teams and other local
government infrastructure and in collaboration with CSOs.

Grievance redresses mechanism (GRM) and anti-corruption. The GRM will be instituted
for beneficiaries to raise grievances about the implementation of the SSNP. Complaints
will be received through multiple channels, including through civil society monitors,
local councilors, wards, NACSA, and other local government officials. In addition to the
GRM, beneficiaries and other stakeholders will be able to report corruption to the Anti-
Corruption Commission (ACC) through the same channels used for the GRM, as well as
to the ACC directly using a national toll free hotline. The Anti-Corruption Commission
will undertake robust corruption prevention measures by both the Secretariat and
independently.

Organization of the Secretariat

At the design stage, the institutional set-up proposed recognized the need to place the
Secretariat under the highest authority in the land, the President’s Office because of the
urgency attached to SP in light of the huge poverty and development challenges facing
the country (see the SP Institutional set-up Chapter). The SP Authority in the form of the
NSPIAF was set-up. The NSPIAF is chaired by the Chief of Staff and comprises of
Ministers from the key ministries implementing SP interventions2. This powerful multi-
sectoral body had the responsibility to define the interventions to realize the SP Policy
and articulate the strategy for its implementation. Implementation authority and
oversight of the Secretariat was placed under NaCSA. Functionality remained shared
between the NSPA and the NaCSA Commissioner. This dual accountability was
inherently conflictual.




2MDAs: Chief of Staff in President’s Office; Finance and Economic Development; Labour
Employment and Social Security; Social Welfare, Gender and Children’s Affairs;
Education, Science and Technology; Health; Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security,
Local Government and Rural Development; Human Rights Commission; and Statistics
Sierra Leone and NaCSA.


                                            24
Diagram 2: SP Secretariat Organogram



              SP SECRETARIAT STRUCTURE




The current organization structure (see above) of the SPS was meant to last the initial
two years that it fell under the NaCSA Institutional set-up (see Chapter 3). Whereas the
SPS Director is accountable to the IAF through the NaCSA Commissioner, The
organogram reflected the following:

   •   SPS Director directly accountable to the NaCSA Senior Director – Programs
       Development, Strategic Planning & Resource mobilization;
   •   Technical oversight from the Senior Directors of Support Services and M&E;
   •   Financial oversight of its activities is exercised by the Senior Director, Finance,
       who reviews the Secretariat’s work-plans and budgetary requests before
       authorizing processing of payments for its activities;
   •   Reporting to the Commissioner via the Deputy Commissioner;
   •   Accountable to the Board per the work-plan;
   •   Ultimately accountable to the NSPIAF in the Chief of Staff’s Office regarding
       coordinating the SP Programs that fall under the MDAs and other stakeholders;
   •   Acts as the Secretary to the NSPIAF taking minutes at the IAF meetings; chaired
       by the Chief of Staff; and
   •   Briefs the Parliamentary Committee on SP if so requested.

The SP Secretariat was to roll out the key functions highlighted in the SP policy plus
additional responsibilities on the SSNP project. The secretariat is anticipated to have
different units that will address different risks and vulnerabilities. It is not anticipated
to address the needs of only a specific project. The current design of the Secretariat is
skewed towards the SSNP.


                                            25
Diagram 3: Social Safety Nets Project SP Institutional Set-up



          SP in NaCSA Ins tu onal Set-up




              NaCSA Current Structure




                                      26
Diagram 4: SSNP Agreed Organization Structure Showing Location of Social
Protection Secretariat (SPS).




Discussion of the Organograms

Diagram 3 shows the SSNP institutional set-up that depicts the three pillars policy
authorizing environment, the coordination platform and the implementation arm as well
as the various actors by level. The SPS is directly accountable to the Commissioner and
NaCSA Board and also relates with the SP Technical Steering Committee. NaCSA
proceeded to introduce a structure that places the SPS under one of its departmental
senior directors, a move that dilutes the Secretariat’s role especially with regard to
serving other sectors as originally intended. The Secretariat collaborates with NaCSA
directors the same way it does with other sector technical directors in the NSPTSC and
through information and data exchange.

In Diagram 4 is shown the structure that was agreed under the SSNP and reflected in the
PAD. Under that structure, the Secretariat is independent of and at par with the other
NaCSA departments as it is accountable to the Commissioner and relates with the TSC. It
seems that NaCSA did not adopt the organogram while other collaborating agencies
proceeded as though this was the structure in operation. That difference in interpretation
may have been one of the underlying causes of the poor working relations between other
sectors and NaCSA.


                                          27
NaCSA’s Performance

The following key achievements are of NaCSA

   •   Put in place systems for use by the SSNP as shown by the SP programs’ reports (See
       Annex);
   •   Completed targeting and enrollment of 22917 extremely poor and vulnerable
       HH (Dec. 2015);
   •   Allocated payments made by fourth quarter excerpt for issues of – absenteeism,
       death, migration, Lost SIM, lost documentation (enrolment certificate);
   •   World Bank and DFID provided $14.3 million to support an additional 7,000
       beneficiaries under the RE-SSN for six months starting September 2016, a sign of
       confidence in the performance of the Project coordinated by the Secretariat.




Table 5: SSNP Performance


Programme            Variant         Districts              Total no. of households paid
Social Safety Nets   Phase I         Bombali, Kono,                      2,720
                                     Moyamba & Western
                                     Rural
Social Safety Nets   Phase II        Bombali, Kono,                    10,827
                                     Moyamba & Western
                                     Rural
Social Safety Nets   Phase III       Bombali, Kono,                    9,370
                                     Moyamba & Western
                                     Rural
Labour Intensive     Phase II        Bombali, Kono,                     4704
Works                                Moyamba & Western
Programme                            Rural
                                                    TOTAL              27,624




                                           28
6.       Options for Housing the Social Protection Secretariat

The Government of Sierra Leone (GoSL) led by NSPIAF has been reviewing the Social
Protection Policy and accompanying options for the housing of the SPS for the
remainder of the SSNP life (2019) and beyond. The current policy needs revision and
updating to take into account the lessons learned from implementing the successful
Ebola response, the SSNP and other social protection programs. Among the proposed
changes is the introduction of the National SP Authority in place of the IAF. A Cabinet
Paper and follow-up Legislation to enable that is being drafted.

Going forward, the IAF would be transformed into a National SP Authority and three
options are proposed for the positioning and organizational location of the SP
Secretariat:
   a) remain under NaCSA – existing arrangement;
   b) move to the Office of Head of Programs (HOP) in the President’s Office, and
   c) move the Secretariat and the Safety Nets Project to HOP in the Office of the
President.

The Options are discussed in turn below:

a) Remain under NaCSA – existing arrangement;

Advantages under this arrangement

Retaining the existing arrangements with or without some modifications remains a
viable option. The reason behind that is one of cost and time considerations. The
advocates of the option content that with modest changes to current reporting lines,
improvements in relations between the Commission leadership and other sectors
actors, and Secretariat staff, normalcy would be restored. In addition, there is
acknowledgement that the existing arrangement has delivered tangible results on the
back of the following conditions:

     •   Clear legal mandate and enabling legislation – NaCSA Act 2008;
     •   Defined programs and projects with clear objectives and expected results;
     •   Operational frameworks and procedures;
     •   Clear institutions, formal organization structures and staff in place;
     •   Funding – accumulated disbursement USD $50 million in 2014;
     •   Track record of accountability for funds received; and
     •   Record of results and performance in delivering safety nets –Community Driven
         Development (CDD) programs, cash transfers.

Critique of SP Secretariat Under NaCSA

While accepting that at design the NSPIAF agreed to place the SPS under NaCSA as a
provisional measure for a period of two years, there was a general consensus that this
arrangement was not ideal given the multi-sectoral nature of SP. As the two years drew


                                           29
to a close, the SP stakeholders made a number of observations that militated in favor of
moving the SPS to an Agency that had a bigger oversight role over most if not all the SP
actors. Below are some of the observations made:

   •   MDAs are taking on more and more responsibilities from NaCSA whose staffing
       levels are declining at Regional levels and below. The big challenge is that the
       MDAs are not reporting all the SP data from the activities they are carrying-out
       because of the poor relations with NaCSA.
   •   The Secretariat is therefore constrained in terms of performing its core functions
       – administering an integrated SP system;
   •   Secretariat is detached from the Agencies it is meant to work closely with, i.e.
       IAF, President’s Office, Sector Ministries and Steering Committee;
   •   Multiple accountabilities, the Secretariat reports to – Commissioner and his
       Deputy, NaCSA Board, National Social Protection Technical Steering Committee,
       National SP Authority (NSPA), President’s Office and Parliamentary Committee
       on SP;
   •   Secretariat subjected to many in-house clearances – Senior Directors for
       Programs, M&E and Support Services; and
   •   Other SP programs outside NaCSA forced to play ‘second fiddle’ to NaCSA, e.g.
       MGWCA, MoFED/Integrated Project Administration Unit(IPAU), MLSS, ministry
       of Health and Sanitation (MHS), MLSS, Ministry of Youth;

NaCSA Constraints to Housing the SPS

   •   SP Policy mandate provided for an National SP Authority that would be in the
       President’s Office, chaired by Chief of Staff;
   •   The Secretariat was accountable to the NSPIAF;
   •   SP Policy provided for Ministerial level membership to the NSPIAF;
   •   There was a two year cap to NaCSA housing the SPS, it lapses in 2016;
   •   The Secretariat’s functions are cross sectoral, hence the need for it to be equally
       accessible to all sectors, NaCSA being a Commission does not provide that level
       of access;
   •   Sector unease at being required to report to a Commission and soured relations
       with the Commission;
   •   Weak Commission support to the Secretariat and perceived victimization of
       Secretariat staff as shown by lower salaries of SPS staff and exclusion of same
       staff from annual salary reviews;
   •   Although NaCSA has Regional Staff, the numbers have been dwindling signaling a
       declining role as the MDAs takeover the routine functions: 124 in 2012, 78 by
       2015 (NaCSA HR records); 50% of the 78 are support staff 32% are managers;

b) Move the SP Secretariat to the Office of the President until the National
SP Authority is established
This option is consistent with the original intention in the SP Policy document that
established the IAF through the Presidential Executive Order. An agency placed under
the President’s Office need not necessarily be located within that office physically,
appropriate premises would be identified for the Secretariat and rentals for same paid
out of the SPS resources. The practice of placing an important agency under the PO is
not new and need not tie that agency to the internal management of the President office.


                                           30
There is acknowledgement that there would be important overlaps with NaCSA on
payments, communication, M&E and reporting. Managing those critical collaborative
areas would mean that the position of an SP Program Manager would be retained in the
Commission. The roles and functions of the Manager would be to ensure the smooth
implementation of SSNP functions that remain under NaCSA (see Tables 1 to 3).


Advantages

The following are the advantages that are likely to be realized form moving the SPS to
the Chief of Staff’s Office:

      Elevates the SP agenda and gives it the visibility and clout that it deserves as a
       multi-sectoral program that addresses poverty;
      The Office of the Chief of Staff has the convening authority that would ensure
       that the Ministers attend the SP policy coordination meetings where decisions
       regarding collaboration are made and agreed;
       Sector ministers and senior officials would provide direct feedback on the
       performance of their SP programs as they participate more freely on the Steering
       and Technical Committees, and inform other actors on their sector norms and
       standards as well as take back other sectors information;
      Direct physical Office allocation to SPS, though supervised and supported by the
       COS would give it a deserved independence that would make it more accessible
       to other SP agencies and actors;
      Enhanced SPS capacity through direct placement of Technical Specialists in
       financial management procurement, M&E, MIS and IEC;
      Improved motivation and productivity of SPS staff as they move away from the
       ‘negative tensions’ currently being experienced under NaCSA;
      All SP data integration and reporting would be easier and more comprehensive
       as sector agencies feel motivated to relate with a freestanding SPS;
      SP Information exchange and flow among the SP actors would improve thereby
       strengthening SP collaboration;
      Current financial arrangements under the Credit Agreement would not need
       major restructuring and the Secretariat will engage a financial management
       specialist to process its expenses and interact with the NaCSA Senior Director,
       Finance;
      Cash flow to beneficiaries would not be disrupted (see Payment Table 2) since
       that has always been done by SPLASH with support form NaCSA regional staff as
       well as from sector extension workers. SPS does spot checks selectively as part
       of quality control;
      Similarly M&E is a structured SPS function in support of both implementation
       and assessment of compliance to guidelines; NaCSA cash transfer staff continue
       to monitor their own performance throughout the phases of the project cycle
       and report on the results to the Board as well as to the SPS using the standard SP
       reporting forms;




                                           31
Disadvantages

      Fiduciary Concerns: the movement of the SPS may raise some financial concerns
       regarding timely accountability. However, it is worth noting that, Splash, a
       private sector entity is paying out beneficiaries, in coordination with NaCSA and
       sector frontline extension workers and SPS Staff. There is room for flexibility and
       contracting some of the sensitive aspect of payment;
      Disruption of current SSNP implementation especially data collection, storage,
       reporting and dissemination as staff settle into new offices;
      Loss of the contribution from the other NaCSA safety nets Units and staff;


c) Move the Secretariat and the Safety Nets Project to the Chief of Staff’s
(COS) Office

The possibility of moving both the Secretariat and the Safety Nets Programs falling
under NaCSA has been considered. It is important to note that although NaCSA
implements other interventions, removal of the Safety Nets would remove the main
reason for its existence.

Advantages

Moving the Secretariat and the SSNP to the Chief of Staff’s Office would have the
advantage that:

      SP programs fall under one roof and are easier to coordinate;
      Ministers and other senior MDAs officials would attend and participate in
       NSPIAF/SP Authority meetings and ensure decisions are made and
       implemented;
      The SSNP components of ‘building blocks of the safety nets system and income
       transfer’ would remain under one roof thereby facilitating smooth project
       implementation;
      Chief of Staff will address some of the administrative bottlenecks and complaints
       tabled regarding NaCSA processing;

Disadvantages

There are real downsides to moving the SPS as well as the SP programs and SNNP to the
Chief of Staff’s Office. That would require placing the NaCSA under that office.

      Repealing the NaCSA Act 2008 and passing a new legislation that would separate
       safety nets programs from the other interventions that include CDD operations
       currently lumped together with the SN and being implemented by NaCSA maybe
       politically challenging just before elections. NaCSA is by and large viewed as the
       home of safety nets even though other agencies such as National Insurance Trust
       (NASSIT) implement the social safety net projects for the aged and the pension
       scheme;



                                           32
         If SNP also moves to that office, the modalities for processing that would be both
         time consuming and demanding given how intertwined the project activities to
         the other NaCSA activities;
        The negative tensions within NaCSA would be imported and therefore continue
         to negatively affect the Secretariat and SP programs.


7.       Findings and Recommendations
The following are the findings of the SP coordination institutional assessment and
review:

        SP pivotal to the fight against poverty in SL;
        Government acknowledged the contribution of the SP program to the Agenda for
         Prosperity as a potential driver for growth and economic transformation;
        The institutional set-up proposed in the SP policy document was not
         immediately implemented, instead, there was agreement to house the
         Secretariat in the existing Commission, NaCSA, given its experience with
         community driven interventions that reached the poor, i.e. CDD programs;
        SP Systems developed, tested and put in place provided platform to fight Ebola;
         the Secretariat was pivotal and led the screening and measurement tools to
         identify the beneficiaries;
        Complementarity of the agencies providing SP services (See Tables 1 to 3)
         delivered results to the beneficiaries under the Ebola program and subsequently
         under the SSNP;
        Given the multiplicity of actors in SP programs, housing of the SP Secretariat in a
         Commission, NaCSA, led to limited participation by other sectors including
         refusal to share SP data via the Secretariat;
        Negative tensions that developed between the MDAs, other SP providers and
         NaCSA have led to demands that the SP Secretariat be moved to the Office of the
         Chief of Staff. It was felt that the multi-sectoral nature of SP interventions
         required that the Secretariat be placed under an Institution that had authority
         and clout, qualities that the COS’s office had;
        The SSNP had demonstrated the complementarity of the two components –
         systems building and income transfer – while recognizing that the services of the
         Secretariat catered for more than the activities implemented by NaCSA;
        Strengthening the ability of the Secretariat to provide key support to MDAs and
         other actors required modest restructuring (see proposed organogram Diagram
         3) and hiring of a few key staff, i.e. finance, procurement, M&E, and MIS, to
         ensure were considered, full integration and integrity of data on SP in the social
         registry for ease of access by the various stakeholders; and
        Although three Options for strengthening SP coordination by finding a suitable
         home for the SPS were considered, the Option to move the SPS to the COS’s Office
         as originally intended under the SP Policy seems to have carried the day;

Based on the above findings, the following recommendations for action were
made and a modest organizational restructuring was proposed (see Diagram 5):




                                             33
     GOSL should adopt measures to formalize adoption of Option 2 and implement it
      during the remaining life of the SSNP – to 2019;
  •   NSPIAF should formally endorse MLSS’s efforts to steer the SP Bill with the
      proposed changes through Cabinet and Parliament. The Ministry took the lead
      with the tabling of the earlier SP programs under NaCSA Act of 2008;
  •   Formalize institutional and organizational changes needed to place the
      Secretariat under the NSP Authority. Critical staff needed for the Authority to
      perform its functions including reporting to the Donors in time, etc. IAF to
      engage NaCSA and agree a schedule of transfer of responsibilities to SP
      Authority.
  •   NSPIAF to engage NaCSA and agree a schedule of transfer of responsibilities to
      SP Authority;
  •   Identify gaps in SPS capacity to carry out its full functions, i.e. collection and
      compilation of data and information on performance, technical staffing, financial
      management, and agree next actions to fill that;
  •   IAF should actively oversee the performance of respective Actors per the Tables
      1 to 3 above;
  •   Chairman IAF convenes briefing meeting to clarify mandate and reporting issues;
  •   NSPTSC proposes staffing needs – strengthen Systems/MIS, monitoring,
      payments specialist, and training on use of systems; and
  •   Location – Chief of Staff finds office space that need not be physically within the
      President’s office, etc.
  •   A timetable should be prepared for carrying out the above.



Diagram 5: Social Protection Secretariat Proposed Organogram


                                           President’s
                 SP Authority             Office Head of
                                            Programs




                      TSC                 Director, SPS




                                                           GRM Officer
               Systems/MIS      SPRINT      Payments                     M&E Officer
                                                              (ACC
                Specialist      Manager     Specialist
                                                            secondee)




         Policy validation
         Technical validation
        Reporting




                                                           34
To make the secretariat more inclusive it is important to take into consideration its
approved mandates both in the SP policy and Strategy as below and its project specific
in the SSNP and future SP projects.

(a) According to the SP Policy the establishment of the secretariat has among others,
     three main objectives:
i. to have an agency that will bring all sp players together for efficient, and cost-
effective delivery of sp services
ii. to have efficient and cost effective monitoring, evaluation, reviewing and
reporting systems in place
iii. to enhance stakeholder participation and accountability in sp delivery,
administration and management.

(b) The secretariat will have the following mandates:
1.    Day-to-day implementation of the National Social Protection Policy and
      strategic plan.
2.    Provide linkages and flow of information to the various partners
3.    Ensure that sector actors prioritize Social Protection programmes in the
      annual budget.
4.    Facilitate/undertake fund raising and resource mobilization for Social
      Protection activities and capacity building.
5.    Facilitate programmes design, implementation and coverage issues
6.    Conduct overall monitoring, evaluation, review of Social Protection policies
      and reporting.
7.    Promote knowledge management
8.    Design, maintain and operate a Social Protection Information Management
      System (SPIMS).
9     Construct a central registry on all beneficiaries of Social Protection
      programmes in the country.
10.   Use SPIMS to track all complementary Social Protection initiatives, thereby
      strengthening inter-sectoral linkages within the National programme for
      maximum impact.

(c ) The structure below was the one discussed and approved in the 10th May 2013
meeting by the NSPIAF and other key stakeholders. It has a general mandate as
explained above. However AIF agreed that since the Secretariat was to be housed at
NaCSA and is also crucial for the implementation of the SSNP for the Director to account
to the IAF through NaCSA commissioner as indicated in the diagram 2
above.




                                          35
36
Annexes
Annex 1: People Met: Institutional Assessment of the Social Protection Secretariat
Institution                  Name                       Designation
Office of the president      Mr. Saidu Conton Sesay     Chief of staff
Ministry Of Social           Mr. Moijue Kaikai          Minister (Former)
Welfare, Gender &            Mr. Paul Fomba             Director of Planning
Children Affairs             Mr. Francis Kabia          Director of Social Services
Ministry of Finance &        Ms. Hawa Musa              Senior Planning Officer
Economic Development         Mr. Adams kargbo           Director- Local Government
                                                        Finance Department
                             Mr. Mohamed Sherriff       Local Government Program
                                                        support Officer
Ministry of Labour &         Hon. Dr. Mathew            Minister
Social Security              Teambo
                             Mr. Thomas Kamara          Regional Coordinator Western
                                                        Area- Social safety net
Ministry of Youth Affairs    Hon. Alimamy Kamara        Minister (Former)
                             Mr. Philip Maheyni         Deputy Director
Ministry of Health and       Mr. Yayah Conteh           Donor Liaison Officer
Sanitation
National Commission for      Mr. Alie Badara            Commissioner
Social Action                Mansaray
                             Ms. Haja Isatu Kamara      Deputy Commissioner
                             Dr. Susan Robert           Senior Director M&E
                             Mr. Sorie Turay            Manager, AHRM
                             Mr. Saidu Lawrence         Finance Manager
                             Sesay
                             Mr. Brima .O.Kanu          M&E officer
                             Ms. Junta Fatima Baghali   District Coordinator Western
                                                        Area
National Social Protection   Mr. Mohamed Rashid         Director
Secretariat                  Bah
                             Mr. Abraham Kailie         GRM officer
                             Mr. Harould Koroma         M&E officer
                             Mr. Cliford Pabs Garnon    Systems Analyst
                             Ms. Anie Gbateh            Admin Assistant
Civil Society Organization   Ms. Christain Baun         Coordinator
Human Rights                 Ms. Jestina King           Deputy commissioner
Commission
UNICEF                       Ms. Maryam Abdu            Chief Social Policy & Planning
                                                        Officer
                             Mr. Aristide Kliem         Social Policy Officer




                                            37
Annex 2: SCHEDULE SP PROGRAMS: SOURCES OF SP DATA
•      Cash transfer programs – RE-SSN for Ebola victims, SSNP: NaCSA, SPLASH,
       MLGRD, MSWCGA;
•      Subsidies for school feeding, Education, Fuel, food & farming MEST, MoFED,
       MTI, MAFFS, Chamber of commerce, SSL,MLGRD, Partners;
•      Emergencies & shocks - ONS, MWHI, MAFFS, OCOS, Partners, NaCSA;
•      Old age and disability pensions-MLSS, NASSIT, MoFED, Disability commission,
       SSL, Partners;
•      Unemployment & productivity programs-MLSS, MYA, NaYCOM, NaCSA, MAFFS,
       CSO, OCOS, MLGRD, SSL Partners
•      Nutrition for health, lactating mother, <6yr / chronically sick, PLHIV/TB-MoHS,
       MEST, MAFFS, NaCSA, women Forum, Partners;

Key:

SSNP: Social Safety Nets Project
NaCSA:        National Commission for Social Action
MLGRD:        Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development
MSWCGA:       Ministry of Social Welfare Children and Gender
MEST: Ministry of Education Science and Technology
MoFED:        Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
MTI:          Ministry of Trade and Industry
MAFFS:        Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security
SSL:          Sierra Leone Statistics
MWHI:         Ministry of Works, Housing and Infrastruture
OCOS:         Office of he Chief of Staff
MLSS: Ministry of Labor and Social Security
MYA:          Ministry of Youth Affairs
NaYCOM:       National Youth Commission
PLHIV:        People: Living with HIV




                                         38
     Job Descriptions Summary
Position     Functions                                                                                                                     Day-to-day       Quarterly reporting
                                                                                                                                           reporting

Director,          Coordinate development of effective delivery systems (effective mapping of resource allocation, targeting, payments,   Chief of Staff   SP Authority
SPS                 MIS, GRM)
                   Lead the Secretariat in establishing strategic coordination mechanisms across and MDAs/partners delivering SP
                    interventions
                   Report to the SP Authority on the progress in SP activities nationally and assist in formulating policies, goals and
                    implementation plans
                   Provide guidance for the day-to-day implementation of the National Social Protection Policy and Strategy
                   Support national and international dissemination of SP evidence and facilitate SP training at various levels
                   Ensure sector actors give adequate prioritization to SP programs in the annual budget
Payment            Generate payment lists for flagship SSN programs                                                                       Director, SPS    NSPTSC
Specialist         Design and update payment systems operational manuals
                   Develop payment operations and assessment tools (e.g., spot checks, reconciliation tools) and support their
                    implementation
SPRINT             IT Oriented person                                                                                                     Director, SPS    NSPTSC
Manager            Design and update SPRINT guidelines and operational procedures and support implementation of systems
                   Develop/commission and update targeting operations and assessment tools (e.g., poverty maps, targeting
                    instruments, spot check tools) and support their implementation
                   Ensure regular and accurate SPRINT individual and household data updates by programs & MDAs/partners
Systems            Design and update ICT systems specifications and operational manuals                                                   Director, SPS    NSPTSC
Specialist         Support implementation of ICT systems and tools (e.g., smartphone and SMS-based applications)
                   Conduct regular testing and adjustments of SPRINT and MIS functions as needed for systems operations
GRM                Liaises with the ACC, NaCSA (existing in NaCSA) – tools for GRM and coordinates with the ACC to resolve)               Director, SPS    NSPTSC
Officer            Develop/commission and update GRM operations and assessment tools (e.g., poverty maps, electronic
                    questionnaires, spot check tools)
                   Follow progress of MDAs/partners in GRM tracking and resolution and support GRM implementation
                   Facilitate training for MDAs/partners on use of GRM systems
                   Conduct random spot checks of GRM operational processes and databases to identify and rectify issues
M&E                Conduct national level SP implementation progress reviews and identify issues for SP Authority attention               Director, SPS    NSPTSC
Officer            Commission/conduct random spot checks of delivery systems processes (targeting and payments) and SPRINT/MIS
                    databases
                   Generate evidence to inform systems design, resource allocation, and operational practices
                   Facilitate training for MDAs/partners on use of the SPRINT & MIS for tracking results and provide technical support
                    for design of robust evaluations
