               2018
BACKGROUND PAPER

LEARNING
to realize education’s promise




ACHIEVING SDG4
THROUGH A
HUMAN RIGHTS BASED
APPROACH TO EDUCATION
Kate Moriarty
University of Sussex
This background paper was prepared for the World Development Report 2018 LEARNING to Realize Education’s
Promise. It is made available here to communicate the results of the Bank’s work to the development community
with the least possible delay. The manuscript of this paper therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the
procedures appropriate to formally-edited texts. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
paper do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments
they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
            Achieving SDG4
               through a
Human Rights Based Approach to Education




  A Background Paper for World Development Report 2018




                  Author: Kate Moriarty




                                                         1
List of acronyms
ACHPR – African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights
CEDAW – Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women
CERD – Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
CRC – Convention on the Rights of the Child
CRPD – Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
CSOs – Civil Society Organisations
EFA – Education for All
ESCR – Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
GCE – Global Campaign for Education
GCPEA – Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack
GDP – Gross Domestic Product
GNP – Gross National Product
GPE – Global Partnership for Education
HRBA – Human Rights-Based Approach
HRBA-E – Human Rights-Based Approach to Education
ICESCR – International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
IDS – Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex
IFFEd – International Financing Facility for Education
IFFIm – International Finance Facility for Immunization
IIEP – International Institute for Education Planning
MDGs – Millennium Development Goals
NGO – Non-Governmental Organisation
ODA – Overseas Development Assistance
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OHCHR – Office High Commissioner for Human Rights
RTE – Right to Education Project
SDGs – Sustainable Development Goals
SDG4 – Sustainable Development Goal 4 on education
UDHR – Universal Declaration of Human Rights
UN – United Nations
UNICEF – United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
UNESCO – United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNESCO GEM – Global Education Monitoring report (formally known as the GMR)
UNESCO GMR – Global Monitoring Report for EFA
UIS – UNESCO Institute of Statistics
WB – World Bank

Keywords: Education, human rights, rights-based, quality, SDG4.

Note: This paper was produced for the World Bank as a background paper for World Development Report
2018, its contents represent the views of the author and not World Bank policy or opinion.

Author: Kate Moriarty is a consultant in human rights and international development, specialising in education
policy and advocacy. Kate started her career at Amnesty International, where she became the Global Coordi-
nator for Human Rights Education, she has since worked for a number of NGOs such as Save the Children,
the Malala Fund and undertaken consultancies for a range of organisations, such as the Global Campaign for
Education, the Norwegian Refugee Council, Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack, and Their-
world. Kate also worked at UNESCO where she was Chief of Section of Education for Peace and Human
Rights. Kate is a qualified teacher, with a BSc in Sociology from the London School of Economics and an MA
in politics and development from the Institute of Latin American Studies. She is currently undertaking doctoral
research at the University of Sussex focused on SDG4.


                                                                                                             2
Introduction

Quality education is a critical dimension for the achievement of sustainable development. Goal 4 of the new
sustainable development agenda recognises this and makes a renewed commitment to ensure inclusive and
equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all by 2030 (UN, 2015). The Edu-
cation 2030 agenda also recognizes that sustainable development goal 4 (SDG4) is “[...] rights-based and in-
spired by a humanistic vision of education and development, based on the principles of human rights [....]
shared responsibility and accountability.” (UNESCO, 2015, p.6). The renewed political commitment set out in
SDG4 is an opportunity to ensure strong coherence between education policy and the right to education first
articulated more than 70 years ago.

This paper presents the results of a desk-based study on a human rights-based approach to education (HRBA-
E) in the context of SDG4. It explores the ways in which such an approach can guide policy, planning, and the
delivery of education in observance with agreed international frameworks providing for the right to education.
The paper argues that the human rights conventions on the right to education are not passive instruments
designed to remain only at the level of discourse but, as legal obligations, require action from the State and
should be central in the development of education services, including in the context of large scale displacement
and crisis. This paper outlines the legally binding commitments of the right to education. It considers how these
can be applied practically through a human rights-based approach to education (HRBA-E) to address the con-
tinuing barriers to access and completion of quality education and learning.

A HRBA-E is a conceptual and practical framework to translate into action the standards set out in the right
to education. It aims to ensure that education systems and services are coherent with, and do not undermine,
the legal obligations to respect, protect, and fulfill these conventions. It provides direction on operationalizing
the standards set out in the international conventions that deal with the right to education to address issues at
the center of debate in SDG4, such as quality, learning, equity, financing, as well as the public and private
provision of education. It is an approach that helps to fulfil states’ obligations, actively addressing discrimination
and encouraging targeted action for the poorest and most vulnerable children. The paper presents evidence
that suggests a HRBA-E can enable more equitable and efficient education systems, concluding that adopting
a HRBA-E creates a greater potential for the achievement of SDG4.

The paper is structured in four sections that examine: (1) the promise of education and the scale of unfulfilled
obligations; (2) the conceptual roots of a human-rights approach and its application to education; (3) how a
HRBA-E is central to issues critical for the achievement of SDG4, such as learning, equity and financing; and
(4) the issue of accountability: the World Bank and human rights, final reflections on a HBRA-E and SDG4.

As a desk based study this paper is constrained in its scope. Further research in this area using primary data
and cases studies could offer more in-depth evidence and assessment to further illustrate and evaluate this type
of approach.

Section 1: The Promise of Education
1.1 The Promise of Education: a Driving Force for Development

Globally, one in every ten people live in extreme poverty, facing a daily struggle to survive with limited oppor-
tunities to escape the social and economic deprivations that may have affected their families for generations.
The sustainable development agenda renews the commitment of governments and their partners to transform
the world economically, socially, and environmentally, for lasting and significant change that has both people
and the planet at its center. Respect for human rights—including the right to education—and equality are fun-
damental to the vision of a sustainable future, where everyone has the opportunity to realize their full potential
and no one is left behind (UN, 2015).


                                                                                                                    3
Education is one of the 17 sustainable development goals (SDGs) and governments, with their international
partners, have made a commitment to “ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all” (Sustainable Development Goal 4 – SDG4). Education is a public good, valued
universally by people around the world regardless of socio-economic or cultural background, and by govern-
ments of all political persuasions. It is a major driving force for development: no country has achieved devel-
opment without universalising education and no country has universalised education without meeting its obli-
gations to ensure free, quality, inclusive education for all. Without quality, equitable, and inclusive education
low and middle income countries will struggle to reach greater development and developed countries will fail
to address long-standing inequality within their population.

Quality education is an end in itself, enriching knowledge and enhancing the capacity to analyze and understand
a broad range of topics, and is the means to more inclusive and sustainable societies. From health outcomes to
economic prosperity, access to and completion of equitable, quality education can help transform the lives of
individuals and their countries (UNESCO, 2014).

Recent data shows that “a good education” is the highest priority for people regardless of age, sex, level of
existing education, or where the person lives (MyWorld Analytics, 2015). Even in the most challenging situa-
tions of conflict and displacement, education is the top priority for affected populations (ODI, 2016), with Save
the Children finding that “99% of children in crisis situations see education as a priority” (Save the Children
UK, 2015, p.1). The value these children—and others—place on education is well founded. Quality education
makes an important contribution to an individual’s income, health and more active participation in society, with
benefits that reach beyond the individual to their families, community and country.

The evidence is clear, participation in quality education increases an individual’s prospect to gain higher wages
and can help break inter-generational cycles of poverty, and increases in average education levels of a population
create growth in a country’s GDP (UNESCO, 2014). The promise that education offers is enormous: “If all
students in low income countries left school with basic reading skills, 171 million people could be lifted out of
poverty, which would be equivalent to a 12% cut in world poverty” (UNESCO, 2010). The value of education
cannot and should not, however, be limited to monetary value alone—quality (rights based) education is a key
mechanism to support the realization of other human rights. It reduces child and maternal mortality, facilitates
healthier lives, and can translate into more active participation in political life of one’s country, increasing elec-
toral turnout (UNESCO, 2014). It can help build more tolerant societies (Ibid) and reduces the risk of conflict
(World Bank, 2005).

Through the ratification of one or more international human rights treaties all States have made a legal com-
mitment to provide free, quality, inclusive education for all (Aubry and Dorsi, 2016). For all children, including
those growing up in poverty, conflict, or other fragile context or marginalized communities, quality education
offers hope: hope of a better future where they can develop to their full potential. The promise of education,
however, is more than just hope, it is every child’s right, enshrined in international law and translated into
obligations that require States to respect, protect, and fulfil this right without discrimination.

1.2 The Right to Education: Respect, Protect, and Fulfil

The right to education was first articulated almost 70 years ago in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(UDHR). Although the UDHR itself is not a legally binding document, it set a common standard for all people
and countries, outlining a set of fundamental human rights to be fulfilled and protected universally without
discrimination. Among its provisions, Article 26 of the UDHR declared that “[e]veryone has the right to edu-
cation”, and that education “be directed to the full development of the human personality and to the strength-
ening of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms” (UN, 1948). Subsequent human rights conven-
tions, such as the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) and the UN
Convention of the Rights of the Child (CRC), make the universal right to education a legally binding obligation


                                                                                                                    4
on those States who have signed and ratified these treaties. Article 13 of the ICESCR reaffirms the commitment
that everyone has the right to education without discrimination, and it sets out more specific details about the
provisions of education at different levels. It establishes that primary education should be free and compulsory
and that secondary education should be “made generally available and accessible to all by every appropriate
means, and in particular by the progressive introduction of free education” (Article 13 (b), ICESCR). Article 13
also makes recommendations on the progressive introduction of free higher education based on capacity, and
promotes fundamental education for people who have not completed primary education. The CRC stresses
that education should enable a child to develop to their fullest potential, promote human rights and fundamen-
tal freedoms, and that it should prepare “the child for responsible life in a free society, in the spirit of under-
standing, peace, tolerance, equality of sexes, and friendship among all peoples, ethnic, national and religious
groups and persons of indigenous origin” (Article 29 (d) CRC). Central to all international human rights treaties
is the principal of non-discrimination. Each person is equal to the next, all rights apply equally, and no one
should suffer discrimination on the basis of their ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, because of disabilities,
their religion, nationality, language, or wealth. A number of conventions, namely the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (1969), the Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW, 1979), and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (CRPD, 2008) deal specifically with discrimination. UNESCO established the first binding obliga-
tion relating to education in its Convention against Discrimination in Education in 1960, which clearly sets out
the principle of non-discrimination and equality of opportunity in education and to which all its Member States
are accountable. These conventions also confer obligations on States with regard to education, reinforcing the
need for governments to take ongoing and proactive action to address discrimination in education access, com-
pletion, and learning.

The provisions on the right to education international law are robust and long-standing, establishing both the
access to as well as the aims of education. The ICESRC determines that “education shall enable all persons to
participate effectively in a free society, promote understanding, tolerance and friendship among all nations and
all racial, ethnic or religious groups, and further the activities of the United Nations for the maintenance of
peace.” (Article 13, 1 ICESRC) The ICESR, the CRC, and other human rights treaties also clearly establish that
education shall be directed at developing respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. This aspect of
the right to education was given increased visibility by the UN General Assembly, which launched a Decade
for Human Rights Education, which ran from 1995-2004, and the subsequent World Programme for Human
Rights Education (2005-ongoing) (UN, 2014).

In addition to human rights law, humanitarian law also provides protection of the right to education. The IV
Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Person in Times of War (UN, 1949) prohibits the
targeting of civilians and what are classified as ‘civilian objects’, which includes schools and hospitals (UN,
2013). In fact, “[t]he deliberate targeting or destruction of schools or hospitals (or other civilian objects) may
amount to grave breaches of the law of armed conflict.” (Ibid, p. 19). The same convention mentions education
in six of its articles, for example it determines that education is “facilitated in all circumstances” (Article 24) and
that the “education of children and young people shall be ensured; they shall be allowed to attend schools”
(Article 94) (Red Cross, 2017). The Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees adopted in 1951, protects
the right to education, affirming that refugees be treated equally to nationals of the host country in respect to
elementary education, and as favorable as possible for other levels of education, including the remission of fees
and recognition of previous studies (i.e. school certificates, diplomas, degrees). This protection for refugee
children and the obligation to provide them with assistance, to have their rights upheld is times of crisis also
reaffirmed in the CRC (Article 22).

The protection of attacks against schools, which as mentioned above are classified as ‘civilian objects’, was
further strengthened in 2011 with the UN Security Council Resolution 1998 that added attacks on schools and
hospitals as a trigger for listing countries in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s Annual Report on Children
and Armed Conflict. The one exception to this protection is when schools are deemed to be used for military



                                                                                                                     5
purposes, whereby their status as a civilian object is no longer considered valid. The ‘Safe School Declaration’,
launched by the Government of Norway in 2015 (GCPEA 2015), has (at the time of writing) 64 signatories
(GCPEA, 2017), and signals political commitment to the ‘Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use During Armed Conflict’ (GCPEA 2014) ensuring schools remain protected as ‘civilian ob-
jects’.

In addition to international human rights treaties, regional human rights systems add strength to the projection
of human rights, with additional consideration of “regional customs, values, culture and practice”. Furthermore,
183 countries have legal provisions for compulsory education and 166 legal provisions for free education (UIS
infographic, 2015). The legal provision for education, whether through the ratification of international treaties,
regional systems, and/or national frameworks, is incredibly strong. In fact, “[a]ll States in the world ratified at
least one treaty protecting the right to education” (Aubry and Dorsi, 2016, p.3).

The right to education is universally recognized and there should be no excuse for lack of action to ensure its
progressive realization. The Declaration on the Right to Development specifically calls on states to “eliminate
obstacles to development resulting from failure to observe civil and political rights, as well as economic, social
and cultural rights” (UN, 1986, Article 6 (3)). Too often, however, State obligations and guarantees on the right
to education are not translated into policy or delivery of education services on the ground, this violates their
legal commitments and has devastating consequences not only for the individuals concerned but also for the
country’s own growth and development. A HRBA-E brings rights to the center of any global, national, or local
discussion and offers a path to the fulfillment of this right to education for all.

1.3 The Unfulfilled Promise of Education

Since the turn of the century important progress has been made in the realization of the right to education,
with the number of out-of-school primary school children declining by 42% between 2000 and 2012 (UIS,
2015, p.13). This has been driven in large part by global policy initiatives such as the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) and Education for All (EFA). While they may not be the only factor, the MDG goal on edu-
cation and the EFA movement, are credited with propelling progress, with an additional 34 million children
entering primary school between 2000-2015 than would have done so if previous trends had continued, and
there are also 30% more young people enrolled in secondary school globally than compared to 1999. Some
positive movement has also been made in achieving gender parity in education, with 63% of countries achieving
gender parity at primary level, however, indicators on gender parity get progressively worse the higher up the
education system with only 46% of countries achieving gender parity at lower secondary level and only a mi-
nority of 23% achieving gender parity at upper secondary (UNESCO, 2016). Despite positive trends, the en-
joyment of the right to education remains a distance dream for many children. Each day an estimated 263
million children and youth are denied an education (UNESCO, 2016). This is a human rights violation on a
massive scale against children, and it is the most vulnerable of these—the poorest children, disabled children,
girls, other minority groups—who are most likely to miss out on an education, with the vast majority unlikely
to ever set foot in a classroom.

Conflict and fragile political contexts are creating increased pressures on access to quality education, with a
global total of 65.3 million people displaced worldwide (UNHCR, 2016), with estimates that there were 31.1
million new internal displacements by conflict, violence, and disasters in 2016 alone—equivalent of one person
forced to flee their home every second (IDMC, 2017). The impact of conflict, fragility, and displacement on
education are enormous, an estimated “75 million children aged 3-18 years living in 35 crisis-affected countries
are in the most desperate need of educational support.” (ODI, 2016, p.10) For refugee children the picture is
bleak, with only half enrolled in primary school and less than 25% enrolled in secondary school (Ibid). Girls
are most severely impacted, “being 2.5 times more likely to be out of school than boys in countries affected by
conflict.” (Ibid, p.10).



                                                                                                                 6
The challenges of ensuring the right to education in situations of humanitarian crisis, with the breakdown or
weakening of education systems, is further impacted by more sinister actions, when in some instances state
forces and non-state armed groups deliberately attack education. These deliberate targeted attacks which num-
ber in the thousands, include “bombing, shelling or burning of schools or universities, or the killing, injury,
kidnapping, abduction or arbitrary arrest of students, teachers and academics” (GCPEA, 2014, p.41). These
attacks constitute a grave violation of human rights and humanitarian law, according to which civilians and
civilian objects, including schools, are protected.

The legacy of past—and ongoing—failures in fulfilling the right to education is evidenced by the 758 million
youth and adults who still do not have basic literacy skills. The scale of adult illiteracy has huge ramification for
other rights, and particular the right of women, who account for two-thirds of illiterate adults.1 Adult illiteracy
is a human rights violation because the “enjoyment of the right to fundamental education is not limited by age
or gender; it extends to children, youth and adults, including older persons.” (CESCR, 1999). These figures are
not only the result of lack of access but also reflect a crisis in learning, with significant numbers of children
who are in school not reaching minimum standards by grade 4. This learning crisis (discussed in more detail in
section 3) is estimated to affect at least 250 million children (UNESCO, 2014).

The right to education was first articulated in 1948 and yet, as the table from UNESCO shows, it will not be
until 2086 that universal access to primary school will be achieved (for girls), while projections for lower and
upper secondary level are for beyond 2100.




                                                                       (UNESCO, 2015e, p.3)

It is shocking that almost 70 years since the Universal Declaration of Human Rights first set out the right to
education, current projections suggest some children will have to wait another 70 years before even their uni-
versal right to primary education is achieved. There can be no legitimate reason why children and young people
are still be being denied their right to education other than it is simply not being given the political priority and
investment required. The speed of progress on fulfilling the right to both primary and secondary education is
already disgracefully slow, and governments and their international partners, such as the World Bank, must
make a new and concerted effort to ensure education is universal.

If the commitments made in SDG4, and the long-standing obligations on the right to education, are not ful-
filled, those children who are out of school or in poor quality education will learn only one lesson: that those
with power make promises they do not keep.

Governments should not view the fulfillment of the right to education as a burden but as an asset. A more
explicit focus on the provisions of right to education can aid the formation of a robust education policy, ensure
greater equity through planning, and strengthen the quality of delivery. A HRBA-E as described below has the




                                                                                                                   7
potential to help create more effective interventions in support of equity in access, completion, and learning at
all levels.

Section 2: Making Human Rights Central in Development and Education
2.1 What is a Human Rights-Based Approach?

In the late 1990s and early 2000s approaches to development began to take a more explicit and systematic
account of human rights frameworks, in what has become known as human rights-based approach (HRBA).
What this meant was rather than viewing human rights frameworks as something abstract or only as a back-
ground narrative, human rights should in fact be guiding decision-making and action. This approach largely
gained prominence through a global dialogue and reflection, that has its roots in the Declaration on the Right
to Development (1986), along with the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action (1993), which stated
clearly that all UN activities, including its international cooperation, should be concerned with the promotion
and protection of human rights. The HRBA was further propelled by reforms within the UN, which sought to
incorporate human rights frameworks across all UN decision-making processes (UN, 2003, para. 144). This
approach proposed a move away from development as charity with passive recipients receiving services, to an
understanding of development within the framework of rights-holders claiming that duty-bearers meet their
obligations. Prior to the emergence of a HRBA model, development was seen as responding to need without
necessarily addressing where failings in the systems had occurred.

Human rights treaties set standards that States, which are party to them, must act on. What this means in
practice is that States have:

             •   to respect: not to interfere with the exercise of a right;
             •   to protect: to ensure others do not interfere, primarily through effective regulation
                 and remedies;
             •   and to fulfil: including to promote rights, facilitate access to rights, and provide for
                 those unable to provide for themselves. (Amnesty International, 2005, p.19).

In essence, a HRBA is “a conceptual framework for the process of human development that is normatively
based on international human rights standards and operationally directed to promoting and protecting human
rights” (UN, HRBA portal, 2017). Using a HRBA makes visible the categories of those with an obligation to
ensure rights—the duty-bearers—and those who are entitled to enjoy these rights—the rights-holders. A
HRBA “automatically raises questions about the actions and accountability of duty-bearers” (Boesen and Mar-
tin, 2007), bringing the possibility of a stronger voice for rights-holders to demand change. This recognition of
the need for participation of rights-holders built on the influential work of Amartya Sen, which argued that
“achievement of development is thoroughly dependent on the free agency of people.” (Sen, 1999, p. 4)

For rights-holders using a HRBA provides a powerful platform for accountability. The Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights noted that accountability was the most important aspect of the HRBA (UN,
2002). Human rights frameworks provide clear standards to which governments are legally accountable, as well
as strengthen the ability of rights-bearers and those supporting them to focus on government lack of prioriti-
zation of rights and to call for increased or targeted action.2 A HRBA-E offers examples of where and how
operationalizing the right to education can potentially make the most difference and can thus help bring more
effective and equitable change.



2 Accountability remains a central theme for education and the UNESCO Global Education Monitoring will pub-
lish a major report on accountability for SDG4 in 2017.


                                                                                                               8
2.2 From Theory to Practice: the Core Principles of a HRBA-E

The integration of human rights as a guiding principal for development perhaps finds greatest synergy in rela-
tion to education. The symbiotic relationship between human rights and education, and education and human
rights, is a relationship that the late Katerina Tomasevski, former UN Special Rapporteur on the Right to Ed-
ucation, described as “a mutually defining process, each essential to the enhancement of the other”. Tomasev-
ski’s rationale is that “national and local education systems should be based on international human rights
treaties and, on the other hand, schools and the curriculum should contribute to the understanding and enjoy-
ment of human rights for all” (Tomasevski, 2004, p. ii). The concept of a HRBA-E is one where the right to
education is reflected in and through education. It is a system-wide approach, where the principles of human
rights are visible and articulated into practice at each stage of the policy, planning, and delivery of education
services.

A useful starting point to more fully understand how human rights obligations can translate into concrete policy
and planning considerations is the 4A’s framework developed by Katerina Tomasevski, which outlines the
explicit obligations of governments to make education “available, accessible, acceptable, and adaptable.” (To-
masevski, 2001). These categories relate directly to the explicit obligations of States, either as consequence of
ratifying international human rights treaties, or through their own constitutional guarantees and domestic law.
Awareness of the legal obligations and what these mean is an important starting point for both rights-holders
and duty-bearers, the latter of which include ministers, planners, regional and local authorities, and so on. In
practical terms this would mean that to meet its obligations on availability a government3 would have to ensure
there are enough “schools matching school-aged children (number, diversity)” (Ibid, p. 12), and require the
government to take action to ensure there are sufficient teachers, which would mean consideration of teacher
numbers and training (Ibid). To meet the standards set in the international human rights treaties governments
must also ensure the removal of any “legal and administrative barriers”, including “financial obstacles” and
undertake the “identification and elimination of discriminatory denials of access and obstacles to compulsory
schooling (fees, distance, schedule)” (Ibid). The Right to Education Project provides a helpful summary of the
4-As scheme:

     •   Availability – that education is free and government-funded and that there is adequate in-
         frastructure and trained teachers able to support education delivery.
     •   Accessibility – that the system is non-discriminatory and accessible to all, and that posi-
         tive steps are taken to include the most marginalized.
     •   Acceptability – that the content of education is relevant, non-discriminatory and culturally
         appropriate, and of quality; that the school itself is safe and teachers are professional.
     •   Adaptability – that education can evolve with the changing needs of society and contribute
         to challenging inequalities, such as gender discrimination, and that it can be adapted lo-
         cally to suit specific contexts (Right to Education Project, 2017).4

Rather than seeing the provisions of the right to education and their obligations under that framework as some-
thing to use only in the discourse of policy narratives, governments and their international partners should take
those provisions and obligations as a means to align multiple and complex demands and actions to streamline
and strengthen education systems. Delivering on the promise of education requires a focus on the right to
education, not in the background but as the foreground, driving policy formation, planning, and delivery of
education services, from central government through to the classroom. Adopting a HRBA requires system-



3 The government as the principle arm of the State which will plan and manage education, although other parts of
the State such as the legislature and judiciary and civil society also have a role.
4 In May 2017, the right to Education Project changed its name to the Right to Education Initiative.




                                                                                                               9
level change, with the analysis of the right to education as a core reference throughout each stage and non-
discrimination as a guiding principle.

Realizing the right to education through HRBA may sound complicated, however, basing education policy—
whether local, national, or global—on existing legal obligations to which all States have agreed helps focus
efforts in a clear direction. That is not to say implementing such an approach will not meet ideological resistance
from some quarters, however, in many cases this type of approach is already in place (although not necessarily
named) and makes practical sense. A HRBA-E will not bring immediate solutions, overcoming the challenges
facing education will take time and require systematic reforms and sustained investment. However, as UNICEF
claims, there is both an intrinsic and instrumental rationale for using a HRBA, as it is morally and legally the
correct thing to do and because it leads to better and more sustainable outcomes (UNICEF, 2016). Human
Rights principals are not abstract theoretical concepts but easily operationalized and should be integrated and
reflected in the policy, planning, and delivery of services by governments, as well as their international partners,
including the World Bank. A HRBA-E offers a holistic approach to operationalize the right to education, re-
specting normative instruments that embed the planning and delivery of education in the principals of
LEARN:5

         Legal standards of the right to education guide implementation;
         Empowering children through quality rights-based learning;
         Accountability of duty-bears to fulfill their obligations for education is upheld;
         Respect for the participation of rights-holders in their own education is constant;
         Non-Discrimination for all children to ensure equitable, inclusive learning is central.

Attention to these principles from those involved in providing education services at all levels—from local to,
national, to international partners—will enable greater equity and participation, more relevant learning out-
comes and stronger accountability and help achieve the targets of SDG4 more efficiently and effectively. Edu-
cation is “the primary vehicle by which economically and socially marginalized adults and children can lift
themselves out of poverty and obtain the means to participate fully in their communities.” (Art 13 (2) (d)
ICESCR), and “has a central role in disrupting the IGT of poverty, inequality, and disempowerment” (Bivens
et al., 2009, p. 97). However, lack of equitable access and poor quality delivery means millions of children are
still denied their right to education, with significant consequences for their lives, as well as their future families
and their country’s development (UNHRBA Portal, 2017)

2.3 Implementing the Right to Education

A HRBA-E is a useful tool that brings practical implications for priority setting and programming and can be
applied to identify “root causes of development problems and systemic patterns of discrimination” and to
define what interventions may be needed and help support the capacity of both duty bearers and rights holders
(UNHRBA Portal, 2017). This starts from the assessment of needs, to the setting of policy, though to what
actually happens in the schools and classroom based on “the claims of human rights in education and the
corresponding obligations of governments, as well as the immediate, underlying and structural causes of the
non-realization of rights.” (UNICEF/UNESCO, 2007, p. 13). It also requires an assessment of the ability of
rights-holders to claim their rights and an assessment of capacity-building interventions to support the State’s
ability to fulfill these where needed. Monitoring and evaluation of both educational processes and education
outcomes should also be guided by human rights standards and principles (Ibid). In other words, a HRBA-E
means bringing an explicit and systematic account of the right to education in all aspects of education—policy,
planning and delivery—and the areas underpinning them, such as budget allocations and qualified teachers.
The added value of a HRBA-E is that it establishes the scope of legal entitlement providing a framework for

5This formation of core HRBA-E principals is adapted from the PANEL principals (Scottish Human Right Com-
mission)


                                                                                                                  10
planning services and assessing progress accordingly, moving the process from rights in principle (i.e. set out
in a document or statement) to rights in practice (that these rights are actually ensured and enjoyed).

A HRBA-E can help determine government action, for example, having identified which children are being
discriminatively denied their right to education, specific polices can be formulated to remedy the rights viola-
tions—this starts with education policy. The UNESCO International Institute for Education Planning (IIEP)
works with ministries of education, including in fragile and conflict affected countries, to build resilience and
social cohesion into education systems. As a starting point their guidelines ask decisions-makers if: “[N]ational
policies reflect international commitments to equal educational opportunities [. . .] as required by the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and other international instruments?”
(IIEP, 2015, p. 9). Where international polices do not reflect international commitments to equal educational
opportunities, then they should be reviewed to include clear references to the right to education set out in the
different international conventions. Each aspect of the policy should respect human rights obligations and
principles and where necessary the policy should be expanded and/or refocused to ensure that it is robust in
its adherence to these standards. Education sector reviews should apply the right to education to guide im-
provements, for example the sector plan should include clear objectives to prevent and address any existing
discrimination against marginalized groups, such as girls or disabled children. Likewise, the policy should em-
phasize the participation of rights holders and their representatives, such as formalizing a role for parent ’s
groups or civil society participation.

The inclusion of human rights should not stop at the level of policy statements, a rights-based approach must
permeate each stage of the process, with the policy statements on rights guiding planning and delivery. Planning
education systems and delivery is a complex activity, it involves both supply and demand side factors. Identify-
ing where schools are needed per number of school-age students is a common practice, however, rather than
planning being focused on school enrolment rates alone, an expanded vision of planning is required to meet
children’s rights. This would take into account

        educational quality and process (the resources to which children have access) and educational
        outcomes (what competencies and capabilities are acquired and how they are valued). [....]
        Systematically planned inputs […] that anticipates where schools and teachers are needed and
        ensures that the availability of learning materials keeps pace with the numbers of children
        enrolled. (Lewin, 2015, p 29)

This type of extended planning can help negate non-enrolment or school dropout due to poor-quality education
that is not perceived to be relevant, especially given the high opportunity costs associated with a child going to
school in low-income households (Ibid). It also fits more closely with a HRBA to compatible with the 4As
framework. Children, their parents, and their community need to know that not only is there a school in place
but the education is relevant, otherwise it is no different to sending the sick to hospital only to give them the
wrong medicine (Banda, 2008). A HRBA-E has participation as a core principle, and while this may seem
burdensome, engaging rights-holders in policy development and planning will help overcome barriers and build
awareness of the benefits of education, as well as bringing forward local concerns or issues.

For example, in conflict and other contexts even if school are available and free, it may not be safe for girls to
travel to school or attend school due to risks of sexual violence (Amnesty International, 2008). Simply ensuring
school places are available would not be sufficient, they need to be accessible, acceptable, and adaptable to all
and education policy based on a HRBA would need to give clear direction on this. A HRBA-E makes explicit
the barriers that restrict groups of children attending school and/or why they do not stay in school, and directs
the best action to address them. The Global Partnership for Education (GPE) guidelines for Education Sector
Plans also emphasize that a holistic rights-based approach, which should include “coherence among subsectors,
with a specific attention to the levels attached to recognized education rights” (GPE et al, 2015, p.9). GPE’s
engagement of different stakeholders through its Local Education Groups (LEGs) is a way for rights-holders’



                                                                                                              11
voices to be included in education sector planning, by bringing ministries of education together with national
civil society groups, teachers unions, donors, international NGOs, and other government ministries.

Article 13 ICESCR states that “the development of a system of schools at all levels shall be actively pursued”
and that these schools should be physically accessible with sanitation facilities for both sexes, with safe drinking
water and other necessities (UN, 1999, p. 199). The SDG4 Means of Implementation Target (A) is in line with
these rights, and commits States to “Build and upgrade education facilities that are child, disability and gender
sensitive and provide safe, nonviolent, inclusive and effective learning environments for all” (SDG4) and those
with decision-making powers must keep both their political and legal commitments in mind as in their planning
and resource allocations. A HRBA-E approach not only includes the State actors working directly in the edu-
cation sector but other sectors such as the finance and health departments, as these sectors will impact directly
on the education system.6 Applying a HRBA means changes at each level of the education system, with policy
makers, planners, curriculum developers, teacher trainers, and others maintaining a focus on the provisions and
standards of the right to education and ensuring human rights standards are incorporated into their area of
responsibly. Education Management Information System (EMIS) are another important tool to monitor pro-
gress on the right to education and identify where action is needed to help those groups who are being system-
atically denied their rights. The information they provide will make it easier to hold governments to account.

The following list of questions might act as a check when applying a HRBA-E at systems level (N.B. this is for
illustrative purposes only and is not intended as a fully functional tool):

    Area of      HRBA-E checklist
    intervention
    Policy       Does the policy reflect human rights treaties ratified by the State that guarantee the right
                 to education? Is there a legal regulatory framework that guarantees the right to education
                 and is the related guidance accessible?
                 Is data from rights-based sector analysis guiding the formation of strategies and pro-
                 grammes?
                 Does the policy take account of current disparities and include targeted measures to
                 support the needs of underserved groups (e.g. girls/disabled children)? Does it include
                 specific objectives to prevent future discrimination?
                 Does the policy reflect children rights more broadly to ensure child protection/safe lean-
                 ing environments/codes of conduct for educational personnel to support child rights
                 (throughout child’s life cycle from pre-primary to upper secondary and beyond)?
                 Does the policy provide a space for consultation and input from rights-holders (or their
                 representatives) and accountability measures?
    Planning     Does planning address current needs and trends using a rights-based analysis that in-
                 cludes input from rights-holders? Does this analysis go beyond access to ensure equity,
                 quality, etc.?
                 Do numbers and distribution of qualified teachers match need (including specialised
                 teachers for children with special educational needs; teacher with language skills for mi-
                 nority linguistic groups/female teachers, etc.)?
                 Does planning include context specific analysis of potential vulnerabilities (conflict, dis-
                 asters, displacement) and include strategies to mitigate these and build resilience in the
                 education system at all levels?
    Budget       Does the budget match need? Is the allocation of funds equitably distributed? Are addi-
                 tional targeted allocations available to meet needs and ensure equity for currently under-
                 served areas and marginalized children?
                 Does the budgetary framework support decisions based on equity and quality?


6   The list of sectors is obviously much more extensive and these are given as examples only.


                                                                                                                12
                 Where there is a shortfall, is there a detailed plan for progressive universalization of ed-
                 ucation from pre-primary to upper secondary?
                 Are external funds being used to address disparities with support directed at most un-
                 derserved areas/groups in a managed plan for progressive universalization?
 Curriculum      Does the curriculum provide the opportunity for children to develop a wide range of
 development     knowledge that supports cognitive and socio-emotional aspects of development and sup-
                 port critical thinking?
                 Does the curriculum include human rights education/global citizenship education? Does
                 the curriculum foster non-discrimination and promote social cohesion?
                 Does the curriculum support relevant skill development that reflects input from rights-
                 holders?
                 Is the curriculum relevant to the social, cultural, environmental, economic, and linguistic
                 context of learners?
                 Is the curriculum structured to allowed participation and the construction of knowledge
                 by rights-holders?
 Learning        Are learning resources free from discrimination and stereotypes?
 resources       Do they reflect diversity in gender, ethnicity, class or caste, sexual orientation, religion,
                 etc.?
                 Do they promote conflict resolution and build tolerance?
 Initial         Are sufficient places for quality ITT available to ensure overall numbers of qualified
 Teacher         teachers?
 Training        Does the policy for ITT selection reflect the diversity and needs of learning population
 (ITT) and       (e.g. female teachers, specialist teachers to support children with special educational
 Continuing      needs, teachers with relevant language skills for any minority groups)?
 Professional    Does ITT/CPD include human rights awareness and education?
 Develop-        Does ITT/CPD support skills development for child-centred pedagogies to ensure chil-
 ment (CPD)      dren’s right to participation?

The obligations flowing from a HRBA-E give a clear focus on these interrelated core aspects of the right to
education at a systems level through to local delivery. The right to education should permeate throughout the
system, including in the organization of the school. This includes the way the school is managed, its relationship
with parents and the local community, as well as, importantly, how children are treated and taught.

Applying a HRBA-E means concern for access, as well quality and respect in the learning environment, schools
should be child friendly and healthy places, where the right to participation is respected, and where learning
and assessment are also rights-based (UNESCO/UNICEF 2007, p.28). Guidance on HRBA-E at a school level
is found in many international programs such as is UNICEF’s Child-Friendly Schools or Amnesty Interna-
tional’s Human Rights-Friendly Schools (to name a few). They offer important insights and lessons for involv-
ing different stakeholders. Findings from the UK and Canada, for example, highlighted the importance of
training teachers to increase human rights culture in school. It also found that parents can sometimes feel
uneasy due to misunderstanding of rights, and that it is important to show that children learn about their own
rights, as well as how to respect the rights of others (UNICEF, 2014). The norms, values, and customs that
make up the culture of the school, including how it is managed, are an important aspect of a HRBA-E. The
ethos of the school, including communication and respect between staff, parents, and pupils should reflect the
principles outlined above (see page 9). School governing bodies or school management committees are com-
mon in the majority of countries, however, the extent to which they are democratic and involve diverse mem-
bers of the local community can vary. Respecting the views of rights-holders, their parents, and members of
the local community is a priority for HRBA-E: “[a]n empowered SMC can enhance education quality at local
level. If it is well grounded and representative it will enhance local ownership of education, making the right to,
and rights in education a reality.” (GCE 2010). A 10-point charter ‘Promoting Rights in Schools’ provides a
useful framework to ensure a HRBA-E at school level. These include: no charges for education, safety of



                                                                                                                 13
children on route to school and in school; the need for proper sanitary facilities; participation in decision making
processes; and transparent and effective monitoring system and accountability (ActionAid and RTE Project,
2011).

A HRBA-E goes beyond discourse and operationalizes the right to education through each level and aspect of
education, ensuring compliance with legal obligations and at the same time bringing a strong equity focus. It
supports the right to education, as well as rights in and through education. Applying a HRBA-E helps reduce
factors that cause children to miss school, drop out, or fail to learn, creating more inclusive, safe and relevant
education that is “therefore not only cost-effective and economically beneficial but also more sustainable.”
(UNESCO, 2007, 12). A HRBA adds value to development processes—including education—by increasing:
legitimacy; empowerment and participation; coherence across sectors through clarity in establishing standards;
relevance; impact and sustainability; and accountability (Amnesty International, 2005).

Section 3: HRBA-E and SDG4

The 2030 sustainable development agenda offers a vision of social and economic transformation rooted in
respect for universal human rights. in fact the 2030 agenda and human right instruments are “are tied to-
gether in a mutually reinforcing way: human rights offer a legally-binding framework as well as guidance for
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda” (Danish Human Institute).7 This is also the case for SDG4 and as
the Education 2030 Framework for Action makes clear “[t]he principles informing this Framework are drawn
from international instruments and agreements” (UNESCO, 2015, p. 7).8 Given the centrality of the right to
education in the formation of the Education 2030 Framework, applying the same standards in its implemen-
tation makes moral and practical sense.

While a HRBA-E is not a panacea for all the problems facing education systems around the world it can provide
an important synergy between legal rights and political commitments and make the path to progressive univer-
salism more effective. By highlighting the standards of the right to education and the role of duty-bearers and
rights-holders, a HRBA-E can shine new light on issues that are central to the achievement of SDG4, as the
following illustrates.

3.1 Quality Education: a Human Right

The Education 2030 agenda has brought a renewed focus on the quality of education recognizing that access
alone is not enough and that children need to learn the knowledge, skills, and values that equip children for life
in the 21st century. Without access to quality education children will not reach their full potential and their
country will not achieve sustainable development. Quality education is also a human right and the Committee
of the Rights of Child in their General Comment Number 1 notes that:

        Article 29 (1) not only adds to the right to education recognized in article 28 a qualitative
        dimension which reflects the rights and inherent dignity of the child; it also insists upon the
        need for education to be child-centered, child-friendly and empowering, and it highlights the
        need for educational processes to be based upon the very principles it enunciates. (Committee
        Rights of the Child, 2001, emphasis added)


7 The guide links each SDG target with the corresponding rights, see: http://sdg.humanrights.dk/
8 The framework lists: Article 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention against Discrimi-
nation in Education, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities [xii], the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and
the UN General Assembly Resolution on the Right to Education in Emergency Situations.


                                                                                                                14
The Education 2030 Framework for Action makes clear the need for “strengthening inputs, processes, and
evaluation of outcomes and mechanisms to measure progress.” (UNESCO, 2015b, p.8). Ultimately only quality
inputs will lead to quality outcomes and duty-bearers must stay attuned to the foundations that enable quality
education and learning. A HRBA-E, by highlighting the legal standards that should be met in regard to inputs,
process, and outcomes, can support the effective action to ensure no child is left behind.

The recipe for quality education and learning involves many different inputs, including but is not limited to:
what children learn; the experience in the classroom, including right-based participatory pedagogy; if there are
adequate numbers of trained teachers; if children understand the language they are taught in; if they have access
to teaching and learning material that promotes diversity; and if the school environment is safe and free from
violence or attack.

While all of the above are important, as the McKinsey report (2007) made clear: “The quality of an education
system cannot exceed the quality of its teachers.” (p.13) There is significant evidence proving that teachers are
key to improving education quality and learning outcomes (UIS, 2016). Globally, however, there is a huge
shortage of qualified teachers and it is estimated that: “In the next 14 years, countries must recruit 68.8 million
teachers to provide every child with primary and secondary education” (UIS, 2016). This will require increasing
funding for teacher training and retention, through domestic sources and through increased levels of external
support from donors, including the World Bank. The Third Addis Ababa Action Agenda on the financing for
development commits to the upgrading of school facilities and increasing the percentage of qualified teachers,
including through international cooperation (UN, 2015).

In order to make education available and accessible (as described in the 4As framework above) States need to
address teacher training, recruitment, and also teachers labor rights (Tomasevski, 2001). This is reinforced in
SDG4, Target (c), which calls for a major increase in the number of qualified teachers, with support through
international cooperation for teacher training in developing countries (target c, is another of the means of
implementation targets). It is not quantity of teachers that will ensure quality education, they must also be
qualified and able to adapt to the needs of all students. Article 24.4 CRPD determines that “States Parties shall
take appropriate measures to employ teachers, including teachers with disabilities, who are qualified in sign
language and/or braille, [...] the use of appropriate augmentative and alternative modes, means and formats of
communication, educational techniques and materials to support persons with disabilities.” The representa-
tional role of teachers is also important for securing gender parity in education. Countries with more female
primary teachers are more likely to have higher enrolment rates for girls in secondary schools. Unfortunately,
in some countries, less than 25% of primary teachers are female. The rights of teachers should be upheld and
their contribution recognized as they are a fundamental condition for quality education. Article 13.2.e of
ICESCR demands that “the material condition of teaching staff shall be continuously improved”, and the 1966
ILO/UNESCO ‘Recommendation Concerning the Status of Teachers’ is an additional normative framework
that elaborates standards on a variety of issues relating to teachers’ professional development, including the
social, ethical, and material concerns of teachers.

Teachers also have a key role in respecting and promoting the rights of learners by promoting non-discrimina-
tion and ensuring children’s rights are respected in the teaching process and wider school environment. Teach-
ers are, however, ordinary people and consciously or unconsciously, they may at times reflect existing social
prejudices and even discriminate against certain groups of children. To address this, both initial teacher training
and ongoing professional development should contain training on human rights. The World Programme for
Human Rights Education recognizes the importance and responsibility of teaching and other education staff
in the transmission of “human rights values, skills, attitudes, motivation and practices, both in the performance
of their professional responsibilities and in their function as role models.” (UNGA 2014, p.8).

Good quality rights-based initial teacher training and on-going professional development that encourages re-
flection on human rights values and behavior can help mitigate the frequency of any behaviors that fail to



                                                                                                               15
protect and respect children’s rights. There are some teachers who take advantage of their position and abuse
children, sometimes demanding brides or even sexual favors for grades. Although these teaches are the minor-
ity, schools, as well local and national education authorities, must take strong measures to ensure teachers meet
a code of conduct that protects children and, where necessary, take criminal proceedings. Supporting teachers—
and other staff—to understand rights and reflect them in their practice is a central to a HRBA to SDG4 and in
doing so will create safer environments and enhance learning.

While teachers arguably have the greatest impact on a child’s education experience and attainment, the whole
school environment and practices are also fundamental to ensuring quality. A school or classroom environment
where children face discrimination or violence violates that child’s fundamental rights. This includes corporal
punishment as Article 29.2 of the CRC that obliges “all appropriate measures” to ensure that school discipline
is administered in a manner consistent with the child's human dignity. The way in which children are treated in
schools should respect and reflect human rights standards: a HRBA-E places children rights at the center of
school practice, as well as empowering them to take an active part in the school community and beyond. This
is not only a moral and legal obligation but also makes economic sense as rights respecting schools and class-
rooms can reduce dropout rates and enable children to learn more effectively (see section on quality and learn-
ing below).

Human rights education is also a vital component of quality education and clearly articulated as a fundamental
aspect of education. Too frequently it is seen as an add-on, rather than a core part of quality education. The
SDG4.7, includes a specific call for leaners to acquire knowledge on human rights, which while positive, needs
to be given a higher focus and priority, given it is a legally binding obligation for education to contribute to
understanding of human rights and fundamental freedoms. To support the wider SDGs goals, a strong focus
on all children learning about their rights, needs to be reflected within global and national indicator frameworks
to sure it is given the attention by governments and international actors alike.

Quality education cannot be measured in learning outcomes alone, it must also be measured by the experience
children have in the classroom, by the participation of rights-holders and their families in the educational pro-
cess to make it inclusive and relevant. A HRBA-E provides a robust guide to ensuring quality and to delivering
strong and diverse learning outcomes.

3.2 Addressing the Learning Crisis through an HRBA to SDG4

In 2013, the UNESCO GMR highlighted the global crisis in learning, estimating that 250 million children were
not learning even the basics, in some cases even after 4 years of school (UNESCO, 2013). The cost of this
learning crisis is high “not only for the future ambitions of children, but also for the current finances of gov-
ernments. The cost of 250 million children not learning the basics is equivalent to US$129 billion, or 10% of
global spending on primary education” (UNESCO GMR, 2014). The research on the crisis facing learning led
to a reflection that the MGD targets of universal primary access had come at the expense of quality and lead to
a strong focus on learning in the debates leading up the final iteration of SDG4.

While learning is at heart education, some critics were concerned that the discourse on learning in the run up
to the final iteration of SDG4 focused primary on outcomes, and was dislocated from the inputs and processes
that enable learning to take place (McLean, 2014). A concern that stemmed partly from the distinctions in
understanding of quality between different education traditions, with some giving more focus to outcomes (i.e.
behaviorist) and others on processes (i.e. humanist) (UNESCO GMR, 2005, p.32). The former often associated
with a more utilitarian approach to education with a narrow set of outcomes and the latter a more rights-based
approach, concerned with process as well as diverse outcomes. Basic skills such as literacy and numeracy are
without doubt foundational, however, for education to be rights-based then it must promote critical thinking,
participation, understanding of human rights and skills linked to (global) citizenship. UNESCO’s work in 2013
was key is reinstating the purpose of learning—in its broad sense—at the heart of quality education. These


                                                                                                              16
ideas were developed in the work of the Learning Metrics task force that identified seven key domains of
learning that are considered necessary to succeed in school and life: 1) Physical well-being; 2) Social and emo-
tional competencies; 3) Culture and the arts; 4) Literacy and communication; 5) Learning approaches and cog-
nition; 6) Numeracy and mathematics; 7) Science and technology (LMTF, 2013). The final targets of SDG4
appear to strike a balance and include diverse learning outcomes, however, concern remains that the centrality
given to indicator SDG4.1 in the global indicator framework risks undermining the ambition of the goal itself
and could negatively impact on the equity and quality of education (Moriarty, 2016). One concern is that a focus
on outcomes remains very strong and as such could undermine the quality of education processes by skewing
the teaching towards testing. The case has been made for some time that what is needed is for “all children
everywhere to participate in learning that is inclusive, relevant, and democratic.” (Barret, 2011).

Participatory pedagogical processes—that might be considered by some as a radical shift from standard prac-
tice—can lead to more cost-efficient education and better learning outcomes. The Escuela Nueva, for example,
which has received wide recognition for its innovative and successful model of education, including from the
World Bank, with evidence that it delivers better learning outcomes and is more cost efficient (Moriarty and
Oswald, 2009). This model of education, which is highly participatory and puts rights-holders at the center in
the classroom, was also found to impact positively on what some consider the foundation subjects of literacy
and math (Psacharopoulos et al., 1993; McEwan, 1998, cited in Kline, 2002). In fact,

        diverse learning goals may seem disparate, but are actually synergistic—by encouraging active
        participation and emphasizing critical thinking, children’s acquisition of basic literacy and math
        can be promoted at the same time they are gaining necessary skills for the 21st century.
        (UNESCO, 2013, p.4)

Pedagogical practice must build inclusion for all children, including those with special education needs. Article
24.2 of the CRPD is clear that States should ensure “children with disabilities are not excluded from free and
compulsory primary education, or from secondary education, on the basis of disability”. It goes on to instruct
State parties to ensure the “use of appropriate augmentative and alternative modes, means and formats of
communication, educational techniques and materials to support persons with disabilities.” A HRBA-E is
concerned with all aspects of education, this also includes the curriculum, which can subtlety or less subtlety
reinforce negative stereotypes and lead to discrimination and exclusion. Teaching and learning resources also
need to be reviewed from a rights-based perspective and revised as necessary as the “canonical character of the
information selected for and presented in textbooks gives them central significance in academic, political and
educational respects” (Georg Eckert Institute, 2017).

While there is a widespread understanding of the above and it may seem common sense, in practice these
standards are not always applied. Attention to what and how children learn is central to a HRBA-E and, as the
evidence shows, brings significant benefit, leading to better learning outcomes and a more cost-effective and
efficient achievement of SDG4.

Child-centered teaching and learning are vital aspects of rights-respecting, quality education. The experience
that children have in the classroom is a lesson for present and later life, quality rights education sets the foun-
dations of active citizenship, supporting critical thinking and the ability to question and build knowledge. The
Brazilian educator and philosopher, Paulo Freire has challenged the notion that education is neutral, he argued
that learners should be centre stage and active in the learning process, as opposed to traditional model so
‘banking’ education, whereby learners just received knowledge. (Freire, 1972). The goal of education, for Freire
is to recognise we are all “subjects” of our own lives, rather than “objects’ in the world of others. Freire compels
us to rethink the purpose of education, which he identifies as conveying a set of beliefs and values, functioning
to maintain a particular set of power relations, and the economic and political systems that underpin them.
Freire talks about learners developing critical consciousness and through this ability to critically engage with
knowledge and society, in this sense right-based education empowers learners to be transforms their lives and



                                                                                                                17
the wider society. A HRBA-E is concerned with the right to and in education and also supporting rights in
wider society:

        A rights-based approach to education that embodies human rights education empowers chil-
        dren and other stakeholders and represents a major building block in efforts to achieve social
        transformation towards rights-respecting societies and social justice. (UNESCO 2007, p.12).

A HRBA approach that encourages participation will enable children to become active citizens, socially, polit-
ically, and economically. Understanding rights and experiencing rights in practice in the classroom and wider
school is critical for the sustainable societies proposed in the 2030 agenda.

3.3 HRBA-E: Shining a Light on Equity

Of the millions of children who are not in school, it is children from the poorest families, disabled children,
children living in conflict, girls, and other minority groups who are most affected. Rarely is this exclusion as a
result of lack of technical know-how (although capacity constraints do exist), it is discrimination and a lack of
priority leading to a massive failure to respect these children’s right to education. A HRBA-E can help shine a
light on the continuing barriers to equitable, quality education promoting non-discrimination as a guiding prin-
ciple in assessment of needs, policy development, planning, and delivery of education.

Non-discrimination requires the identification of why and how marginalized groups are being denied their right
to education and taking proactive, targeted measure to combat this. This might include, for example, commu-
nity based awareness programs to strengthen understanding that education is a right for all and the benefits it
can bring. It might mean donors working with governments to build their capacity to identify to reach children
marginalized children, for example, supporting the teachers to work with children with physical disabilities
through specialized teaching and learning resources. A HRBA-E often means just doing what should be obvi-
ous, however, this is not always the case and too often the most marginalized groups continue to get left behind.
Globally, for example, more girls are out of school than boys and in some contexts the difference is extreme.
This is not only morally unjustified, it is a failure to meet legal obligations and is undermining development.
The impact of girls’ education is well documented—from reduction in child mortality to decreased risk of HIV
infection (UNESCO, 2013). Lack of education for girls can mean some countries losing as much as $1 billion
a year—simply by not educating girls equally to boys (GPE, 2015). Fulfilling a girls’ right to education should,
therefore, be seen as positive and beneficial for governments. Governments can take a range of actions to
increase girls access to and completion of quality education. This might mean addressing cultural beliefs that
prevent girls going to school or practices, such as early marriage, that also have a huge impact on girls’ education.

It is not only cultural barriers that prevent girls or other marginalized groups, such as disabled children or
children from linguistic or ethnic minorities accessing education: school fees, poor quality education, inade-
quate infrastructure, or a lack of female teachers, all reduce the incentive of parents with very limited re-
sources to send their children to school.

In the planning and allocation of resources, policy makers should introduce measures that support specific
measures for groups that are currently left behind through a roadmap for converting equity principles into
measurable targets (Watkins, 2013), this would involve “stepping stone” targets (Malala Fund, 2016). The most
marginalized groups might vary from context to context and a human rights-based analysis of education can
help shine a light on groups that face discrimination. The Incheon Declaration and Framework for Action
promised that no target will be considered met unless met for all (2015) and a HRBA-E is an important tool to
address continuing discrimination. While a HRBA-E will not overcome these barriers immediately, it can help
direct government action to deliver more equitable education systems, leading to a better chance of achieving
SDG4 and, in so doing, create greater prospects for development more generally.



                                                                                                                 18
3.4 The Cost of Quality: Financing the Right to Education
The promise that education holds for sustainable development is enormous, with wide reaching benefits for
human well-being and dignity, for social cohesion and peace, and for the protection of the planet. If the evi-
dence on these indicators is not sufficient to convince politicians, then the economic arguments will be persua-
sive. Quality education and learning increases individual earnings, reduces economic inequality and promotes
economic growth. Without sustainable finance, it will not be possible to meet SDG4, and the ability of duty-
bears to respect, protect, and fulfill the right to education will be limited. The financing of education is therefore
a human rights issue. States have obligations to act both immediately and progressively to fulfill the right to
education. They must show they are making every effort to meet their obligations, even where financial re-
sources are constrained. In its General Comment 1, the Committee of the Rights of the Child makes it clear
that “resource constraints cannot provide a justification for a State party’s failure to take any, or enough, of the
measures that are required” (CRC, General Comment 1, paragraph 28). Furthermore, the clause of progressive
realization of rights cannot be used as an opt-out from action: “In relation to article 13, paragraphs (2) (b) to
(d), a State party has an immediate obligation ‘to take steps’ (art. 2, para. 1) towards the realization of secondary,
higher and fundamental education for all those within its jurisdiction.” (UN, 1999, p. 125). These legal obliga-
tions bring the full weight of a rights based approach and set clear parameters for the actions of governments
concerning the funding of education. The Third International Conference on Financing for Development
promised to scale up investments and international cooperation to allow children to complete equitable, inclu-
sive, and quality pre-primary, primary, and secondary education free of charge. It also encouraged countries,
where possible, to set nationally appropriate spending targets for education in accordance with internationally
recognized benchmarks of between at least 4% to 6% of GDP, and/or to allocate at least 15% to 20% of public
expenditure to education (UN, 2015). The Education 2030 Framework for Action, which was adopted unani-
mously by all UNESCO Member States makes clear the role of “governments to provide equitable financing
commensurate with national educational priorities, needs, and capacities to advance the progressive realization
of the right to education.” (UNESCO, 2015b, p. 67).

The Framework of Action suggests that in order to increase public spending on education, countries will need
to increase their tax base, which in many developing countries is far below recommended levels (UNESCO,
2015b). A shift towards a progressive taxation system will be needed, where the wealthiest—large companies,
including multinationals—contribute to services that support the poorest, such as public education. This would
generate significant amounts of money that could be spent on education, in some countries the money lost
through unpaid tax by corporations is double the annual education budget and in others it would be sufficient
to fund training to fill the primary school teacher gap, to provide children with textbooks and build thousands
of new classrooms (GCE, 2013). In addition to increasing tax revenues, and directing increased funding to
education, the Education 2030 Framework for Action also recommends that improved governance and ac-
countability—which a rights-based approach can support—should be implemented to ensure greater efficiency
and effective use of existing resources in the education system. In accordance with a rights-based approach it
also suggests prioritizing those most in need. This would require governments to make phased implementable
plans that start with the most marginalized groups that are furthest away from realizing their right to education.

To fully fund the right to education will require a substantial investment in education, in the policy paper
‘Pricing the right to education: The cost of reaching new targets by 2030’ (UNESCO GEM, 2015e), UNESCO
projects that the financing gap—between what is available from domestic resources and the amount necessary
to reach the new education targets—as being an average of $US39 billion per year between 2015 and 2030, with
the largest gap in low income countries where it constitutes 42% of annual total costs (Ibid, p.1). This gap will
need to be filled by external support until a time when domestic resources increase sufficiently to match need.
Article 28.3 of the CRC calls on States party to the convention to “promote and encourage international coop-
eration in matters relating to education” and the CRC “encourage[s] international cooperation both in general
terms (arts. 4 and 45 of the Convention) and in relation to education (art. 28 (3)” (CRC, General Comment 1,
paragraph 28). The CRC is clear that State Parties providing development cooperation should ensure that their
programmes are designed so as to take full account of the principles contained in article 29 (1) (Ibid).


                                                                                                                  19
There are only two countries which have not ratified the UN CRC,9 every other country is therefore bound by
the articles of the convention and, therefore, have a commitment to supporting the right to education through
international cooperation. Aid to education has, however, fallen since 2010, with the figures from 2014 showing
an 8% decline. Education’s share of total aid (excluding debt relief) fell from 10.2% in 2010 to 9.5% in 2013
and 8.2% in 2014 (UNESCO GEM, 2016). Figures on humanitarian aid also show the same low investment in
education, accounting for only 1.9% in 2016, despite the UN calling for having a target of at least 4%. These
figures highlight the fact, that despite the known impact that increased access to quality education has for
development, donors are not prioritizing education in any contexts, and as such failing not only to meet their
policy promises but also ignoring their obligations under human rights law.

The Education 2030 Framework for Action—agreed on by all of UNESCO’s Member States including donor
governments—highlights the importance that donor governments meet their commitments related to Overseas
Development Assistance (ODA) of 0.7 per cent GNP (UNESCO, 2015b, p. 67). If these commitments were
met, and at least 10% was directed to aid basic education, there would be a substantial reduction in the education
financing gap. Multilateral donors increased their aid to education by 10% and now account for 29% of total
aid to education, up from 25% in 2013—this includes the 42% (US$480 million) increase in disbursements by
the World Bank (Ibid). Despite these more positive examples, if investment in education remains at current
levels the violation of the right to education will continue on a massive scale up to and beyond the 2030 SDG4
deadline. The Education Commission,10 estimates that “if investments trends in education continue more than
800 million of the world’s 1.6 billion young people will lack the skills necessary for employment (Education
Commission Briefing, 2017, p.1). The Education Commission has suggested governments need to increase
their domestic spending on education, and has called for an increase on ODA spent on education to 15%. It is
also proposing the creation of a new International Financing Facility for Education (IFFEd), which, along with
increased domestic investments and increased ODA to education, could help bridge the current the global
shortfalls. Increases in financing must go hand in hand with equitable allocation targeting the most marginal-
ized. Any increases in resources from existing or new sources must be coherent with and support national
obligations to respect, protect, and fulfil the right to education.

While there is no overnight solution, adequate and sustained financing by governments from domestic sources
and revitalized support from the international donor community will facilitate the path to fulfilling the right to
education, and enable education to play its catalytic role as a driver for equitable and sustainable development.
The challenge of fully financing universal access and completion of equitable quality education is a human rights
imperative: without it the opportunities for children will be greatly limited, especially those from the poorest
and most marginalized groups. Countries will also face limitations: low and lower middle-income countries will
find it harder to lift themselves up and middle- and high-income countries will continue to face social inequality,
hindering their national capacity and fueling tension. While the cost of financing education is high, the benefits
that come from universal access to free quality education make the investment worthwhile.

3.5 Public Vs Private: The Right to Education and the Private Sector

The role of the State is central to ensuring quality education for all. In all circumstances the State remains the
primary duty-bearer for the right to education, with an obligation to provide free, inclusive, quality primary and
secondary education (as well as foundational and tertiary education). Under international human rights law,
parents also have responsibilities. For example, they must recognize and support the right to education of all
their children; they should allow children the time to go to school and not keep them out of school to carry out
domestic or other labor; and they should ensure their children are prepared for school, attend, and arrive on
time ready to study (UNESCO, 2007). Parents and children also have the freedom to chose an alternative
school to the public schools provided by the State, and Article 13 of the ICESCR provides for the right of

9   The United States and South Sudan are the two countries which have not adopted the CRC.
10  The ‘International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity’


                                                                                                               20
individuals to establish and direct educational institutions. The State, then, need not be (and rarely is) the sole
provider of education. Non-state provision of education includes religious or community schools, schools run
by CSOs/NGOs and other philanthropic organizations, as well as fee-paying schools (traditionally for high-
income groups). These can and do work in harmony alongside public education, although while other providers
may exist, the Committee on ESCR, in their General Comment 13 notes: “The obligation to pursue actively
the ‘development of a system of schools at all levels’ reinforces the principal responsibility of States parties to
ensure the direct provision of the right to education in most circumstances.” (UN,1999, p.125).

Over the last decade or so there has been an increasing expansion in new private providers of education, giving
rise to the question of how this impacts on rights-holders and the role of the State as the primary duty-bearer.
This increased growth began more than a decade ago and, as far back as 2002, attention has been drawn to the
role of the non-state provision of education, with questions concerning its quality and impact on equity:

         The provision of low quality private education for the poor is not serving their needs, but
         rather using up their scarce resources with limited benefits. The recent evidence implies that
         there is a need for tightening of regulation of the private sector, whose motives are not always
         obvious, to ensure that education provided is of an acceptable standard. […] While it is unde-
         niable that the non-state sector has played, and will continue to play a role in education, this
         should not be seen as an alternative to the state’s role in providing for social needs. (Rose,
         2002, p. 16)

From a rights-based perspective the obligation of the State as primary duty-bearer is clear alongside its respon-
sibility for ensuring that any non-State providers of education respect and protect the right to education, in-
cluding the clause of non-discrimination. The actions of private providers of education must in no way under-
mine the State’s obligations to respect, protect, and fulfil the right to education.

A new brand of for-profit private schools—often referred to as low-fee private schools—are putting themselves
forward as a solution to fulfilling the right to education, however, with little evidence this is a feasible and from
a rights-based perspective it raises much concern. There is also limited robust evidence to suggest that private
providers can replace the State or that it would be desirable for them to do so. A rigorous review of literature
on ‘The role and impact of private schools in developing countries' (Day et al., 2014) found that the strongest
evidence concerned improved teaching in private schools, with moderate evidence of better learning outcomes.
The review raised concerns over equity, with some evidence that boys are more likely to be enrolled in private
schools, although this was context specific. The summary findings pointed to a “sizeable evidence base” indi-
cating that the poorest families could not afford private school, and if they could, it was the result of other
welfare sacrifices; given this, sustaining attendance over the years would be very difficult. Overall the evidence
from the review suggested that most claims about the benefits and potential of private schools are weakly
evidenced, however, the framing of the assumptions used in the review have been criticised (Tooley and Long-
field, 2015). A HRBA-E can bring a clear and legally based framework for the assessment of the role of private
providers. Aubury and Dorsi (2016) assert that human rights law and standards can provide a normative frame-
work to assess the role of private actors in education, especially given all countries in the world are party to one
or more international treaties protecting the right to education.

If governments openly hand over provision of education to private providers, or purposefully neglect their
obligations in order for private providers to fill the void, this would constitute a failure in their responsibilities
under law. There are some high-profile examples where government acquiescence appears to promote private
provision instead of public education. One such example is Uganda, where both the UN and the African Com-
mission on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) have expressed concerns. The ACHPR have noted that:

         The increase in the establishment of private schools, which has been encouraged by the Gov-
         ernment, allegedly raises the concern of the Government gradually releasing itself from the



                                                                                                                  21
         obligation to provide quality public education, which could result in discrimination against
         children from low-income household. (ACHPR, 2015, p.12)

Any measures by a State that appear to be a deliberate withdrawal from their obligations under the right to
education could be viewed as being in contradiction to the Principe of Non-Retrogression. When applied to
the right to education this would require States to prove the measures have been introduced only after careful
consideration of all alternatives, and are justified only by the “totality of the rights provided for in the Covenant
and in the context of the full use of the State party’s maximum available resources.” (Moumné and Saudemont,
2015, p.7). Donors also have a responsibility to bolster national capacity and accountability to enable States to
meet their obligations according to the right to education. In some instances, donors have faced criticisms for
their apparent promotion of private providers. This includes the World Bank who have been challenged for
their support of the chain of low-fee private schools—Bridge International Academies (BIA)—in which the
bank had invested 10 million dollars, even while it had no planned investments in public education systems in
the same countries, namely Kenya and Uganda (RTE, 2014).

The Special rapporteur on the Right to Education, argues that “governments should ensure that private pro-
viders only supplement public education, the provision of which is the Government’s responsibility, rather than
supplant it”, and that States should not “disinvest in public education by relying on private providers’ (UN,
para. 96). The Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education reports that both UNESCO and the International
Organization of la Francophonie have expressed concern with sweeping privatization in education reducing
education to a commodity (UN, 2015). The same report makes the following observation:

         Education is instrumental in promoting development, social justice and other human rights
         […] Low fee private schools not only constrain social justice in education, favouring access
         for some over others, but also social justice through education as their raison d’être is mone-
         tizing access to education. This aggravates inequality through the structural exclusion of cer-
         tain groups, entrenching a neoliberal vision of society (UN, 2015).

Suggesting that private provision can address either out-of-school challenges or the learning crisis ignores the
underfunding and lack of prioritization that has besieged public education for many years (GCE, 2016). An-
other concern is that increased private provision could in fact lead to decreased spending on public education,
which in turn could lead to more private provision and more support from external donors who may consider
private providers a better option—in other words, a vicious circle of privatization (Moumné and Saudemont,
2015). Moumné and Saudemont note that an expansion of private provision in education and a decline in public
funding has been seen in some countries such as the Philippines, India, and Bangladesh, however, in other
cases such as Morocco and Chile, this has not been the case. They suggest that firm conclusions cannot be
made at this time. Nevertheless, this scenario is a concern from a rights-based perspective and should be
carefully monitored. As the Global Campaign for Education (GCE) points out: “No country—possibly aside
from the city state of Singapore—has ever achieved universal participation in basic education by relying on the
private sector. Indeed, such achievements have always depended on government action and the building of a
public education system.” (GCE, 2016, p10).

While non-state providers will continue to have a role in the provision of education, the actions of non-state
providers must respect the fundamental principles set out in the right to education and not replace the state as
the primary provider of education. The role of the State is, and should remain, central to the fulfillment of the
right to education and any support of private provision should not undermine public education. A HRBA-E
highlights and supports the role of States in this role and it is only through quality public education that equitable
education and lifelong learning can be achieved.




                                                                                                                  22
3.6 The Right to Education Cannot Wait

International law protects the rights of children to an education in times of peace and in times of conflict. Even
so, millions of children are missing out on school because of conflict, a major cause being the lack of political
will to respect, protect, and fulfill the right to education. For children living through conflict and other emer-
gencies, quality education is a ray of light in an otherwise dark and stressful time.

The impact of conflict on education is severe and 30% of all out of school children and adolescents live in
countries affected by conflict. In Syria, one out of every three schools are out of use, damaged, or destroyed,
being used to shelter displaced families, or being used for military purposes. In 2016, at least 87 attacks on
schools and education personnel were recorded and more than 255 children were killed while at school or near
school (Watt, 2017). Ending impunity for attacks on schools and upholding the rights of displaced and refugee
children is essential. For children who have been displaced and fled across borders their situation also remains
dire, only half of refugee children of primary age are in school, with this figure dropping to a quarter for sec-
ondary education (UNHCR, 2016). In some refugee hosting countries, the numbers are even lower: “In Tur-
key—host to the largest number of refugees in the world—including nearly 3 million Syrians—just 13 percent
of secondary-school-age refugee children attend school. In Cameroon, 6 percent do: in Pakistan and Lebanon,
just 5 percent.” (Khawaja et al, 2016). By bringing a HRBA-E to situations of conflict, governments, the UN,
donors, and other actors can provide a safe space and the continuity of learning that will enable children to
cope with the crisis and build resilience and skills for the future.

While humanitarian emergency contexts do bring severe challenges, children who live through them, whether
in their own country or as refugees, still need and have a right to education, this is universal and inalienable and
cannot be disregarded because of the context of where a child lives. The UN Special Rapporteur on the Right
to Education noted the lack of attention given to education by humanitarian actors and “relative absence of
clear programmatic principles, indicators, or funding.” (UN, 2008, p.7). The report reaffirmed that: “As parties
to human rights treaties, States have an obligation to respect, protect and fulfill the right to education, whether
or not an emergency situation prevails. In addition, the right to education inheres in each person regardless of
legal status, whether refugee, child soldier or internally displaced person.” (UN, 2008, p.10). Too frequently,
however, humanitarian responses still see education as a secondary concern and this is reflected in the extremely
low proportion of total humanitarian aid invested in education, which was only 1.4% of total humanitarian aid
in 2016 (UNOCHA FTS, 2016).

The barriers to quality education for children and youth affected by emergencies is due in great part to a lack
of prioritization and chronic lack of underfunding. Rights are indivisible and interrelated and there should be
no hierarchy of which rights a child should enjoy, just as children should have access to food, healthcare, and
shelter, children also have a right to education from the first phase of a humanitarian response. Education
offers immediate protection and support for children caught up in conflict; it can save and transform lives. The
Committee on the Rights of the Child has stressed that:

        In situations of emergency, the child’s need to enjoy his/her right to education is reinforced
        by the fact that it is a protection measure, as well as a relief measure and a life saving measure
        that provides physical, psychosocial, and cognitive protection. Education mitigates the psy-
        chosocial impact of conflicts and disasters by giving a sense of normalcy, stability, structure
        and hope for the future. (Committee on Rights of the Child, 2008, p.8)

Governments, host countries, donors, the UN and civil society organizations need to respect human rights and
humanitarian law and ensure that a HRBA is brought to education at all times. The right to education of children
living through conflict or displaced by conflict, does now have higher profile following the launch of new
initiative called ‘Education Cannot Wait’ in 2016. This fund is designed to address the chronic neglect of edu-
cation in emergency contexts. however, the fund has only received US$113.4 million of US$153 million target


                                                                                                                23
set for Year 1, suggesting that the right to education for children in humanitarian contexts is bring neglected,
reducing the possibility of achieving SDG4

A HRBA-E in humanitarian emergencies can offer practical guidance for program design, as this tool from
UNICEF illustrates:

 Checklist for Rights-Based Considerations in Programme Design
 • Non-discrimination: Have discriminatory practices been identified (within the affected community, and
    within the response itself) and have measures been put in place to overcome them?
 • Accountability: Have accountability systems between all players, and in all directions, including com-
    plaints and response mechanisms, been established in the framework of the humanitarian and/or tran-
    sition programmes?
 • Transparency: Do crisis-affected populations have easy access to information about humanitarian and
    transition programmes which enables them to participate in and shape them?
 • Participation: Have mechanisms been established to facilitate the active participation of different crisis-
    affected population groups in the assessment, design, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of
    humanitarian and transition programmes?
 • Capacity-Building: Do humanitarian and transition programmes include targeted efforts to build the ca-
    pacity of rights holders to claim their rights and duty bearers to fulfil their obligations? Does this strat-
    egy include building the capacity of partners and counterparts to operate according to a rights-based
    model?
 • Local ownership: Are measures in place to promote local ownership (by crisis-affected populations and
    local authorities) of humanitarian and transition programmes?
 • Sustainability: Are programmes designed with an exit-strategy in mind, to ensure their sustainability over
    the medium- and long-term, including in the shift from humanitarian to post-crisis transition?
 • Advocacy: Has a humanitarian/transition advocacy strategy been developed, taking into considerations
    the different approaches to advocacy in politically sensitive and insecure contexts? (UNICEF, 2012)

This type of practical, rights based check list can help ensure that the education response in emergencies is
equitable, reflects the needs of the affected population and is sustainable. The Inter-Agency Network for Edu-
cation in Emergencies Minimum Standards, for example, calls for the rights of learners to be “upheld and
addressed through curricula, instruction and assessment, while also highlighting the need to include human
rights education and education for peace and citizenship in formal and non-formal settings.” (INEE 2010, p.
2).

A HRBA-E acknowledges that a child’s right remains regardless of contexts and it is this explicit application of
rights that make a difference to the experience of children living through conflict and crisis, from preventing
or overcoming the toxic stress young children suffer to helping adolescents find new skills and believe in a
future. SDG4 calls for equal access to all levels of education, including for children in vulnerable situations, and
there is no doubt that children living through conflict or other humanitarian emergences are in very vulnerable
situations. Quality rights-based education can protect children even in the midst of conflict and crisis, it can
protect their development and learning and protect their future opportunities. Without education, the children
of Syria—where more than half are missing and out of school—and the children of multiple other conflicts or
emergencies have little hope. Education is their hope and it is also their right. A HRBA-E to SDG4 can ensure
these children are not left behind.




                                                                                                                24
Section 4: Meeting the Promise of Education through HRBA-E
4.1 Leveraging Accountability through HRBA-E

The strength of a HRBA-E is that by stressing legitimacy and accountability it validates calls for the State to
act, leveraging additional political pressure to provide education based on a legal obligation. Where a legitimate
legal claim exists—as in the right to education—it follows that someone holds responsibility for fulfilling that
right or, at a minimum, respecting and projecting it. In the case of education, this responsibility lies primarily
with the State.

Primary education, for example, is free and compulsory and governments have an obligation to meet their
commitments immediately. Article 14 of the ICESCR instructs that each State party that had not secured “com-
pulsory primary education, free of charge, undertakes, within two years, to work out and adopt a detailed plan
of action for the progressive implementation, within a reasonable number of years” (UN, 1966). Of course, the
61 million primary-school-aged children still not in class show that governments obviously do not always meet
their obligations; however knowledge is power, and a first step in holding governments to account. Awareness
of what human rights are is important for rights-holders to be able to demand accountability of those in power,
and a HRBA-E can be an effective tool in challenging the status quo. Giving a voice to rights-holders is a core
tenet of a HRBA and is key to holding governments to account in education: “Politicians can ignore poor
public services if they believe that voters cannot penalize them for poor performance” (World Bank, 2004, p.
88). However, when rights-holders have information and hold governments publicly accountable it changes the
equation. This can be useful in overcoming some of the political economy constraints faced by education, and
leads to change that might otherwise not occur. That is not to say that simply applying a rights-based approach
will immediate result in changing policy, and weakness with this approach includes the often dense or vague
language of human rights, which can leave room for interpretation (Katsui, 2008). Another weakness is the
failure of human-rights frameworks to provide ready-made benchmarks against which the credibility of State
efforts can be measured (Watkins cited in UNICEF, 2014). The lack of determined criteria by which to measure
effort can make it challenging to hold governments to account, nevertheless, rights-holders, with support from
civil society organizations and international actors, can bring effective pressure to bear on governments, and
influence policy and actions. Local, national, regional and international non-governmental organizations and
coalitions working with and on the behalf of rights-holders have been powerful actors in holding governments
and their international partners to account through a HRBA-E. A review of civil society engagement in the
Education for All movement between 2000-2015 highlighted how, through holding governments to account,
“civil society has made an important contribution in its drive for faster and more equitable progress towards
EFA. Importantly, civil society has kept the message that education is a fundamental human right at the center
of the debate” (UNESCO 2015). A human rights-based approach can create a virtuous cycle: strengthening the
knowledge and empowerment of rights holders to demand accountability of their government, and in so doing
enabling future generations greater opportunities to access quality education with relevant learning outcomes,
which will in turn empower those learners.

In all and any circumstance, what is clear is that governments cannot simply opt out of their obligations. All
children have the right to free public education from primary to secondary, and where there is strong partici-
pation of rights holders—which a HBRA can support—the possibility for accountability, and for overcoming
the constraints of political economy, will be far greater. The constraints of political economy affecting education
are undoubtedly complex, as rigorous reviews of the literature have suggested (Kingdon et al, 2014; Novelli et
al, 2014). “[E]ducation does not exist in isolation from broader social issues and processes, which affect policy
interventions and shape content and outcomes” (Novelli et al, 2014, p.2), and it would be an oversimplification
to suggest a HRBA alone would be sufficient to address all the challenges. It is possible to assume that the
participation of rights-holders and an increase in public accountability can lead to positive changes for education
and in turn for wider society, and the literature shows “that aggregate public education spending increases with
a shift towards democracy or openness.” (Kingdon et al, 2014, p.56).



                                                                                                               25
If a government claims in its policy statements or in political messaging to be committed to the right to educa-
tion but is not allocating resources in line with recognized benchmarks, the credibility of their actions can be
challenged, especially if there is no notable change or progress. In education there are accepted international
and regional benchmarks that call for the allocation of at least 4 – 6% of Gross Domestic Product and/or at
least 15 – 20% of total public expenditure to education (UNESCO, 2015). Allocation of resources should be
in line or seen to be moving progressively towards this. Understanding that the term ‘progressively’ is not an
excuse for inaction, but in fact requires that “State parties have a specific and continuing obligation ‘to move
as expeditiously and effectively as possible’, towards the full realization of article 13” (General Comment 13 on
the ICESRC, paragraph 44), can strengthen the legitimate call for increased investments in education. This
accountability can be taken further by ensuring governments are taking steps outside of education itself to look
at other fiscal policies that might impact the availability of domestic funds for education. For example, where
taxation is either weak or inequitable there is a strong call for increases in domestic tax revenue to ensure a
larger source of domestic funds becomes available. A HRBA, through reference to the legal obligations that
the State has signed up to in committing to the right to education, makes these wider claims legitimate avenues
to hold the government of the day accountable.

Other actors must also do nothing to undermine the enjoyment of the right to education for any individuals or
group through their actions. This applies to both local and global non-governmental organizations, as well as
the business community. In the case of businesses, the Committee on the Rights of the Child in their General
Comment 16 (UN, 2013) and Guiding Principles on ‘Business and Human Rights (UN, 2011) also makes clear
that no actions by companies should undermine human rights. For education, these guiding principles are im-
portant given the growing trend of increasing private provision in developing contexts (as discussed above).

Where all else fails, human rights provide for the possibility of legal recourse. The UN Special Rapporteur on
the Right to Education in his 2012 annual report cited the finding that “The essential element [of a right] is the
legal power bestowed upon the [individual] by the legal order to bring about, by a law suit, the execution of a
sanction as a reaction against the non-fulfilment of the obligation.” (UN, 2012). He goes on to say that if this
right is denied or violated then the individual has legal recourse to action, and that courts across numerous
geographical regions have upheld the right to education in its various dimensions. As the Special Rapporteur
explains, regional courts such as the European Court of Human Rights, the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights, and the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights were established for the enforcement of regional
treaties and rights.

The justiciability of the right to education is an important tool in a human rights-based approach. However,
while this is a strength, it is not necessarily easily implementable. Recourse to justice through human rights
mechanisms tends to be via individual mechanisms, which can be challenging both in terms of the ability of
marginalized individuals to pursue claims as “most poor people have little access to the institutions that might
enforce their rights and that the interface between different legal systems governing their access to entitlements
makes the process of recognizing and claiming rights complex” (Cornwall and Nyamu-Musembi, 2004, p.1418).
With support from local or national NGOs this route can, however, be available:

        Defensoria Pública in São Paulo (Brazil) provides legal support to poor citizens whose right
        to education has been violated, even as the Public Prosecutors in São Paulo (Brazil) take up
        such violations with public authorities, as well as in courts for the enforcement. The National
        Commission for Protection of Child Rights in India [ . . .] examining a large number of com-
        plaints regarding imposition of fee for primary education when the education should be free
        of cost, the findings of the Commission led to parents having fee payments reimbursed
        through subsequent court actions. (UN 2013, p. 11)




                                                                                                               26
While taking legal action may be one route to accountability, the simple act of sharing knowledge of rights
creates more empowered individuals and communities. This is a core aspect of a HRBA supporting the partic-
ipation of rights-holders in decision-making processes, placing people at the center of the development process,
where empowerment and participation do not come only as the end result but as part of that process. This is
important as it has long been shown that poverty is multidimensional, reflected not only in a lack of material
goods or services but also through situations of powerlessness, of the ability for one’s voice to be heard ( Na-
rayan et al., 2000). Human rights-based approaches are strongly rooted in the practice and approaches of grass-
roots political and social movements, who have demanded participation in decisions that affect their lives: a
shift from clientelism to active citizenship (IDS, 2003).

International human rights law establishes that States must take all appropriate legislative, administrative, and
other measures for the implementation of rights in regard to economic, social, and cultural rights, such as the
right to education: “States Parties shall undertake such measures to the maximum extent of their available
resources and, where needed, within the framework of international cooperation.” (CRC, Article 4). Article 2
of the ICESCR also calls on all States party to the convention to take both economic and technical steps—
individually, and through international assistance and co-operation—to the maximum of their available re-
sources. It is, therefore, important that States and their international partners respect obligations which are
legally binding, and that all their actions are directed to supporting this.

Where the State is systematically failing to fulfill, protect, or respect the right to education there is also legitimate
scope for international organizations to act collectively to ensure a child’s right to education is not denied, as
set out in the Declaration on the Right to Development. The World Development Report 2004 described a
long and short route to accountability. In this vein, the argument would be that where governments cannot or
will not act on public interest or demands then “there may be few options for poor communities but to develop
mechanisms for getting services some other way” (World Bank 2004, p. 65). An example might be the provision
of education in times of conflict or fragility, where the capacity of the State is diminished. International organ-
izations might also intervene in the case of a county being unwilling or unable to provide education due to a
lack of financial resources or lack of capacity to meet its obligations. International aid agencies frequently have
conditions relating to accountability and transparency, however, these may not be sufficient incentives for re-
cipient governments to fully comply (CFBT 2011). In such circumstances, international aid agencies would
need to consider alternative mechanisms that allow children to go to school, while also strengthening national
systems for the longer term. Any such mechanism would, however, need to “respond to needs and opportuni-
ties through both short- and long-run accountability routes” (Save the Children, 2008, p17). This encourages
and supports State accountability while also ensuring children are not missing out on school as has too often
been the case in conflict-affected fragile States.

International actors, including donors and IFIs therefore have an important role in strengthening government
accountability and capacity, while also supporting measures to ensure immediate access to free, quality, and
inclusive education in line with human rights obligations.

4.2 The World Bank and HRBA

The right to education is primarily the responsibility of the child’s home State. However, as we have seen above,
it is also incumbent on international development partners, such as the World Bank, to play their role in pro-
tecting, respecting, and fulfilling the right to education. Support for education in other States through interna-
tional cooperation is set out in the CRC Article 4 and Article 28(3). This means that the policy and actions of
international actors should be consistent, and have as their ultimate objective the fulfillment of human rights
(UN, 1993). Translating this into practical and operational terms means:

    ➢ that development policies and programs have the fulfillment of human rights as their core objective;
    ➢ that human rights principles and standards should guide all development cooperation;


                                                                                                                     27
    ➢ and that this approach should strengthen the capacity of rights-holders to claim their rights, and of
      duty-bearers to meet their obligations (UN, 2006).

The Right to Education Project points out that according to international law, International Financial Institu-
tions, including the World Bank should give “greater attention to the protection of the right to education in
their policies, credit agreements, structural adjustment programs, and measures taken in response to the debt
crisis”.

Although the World Bank might arguably see itself as contributing to human rights through its activities, it has
faced criticisms for being too slow to adopt a HRBA (Cornwall et al, 2005), with its critics suggesting it did not
wish to be held accountable under the international human rights framework (Piron, 2005) and has simply
adopted a “[rh]etorical-formulaic incorporation” of a HRBA (Uvin, 2007, p. 599), in which rights language has
been appropriated without following through in its application. A more recent review of whether human rights
were reflected in the World Bank’s education policy concluded that they were not (Menashy, 2013); rather, it
was claimed that “the placement of discourse on rights within documents denotes the inclusion as either an
afterthought, or window-dressing, for it is clear from a broad analysis inclusive of several documents that a
rights-based approach is not dealt with in a serious manner” (Ibid, p. 754). The same research suggested this
omission requires serious interrogation given the leading role the World Bank plays in funding education, es-
pecially in the Global South (Ibid).

That is not to say that the World Bank has ignored human rights; however, inclusion of human rights still
remains largely absent in the World Bank’s core documents. It is the case that very limited mention of human
rights has featured in previous editions of the World Bank’s World Development Report, and there is only
minimal reference to human rights conventions in the World Bank’s current education strategy (World Bank,
2012). The World Bank’s explanation is that “human rights have traditionally been seen as political, and there-
fore outside of its mandate because of the political prohibitions contained in its Articles of Agreement” (World
Bank and OECD, 2016, p. 16). This explanation does not, however, hold up under scrutiny given both the
universal nature of human rights, and the wide ratification of human rights conventions by governments in all
regions of the world.

Fully embracing a HRBA in education will create greater synergy between the World Bank’s policy statements
and actions, ensuring there is no disconnect between how the World Bank works and its public commitment
as a convener of SDG4.

4.3 Conclusion

The positive impact of quality education is undeniable. It changes individual lives, the lives of their families and
communities, and is the key to sustainable development: no country has ever achieved development without
universalizing education. Overcoming the challenges and current barriers facing education will take time and
require systematic reforms and efforts over a prolonged period. Rather than view the right to education as a
rhetorical tool to make policy statements sound inclusive, this paper has outlined how this right can be opera-
tionalized to build more equitable and effective education systems leading to strong learning outcomes. The
right to education should play a guiding role for the achievement of SDG4, not only because every government
has made a legally-binding obligation to provide universal education, but also because it makes moral and prac-
tical sense, delivering stronger leaning outcomes that are more cost effective.

The current state of education globally, with 263 million children and adolescents still out-of-school and mil-
lions more not learning, along with a staggering 758 million adults living without functional literacy, is a global
scandal. Business as usual will not deliver on SDG4 and all those involved in the planning and delivery of
education, including international actors such as the World Bank, should reflect on past failings, as well as
successes. The repeated delays in fulfilling the universal right to education and meeting global policy promises


                                                                                                                28
on education suggests that the international community is failing to learn the basics: that political will and
adequate investment can deliver on the right to free, equitable, inclusive, quality education, leading to substantial
and sustainable improvements in the three spheres of the sustainable development agenda—economic, social,
and environmental. The LEARN principles of a HRBA-E (repeated from above), provide the criteria to ensure
SDG4 is realized. These are:

        Legal standards of the right to education guide implementation;
        Empowering children through quality rights-based learning;
        Accountability of duty-bearers to fulfill their obligations for education is upheld;
        Respect for the participation of rights-holders in their own education is constant;
        Non-Discrimination for all children to ensure equitable, inclusive learning is central.

This paper has sought to illustrate how the right to education can and should guide each and every step of the
education process—from policy, planning, and school management, to pedagogy, learning and financing—to
help address current barriers. This is entirely feasible. For example, the achievement of greater gender parity in
education is the result of a rights-based approach to tackling discrimination. What a HRBA-E does is keep the
focus of policy makers on where action is most needed in order to fulfill State obligations to protect, respect
and/or fulfill the right to education. This is true in times of peace or when delivering education in emergency
contexts. A HRBA-E can aid State-actors, such as civil servants working at national, regional, and local levels,
to strengthen the application of legal rights throughout the system. It can also support teachers and schools in
ensuring that rights guide their practice.

There are of course challenges in applying a HRBA. These range from a distorted perception that human rights
are part of political ideology; or that the fulfillment of rights is too costly; or that participation is too cumber-
some to be practical; to a simple lack of information and awareness that rights exists; or that poverty can only
be addressed through economic growth. For education, the latter has been a considerable problem, with gov-
ernments too focused on the human capital outcomes of education, tending to approach the planning and
implementation of education services through an instrumental, economic approach, without due focus on a
rights-based approach. This is misguided, as a HBRA-E supports more cost-effective fulfillment of quality
education and learning.

The vision of free, equitable, quality education that delivers on a diverse set of learning outcomes is not a
utopian ideal proposed by people who do not understand the political reality and economic constraints, it is a
globally recognized and legally binding commitment. What is more, evidence suggests that rights-based educa-
tion, which encourages active participation and empowerment, not only generates more social cohesion but
also enhances cognitive development (Bivens et al, 2008; Moriarty and Oswald, 2009). A HRBA approach to
SDG4 is the most effective intervention to build learning and enable the promise of education to be a reality
for all.

Through the ratification of one or more international human rights conventions, all countries have commit-
ted to the right to education, meaning that the standards provided for by the right to education have unani-
mous support. While a HRBA-E is not without tensions or challenges—and is certainly not a magic solu-
tion—it does offer a clear and practical path to the progressive universalization of free, equitable, inclusive
education, and must have a central place in delivering SDG4. The Right to Education is an end, and also a
means by which to achieve that end through a HRBA-E, as this paper has sought to highlight. A HRBA-E, as
noted above supports the right to education, rights in education and rights through education, and to reflect
the sentiment expressed by of Nelson Mandela, this type of rights-based “education is the most powerful
weapon which you can use to change the world”.




                                                                                                                 29
This paper has suggested how the right to education can be applied practically and should be integrated and
reflected in the policy, planning, and delivery of educational services by governments and their international
partners, including the World Bank.

The new sustainable development agenda commits to radical transformation to improve the lives of all people,
with a promise to leave no one behind. However, committing promises to paper is meaningless unless the
political will for immediate and sustained action and financial investment go hand-in-hand. It is not a cliché to
say education holds the key to a better future. Without education, the vision for transforming our world that
193 countries, the UN, the World Bank and others committed to in 2015, will not be achieved. A rights-based
approach is the best hope to achieve SDG4 and deliver on the promise of education.




                                                                                                              30
Bibliography for background paper HRBA-E

ActionAid & RTE Project. (2011). Promoting Rights in Schools: providing quality public education. London:
ActionAid.
Amnesty International. (2005). Human rights for human dignity A primer on economic, social and cultural rights (AI Index:
POL 34/009/2005). London: Amnesty International.
Amnesty International. (2008). Breaking Barriers: Safe Schools: Every Girl’s Right. London: Amnesty International
Amnesty International Ireland. (2005) Our Rights, Our Future Human Rights Based Approaches in Ireland: Principles,
Policies and Practice. Dublin: Amnesty Ireland.
African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights (2015) Concluding Observations and Recommendations on the
5th Periodic State Report of the Republic of Uganda (2010 – 2012). The Gambia: African Commission on Human &
Peoples’ Rights.
Aubry, S. and Dorsi, D. (2016) Towards a human rights framework to advance the debate on the role of private actors in
education. Oxford Review of Education Pages 612-628 | Published online: 26 Sep 2016. Retrieved Feb 2017.
Banda, D. (2008). Education for All (EFA) and African Indigenous Knowledge Systems (AIKS): The Case of the Chewa
People of Zambia (Unpublished doctoral thesis). Nottingham: University of Nottingham.
Barret, A. (2011). A Millennium Learning Goal for education post‐2015: a question of outcomes or processes. Comparative
Education 47(1), Pages 119-133 | Published online: 18 Feb 2011. Retrieved Feb 2017, from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03050068.2011.541682
Bivens, F.; Moriarty, K. and Taylor, P. (2009) Transformative Education and its Potential for Changing the Lives of
Children in Disempowering Contexts. IDS Bulletin 40.1. Brighton: IDS.
Boesen, J., and Martin, T. (2007). Applying a rights-based approach an inspirational guide for civil society. Copenhagen:
Danish Institute of Human Rights.
Committee on Rights of the Child. (2008). Day of General Discussion on “The Rights of the Child to Education in
Emergency Situations” Recommendations. Geneva: OHCHR.
Cornwall, A., and Nyamu-Musembi, C. (2004). Putting the 'Rights-Based Approach' to Development into Perspective
Source: Third World Quarterly, Vol. 25, No. 8 (2004), pp. 1415-1437 Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd
Danish Human rights Institute. (2016) Human rights Guide to the Sustainable Development Gaols Copenhagen: Danish
Institute of Human Rights: retrieved Feb 2017 from, http://sdg.humanrights.dk
Day Ashley L, Mcloughlin C, Aslam M, Engel J, Wales J, Rawal S, Batley R, Kingdon G, Nicolai S, Rose P
(2014) The role and impact of private schools in developing countries: a rigorous review of the evidence. Final report . Education
Rigorous Literature Review. Department for International Development. UK: DFID.
 http://eppi.ioe.ac.uk/cms/Default.aspx?tabid=3461
Delors, J. (1996). Learning The Treasure Within: Report to UNESCO of the International Commission on Education for
the Twenty -first Century. Paris: UNESCO.
Education Commission. (2017). A proposal to create a new International Finance Facility for Education Summary. Wash-
ington DC: Education Commission.
Freire, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the oppressed. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Georg Eckert Institute. (2017). Text from main web page, retrieved March 2017 from,
http://www.gei.de/en/the-institute.html
Global Campaign for Education. (2010). Education Rights: A guide for practitioners and activists. Retrieved Feb 201,
from http://www.actionaid.org/sites/files/actionaid/1._education_rights_-_a_guide_for_practition-
ers_and_activists.pdf
Global Campaign for Education. (2013). A Taxing Business: Financing Education For All Through Domestic Resources.
South Africa: GCE.
Global Campaign for Education (2016) Private Profit, Public Loss: why the push for low-fee private schools is throwing
quality education off track. South Africa: Global Campaign for Education
GCPEA. (2014). Education Under Attack. GCPEA: Retrieved February, 2017, from http://www.globalpartner-
ship.org/blog/17-ways-education-influences-new-17-global-goals




                                                                                                                              31
GCPEA. (2014). Guidelines For Protecting Schools And Universities From Military Use During Armed Conflict (2014).
New York: GCPEA.
GCPEA. (2015). Safe School Declaration. GCPEA: Retrieved March 2017, from http://www.protectingeduca-
tion.org/sites/default/files/documents/safe_schools_declaration-final.pdf
GCPEA. (2017). Safe Schools Declaration Endorsements. GCPEA: Retrieved May 2017, from http://www.protect-
ingeducation.org/guidelines/support.
GPE, IIEP and UNESCO. (2015). Guidelines for Education Sector Plan Preparation. United States and France: GPE,
IIEP.
GPE. (2015) 17 Ways Education Influences the 17 New Global Gaols. GPE Retrieved Feb 2017, from in
http://www.globalpartnership.org/blog/17-ways-education-influences-new-17-global-goals
IDMC (2017). ‘Global Report on Internal Displacement 2017’. IDMC, Retrieved in May 2017, from http://www.in-
ternal-displacement.org/assets/publications/2017/20170522-GRID.pdf .
IIEP. (2015). Safety, resilience and social cohesion: guide for education sector planners. Booklet 3. Paris: IIEP.
IHR Network. Human Rights Based Approaches in EU Development Policies. Retrieved form website Feb, 2017.
http://www.ihrnetwork.org/hr-based-approaches_180.htm
Katsui, H. 2008. Downside of the Human Rights-Based Approach to Disability in Development. Finland: Institute of
Development Studies Helsinki University
Kingdon GG, Little A, Aslam M, Rawal S, Moe T, Patrinos H, Beteille T, Banerji R, Parton B and Sharma SK
(2014) A rigorous review of the political economy of education systems in developing countries. Final Report. Education Rigorous
Literature Review. London: Department for International Development
Khawaja, B., Martinez, E., and Van Esveld, B. (2016). The Lost Years: Secondary Education for Children in Emergencies.
UK: Human Rights Watch.
Kline, R. (2002) A Model for Improving Rural Schools: Escuela Nueva in Colombia and Guatemala, Current Issues in
Comparative Education 22.2.
IDS. (2003. The rise of rights Rights-based approaches to international development. Policy briefing. Issue 17. Sussex. IDS
http://www.ids.ac.uk/files/Pb17.pdf
IDMC. 2016. Global report on Internal Displacement. Geneva: IDMC.
INEE, 2010 INEE Thematic Issue Brief: Human Rights. New York: INEE.
Lewin, Keith (2015) Educational access, equity, and development: planning to make rights realities. Fundamentals of Educa-
tional Planning. Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation.
LMTF. (Learning Metrics Task Force). 2013. Toward Universal Learning: Recommendations from the Learning Metrics
Task Force. Montreal and Washington, DC: UNESCO Institute for Statistics and Center for Universal Educa-
tion at the Brookings Institution.
Locatelli, R. and Tawil, S. (2015). NORRAG blog: Rethinking Education: Towards a Global Common Good. Retrieved
Feb 2017 from ,https://norrag.wordpress.com/2015/05/15/rethinking-education-towards-a-global-com-
mon-good/
Menashy, F. (2013) Interrogating an omission: the absence of a rights-based approach to education in World Bank policy
discourse. Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 2013  Vol. 34, No. 5. Retrieved Feb 2017
from http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01596306.2013.728368
Malala Fund. (2015). Beyond Basics: Making 12 Years of Education a Reality for Girls Globally. Washington DC: Malala
Fund
Malala Fund. (2016). Not Lost: Claiming Syria’s Future. Washington DC: Malala Fund.
McKinsey (2007) How the World’s Best Performing Schools Come Out on Top, UK: McKinsey and Company
McLean, H. (2014). Who Own Learning? Blog published on https://www.unite4education.org/uncatego-
rized/who-owns-learning/
Melchiorre, A., and Atkins, E. ( 2011) At What Age. UK: RTE Project.
Minority Rights Group International. (2010) Human rights-based approaches to development education a toolkit for activ-
ists  in new EU member states. Place of n.p. Retrieved Feb 2017 from, www.minority rights.org Minority rights
Moriarty, K. (2016) Rewriting the Ambition of SDG4: the Risk of Narrow Global Indicators. NORRAG NEWS 54.
Retrieved Feb 2017 from, http://www.norrag.org/



                                                                                                                            32
Moriarty, K. and Oswald, K. (2009) Transforming Children’s Lives Through Innovation in Quality Education: Implications
for Policy and Practice. Practice Paper Volume 2009 Number 4. UK: Institute of Development Studies.
Moumné, R. and Saudemont, C. (2015). Overview of the Role of Private Providers in Education in Light of Existing
International Legal Framework: Investments in Private Education: Undermining or Contributing to the Full Development of
the Human Right to Education. Paris: UNESCO.
MyWorld Analytics. (2015). Overview. MyWorld, Retrieved march 2017 from http://data.myworld2015.org
Narayan, D., Raj Patel Kai Schafft Anne Rademacher Sarah Koch-Schulte. (2000). Voices of the Poor: Can Anyone
Hear Us?. Washington DC. World Bank.
Norweigna Refugee Council (NRC) and Save the Children. (2015). Walk the Talk: Review of Donors’ Humanitarian
Policies on Education. Norway: NRC and Save the Children.
ODI. (2016).Education Cannot Wait Proposing a fund for education in emergencies. London: ODI
Novelli M, Higgins S, Ugur M, Valiente V (2014) The political economy of education systems in conflict-affected contexts:
A rigorous literature review. London: Department for International Development.
Nyamu-Musembi, C. and Cornwall, A. (2004). What is the “rights-based approach” all about? Perspectives from interna-
tional development agencies. UK: IDS
Pigozzi, M. J. PhD, (April 2004) The 10 Dimensions of Quality in Education Source: UNESCO-IBE Training Tools
for Curriculum Development. UNESCO-IBE Training Tools for Curriculum Development 1.1.2 P ENG
Piron, LH. (2005). Rights-based Approaches and Bilateral Aid Agencies: More Than a Metaphor?. UK: IDS
ODI. (2001). Economic Theory, Freedom and Human Rights: The Work of Amartya Sen. briefing paper. London: ODI
Sandkull, O. (2005) Strengthening Inclusive Education by Applying a Rights-based Approach to Education Programming.
Bangkok: UNESCO.
Red Cross (2017). Geneva Convention (IV) on Civilians, 1949. Retrieved Feb 2017 from, http://www.red-
cross.org/humanityinwar/geneva-convention-iv-on-civilians-1949.
Rose, P. (2002). Is the Non-State Education Sector Serving the Needs of the Poor?. Prepared and Presented at the 'Making
Services Work for Poor People'. Oxford Workshop held at Eynsham Hall for World Development Report
(WDR) 2003/04.
The Right to Education Project. (2015). Press Release http://www.right-to-education.org/news/joint-statement-
world-bank-support-privatisation-education. UK: RTE
Save the Children. (2015). What do children want in times of emergency and crisis? they want an education. London: Save
the Children.
Sen, A. (1999). Development as Freedom. UK: Oxford University Press.
Tomaševski, K. (2001).Right to Education Primer No. 1: Removing obstacles in the way of the right to education. Sweden:
SIDA and Raoul Wallenberg Institute
Tomaševski, K. (2001). Right to Education Primer No. 3: Human rights obligations: making education available, accessible,
acceptable and adaptable. Sweden: SIDA and Raoul Wallenberg Institute
Tomasevski, K. (2006) The State of the Right to Education Worldwide: Free or Fee?. 2006 Global Report. Copenhagen
http://www.katarinatomasevski.com/.
Tooley, J., & Long eld, D. (2015). The role and impact of private schools in developing countries: A response to the DFID-
commissioned ‘rigorous Literature review’. Pearson. retrieved from: https:// research.pearson.com/con-
tent/plc/prkc/uk/open-ideas/en/articles/role-and-impact-of-private-                      schools/_jcr_content/par/arti-
cledownloadcompo/ le.res/150330_Tooley_Long eld.pdf
UN General Comment No. 13: The right to education (article 13) (1999) (Adopted by the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights at the Twenty-first Session, E/C.12/1999/10, 8 December 1999). Retrieved Feb 2017 from,
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Education/Training/Compilation/Pages/d)GeneralComment No 13 The
right to education (article13)(1999).aspx
UN. (2008). COMMITTEE ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD DAY OF GENERAL DISCUSSION ON
“THE RIGHT OF THE CHILD TO EDUCATION IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS” RECOMMEN-
DATIONS. www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CRC/Discussions/.../Recommendations2008.do
UN. (2000). MDG Declaration. A/RES/55/2. http://www.unmillenniumproject.org/documents/ares552e.pdf
UN. (2003). The Human Rights-Based Approach to Development Cooperation: Towards a Common Under-
standing Among UN Agencies (Stamford Common Understanding). New York: UN
UN. (2006). FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ON A HUMAN RIGHTS-BASED APPROACH TO


                                                                                                                      33
DEVELOPMENT                 COOPERATION.               Geneva:     OHCHR        Retrieved     Feb     2017    from,
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/FAQen.pdf.
UN. (2011). Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. Geneva: OHCHR Retrieved Feb 2017 from
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/GuidingPrinciplesBusinessHR_EN.pdf
UN. (2013). Working Paper 1: The Six Grave Violations Against Children During Armed Conflict: The Legal Foundation.
(Updated Version). Retrieved Feb 2017 from, http://www.refworld.org/docid/528a107a6.html
UN. (2014) Plan of Action for the third phase (2015–2019) of the World Programme for Human Rights Education. Ge-
neva: OHCHR
UN. (2015). Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. New York: UN
UN (1999). General Comment No. 13: The right to education (article 13) (1999) (Adopted by the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights at the Twenty-first Session, E/C.12/1999/10, 8 December 1999) Re-
trieved Feb 2017 from, http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Education/Training/Compilation/Pages/d)Gen-
eralCommentNo13Therighttoeducation(article13)(1999).aspx
UN. (2001) General Comment No. 1: The Aims of Education (article 29) (2001). (Adopted by the Committee on the Rights
of the Child at the Twenty-sixth Session, CRC/GC/2001/1, 17 April 2001)
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Education/Training/Compilation/Pages/a)GeneralCommentNo1TheAimsofEduca-
tion(article29)(2001).aspx (downloaded Feb 2017).
UN. (2013) General Comment No. 16 CRC/C/GC/16,
IV        Geneva      Convention       (1949)       http://www.redcross.org/images/MEDIA_CustomProductCata-
log/m27740285_Geneva_Convention_IV.pdf (downloaded 22nd Feb)
UN. (1948). Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Retreived 7th February, 2016, from
http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/
UN. (1966). International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights (ICESCR)
UN International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD)
UN. (1979). Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)
UN. (1986) The Declaration on the Right to Development . New York. A/RES/41/128.
UN. (1989). Convention of the Rights of the Child (CRC)
UN. (1993) Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action. Vienna. UN
UN. (2000). Millennium Development Goals. New York. A/RES/55/2. UN
UN. (2008) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
UN (2015) Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development.
Res. 69/313. Addis Ababa. UN
UN. (2008) Right to education in emergency situations. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education
Document A/HRC/8/10. OHCHR. Geneva
UN (2012). Justiciability of the right to education. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education.
Document A/HRC/23/35. OHCHR. Geneva
UN (2014) Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education. Document A/69/402. OHCHR.
Geneva
UN Report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education, Kishore Singh. (2015). Protecting the right to
education against commercialization.. Geneva: OHCHR.
UNGA Report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education, Kishore Singh. (2013). Justiciability of the
right to education. Geneva: OHCHR.
UN HRBA PORTAL. (2017). FAQ on HRBA. LOCATION UNHRBA: Retrieved March 2017 from,
http://hrbaportal.org/faq/what-is-a-human-rights-based-approach
UN OCHR http://www.ohchr.org/EN/UDHR/Documents/UDHR_Translations/eng.pdf
UN. (2015). A/RES/70/1 Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
UIS (2016). Fact Sheet No. 39: THE WORLD NEEDS ALMOST 69 MILLION NEW TEACHERS TO
REACH THE 2030 EDUCATION GOALS. UIS, Canada.
UNESCO. (2000). ‘Dakar Framework for Action Education For All: Education for All: Meeting our Collective
Commitments’. UNESCO Paris
UNESCO. (2005) Global Monitoring Report EFA: The quality Imperative. Paris. UNESCO



                                                                                                                34
UNESCO and UNICEF (2007) A Human Rights-Based Approach to Education for All’. UNESCO Paris,
UNICEF, New York.
UNESCO (2013a). The Global Learning Crisis: Why Every Child Needs an Education. Paris: UNESCO.
UNESCO (2013b) Education Transforms Infographic. Paris. UNESCO
UNESCO. (2014). Global Education Monitoring Report: TEACHING AND LEARNING: Achieving quality for all.
Paris. UNESCO
UNESCO. (2015a). Global Monitoring Report – Education for All 200-2015: Achievements and Challenges.
Paris. UNESCO
UNESCO (2015b) Education 2030 Framework for Action. ED-2016/WS/28. Paris. UNESCO
UNESCO. (2015c) Collective Commitments: The role of civil society in the Education for All movement 2000-2015. Paris:
UNESCO.
UNESCO (2015d) Rethinking Education: Towards a Global Common Good. Paris: UNESCO
UNESCO GEM (2015e). Pricing the right to education: The cost of reaching new targets by 2030. Policy paper 18. Paris:
UNESCO.
UNESCO (2015e) How long will it take to achieve universal primary and secondary education? Technical background note
for the Framework for Action on the post-2015 education agenda. Paris: UNESCO
UNESCO GEM (2016). Aid to education stagnates, jeopardising global targets. Policy Paper Number 25. Paris:
UNESCO,
UNICEF (n.d) Glossary. Retrieved Feb 2017 from, https://www.unicef.org/gender/training/content/re-
sources/Glossary.pdf
UNICEF (2014a), Child Rights Education Toolkit: Rooting Child Rights in Early Childhood Education, Primary and Sec-
ondary Schools. First Edition’. Geneva. UNICEF Private Fundraising and Partnerships Division (PFP) 2014
UNICEF (2014b). A Study on Early Marriage in Jordan, 2014. New York. UNICEF
UNICEF. (2016). Human Rights Based Approach to Programming. UNICEF. Retrieved March 2017 from,
https://www.unicef.org/policyanalysis/rights/index_62012.html#1.
UIS. (2016) THE WORLD NEEDS ALMOST 69 MILLION NEW TEACHERS TO REACH THE 2030
EDUCATION GOALS. UIS FACT SHEET, No. 39. Quebec, Canada. UIS.
Uvin, P. (2010). From the right to development to the rights-based approach: how ‘human rights’ entered development. Devel-
opment in Practice, Volume 17, Numbers 4–5, August 2007. Published online. Retrieved Feb 2017.
Watkins, K. (2013) ‘Leaving no-one behind: an equity agenda for the post- 2015 goals’. London. Overseas Develop-
ment Institute.
Watkins, K (2014) The Convention on the Rights of the Child: Delivery on the promise for children is long overdue. (in
UNICEF (Ed) 25 YEARS OF THE CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD : Is the world a
better place for children?). New York. UNICEF
Watt, E. (2017). Killed, injured and forced to fight: 2016 was the deadliest year for Syria's children. Theirworld (online
http://theirworld.org/news/2016-worst-year-for-syria-children-says-unicef accessed April 2017)
World Bank. (2004) World development Report: Making Services Work for the Poor. Washington DC. The World Bank
World Bank. (2011). Learning for All Investing in People’s Knowledge and Skills to Promote Development: Education strategy:
World Bank Group Education Strategy 2020. Washing DC. The World Bank.
World Bank. (2012). Learning for All Investing in People’s Knowledge and Skills to Promote Development: World Bank
Group Education Strategy 2020. Washington DC. World Bank.
World Bank and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2013). Integrating Human Rights
into Development: Donor Approaches, Experiences, and Challenges. 2nd ed. Washington DC. The World Bank




                                                                                                                       35
