MSME FINANCE GAP
ASSESSMENT OF THE SHORTFALLS AND OPPORTUNITIES IN FINANCING
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES IN EMERGING MARKETS
            © INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 2017.
                         All rights reserved.
                         2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
                       Washington, D.C. 20433 www.ifc.org

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions
or all of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. IFC
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to repro-
duce portions of the work promptly, and when the reproduction is for educational
and non-commercial purposes, without a fee, subject to such attributions and
notices as we may reasonably require.

IFC does not guarantee the accuracy, reliability, or completeness of the content
included in this work, or for the conclusions or judgments described herein, and
accepts no responsibility or liability for any omissions or errors (including, without
limitation, typographical errors, and technical errors) in the content whatsoever
or for reliance thereon. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other infor-
mation shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Di-
rectors of The World Bank or the governments they represent.

The contents of this work are intended for general informational purposes only
and are not intended to constitute legal, securities, or investment advice, an opin-
ion regarding the appropriateness of any investment, or a solicitation of any type.
IFC or its affiliates may have an investment in, provide other advice or services
to, or otherwise have a financial interest in, certain of the companies and parties
(including those named herein).

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be
addressed to IFC’s Corporate Relations Department, 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue,
N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433.

International Finance Corporation is an international organization established by
Articles of Agreement among its member countries, and a member of the World
Bank Group. All names, logos, and trademarks are the property of IFC and you may
not use any of such materials for any purpose without the express written consent
of IFC. Additionally, “International Finance Corporation” and “IFC” are registered
trademarks of IFC and are protected under international law.



Photo Credits: World Bank Photo Library and Shutterstock
Contents

Acknowledgements..........................................................................................................................................III

Acronyms.............................................................................................................................................................V

Foreword............................................................................................................................................................ VII

Executive Summary..........................................................................................................................................IX

I. Introduction...................................................................................................................................................... 1

II. Other Finance Gap Studies.........................................................................................................................3

III. Current Methodology.................................................................................................................................. 7

IV. Quantifying the Finance Gap.................................................................................................................. 21

	    Number of Enterprises............................................................................................................................... 21

	    Formal Finance Gap...................................................................................................................................27

	    Gender Finance Gap.................................................................................................................................. 36

	 Potential Demand in the Informal Sector............................................................................................ 40
	
V. Implications of the MSME Finance Gap................................................................................................ 43

	    The Role of the Public Sector.................................................................................................................. 43

	    The Role of the Private Sector................................................................................................................ 46

Conclusion.......................................................................................................................................................... 51

Bibliography..................................................................................................................................................... 53

Annex...................................................................................................................................................................61




                                                                                                                                                         CONTENTS            i
Acknowledgements

This report, MSME FINANCE GAP: Assessment of the Shortfalls and Opportunities in Financing
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in Emerging Markets, was authored by Miriam Bruhn, Martin
Hommes, Mahima Khanna, Sandeep Singh, Aksinya Sorokina and Joshua Seth Wimpey. Analytical support
was provided by Yangyang Zhou.

The authors would like to acknowledge guidance from an Advisory Board consisting of
Deepa Chakrapani, Julie Fawn Earne, Matt Gamser, Dan Goldblum, Sharmila Hardi, Bill Haworth,
Anushe Khan, Jorge Rodriguez-Meza, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, Peer Stein, and Wendy Teleki,
as well as valuable contributions from Raymond Anderson, Minerva Adei Kotei, Kaylene Alvarez,
Nuria Alino Perez, Melina Mirmulstein and Leila Search.

The team received useful insights from consultations with Luke Haggarty, Hans Peter Lankes,
Toshiya Masuoka and others in the leadership team of IFC’s Economics & Private Sector Development
Vice-Presidency. The authors also benefited from discussions with Mary Hallward-Driemeier and
Navin Girishankar, members of the Country Private Sector Diagnostics team within the World Bank Group’s
Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice.

We thank Nadia Afrin, Barbara Balaj, and Li Wen Quach for the coordination in editing, design, and
production.

The authors would also like to acknowledge the major data providers: Bureau Van Dijk (Orbis), the
IMF’s Financial Access Survey, the OECD’s Financing Small and Medium Enterprise and Entrepreneurs
Scoreboard, and the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys.




                                                                               ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS           iii
Acronyms

   AFI	      Alliance for Financial Inclusion
   BOW	      Banking on Women
   CAGR	     Cumulative Adjusted Growth Rate
   CENFRI	   Centre for Financial Regulation and Inclusion
   CGAP	     Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
   DTF	      Distance to frontier
   EAP	      East Asia and Pacific
   ECA	      Europe and Central Asia
   ECB	      European Central Bank
   EIB	      European Investment Bank
   EIF 	     European Investment Fund
   ES 	      Enterprise Survey
   EU	       European Union
   FI	       Financial institution
   FCC	      Fully credit-constrained
   FAS 	     Financial Access Survey
   FMO	      Netherlands Development Finance Company
   GDP	      Gross domestic product
   GSMA	     Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association (Mobile Network Operators)
   IFC 	     International Finance Corporation
   IFRS	     International Financial Reporting Standards
   IMF	      International Monetary Fund
   IRR	      Internal rate of return
   ISIC	     International Standard Industrial Classification
   IT	       Information technology
   KPI	      Key performance indicator



                                                                        ACRONYMS   v
           KYC	         Know Your Customer
           LAC	         Latin America and the Caribbean
           LIFT	        Livelihoods and Food Securities Trust Fund
           LTDB	        Long-Term Debt
           MPOS	        Mobile point-of-sale
           MIX	         Microfinance Information Exchange
           NCC	         Not credit-constrained
           NFS	         Non-financial services
           NPL	         Non-performing loan
           OECD 	       Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
           OLS	         Ordinary least squares
           PCC	         Partially credit-constrained
           PO	          Purchase order
           MAPE	        Mean absolute percentage error
           MENA	        Middle East and North Africa
           MFI	         Microfinance institution
           MSME 	       Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
           RoA	         Return on assets
           RoE	         Return on equity
           SA	          South Asia
           SAFE	        Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises
           SCF	         Supply chain financing
           SME	         Small and Medium Enterprises
           SSA	         Sub-Saharan Africa
           UNDP	        United Nations Development Programme
           UNIDO	       United Nations Industrial Development Organization
           WBG	         World Bank Group
           WDI	         World Development Indicators




vi   MSME FINANCE GAP
Foreword

At the International Finance Corporation, we pay special attention to small businesses
because they are the engines of job creation and economic growth. Nine out of ten
new jobs worldwide are created by small businesses, and we need nearly 3,3 million
jobs every month in emerging markets by 2030 to absorb the growing workforce. Lack of access to finance
is one of the biggest hurdles small businesses face that prevent them from growing and creating jobs.

The private and public sector can better address this problem if they have better insights about the magnitude
and nature of the finance gap. With this in mind, IFC and McKinsey & Company conducted the first
comprehensive assessment of the global MSME finance gap in 2010. At that time, the magnitude of the
gap – over $2 trillion annually – caused quite a stir. However, looking back now we find that with the scarce
data available then along with the limitations of the methodology, we were, if anything, too conservative in
our estimation before. To address this, a group of staff from across the World Bank Group has developed a
new methodology that utilizes better and more diverse data from both supply and demand sides to assess
the finance gap in developing countries.

The results this time are even more staggering: 65 million enterprises, or 40 percent of formal micro, small
and medium businesses in developing countries, have an unmet financing need of $5.2 trillion every year.

So how are we addressing this financing gap and helping small businesses thrive?

•	 We are providing investments and advisory services to financial intermediaries catering to small
   businesses. In 2016, 304 of our financial institution clients made 62 million loans to micro, small and
   medium enterprises valued at $412 billion.

•	 We are strengthening financial markets by supporting collateral registries and credit bureaus that
   facilitated more than $250.6 billion in financing in 2016. More than 679,900 micro, small and medium
   enterprises were able to receive loans secured with movable property.

•	 We are investing and working with the multiple FinTech companies such as Ant Financial, Welabs,
   Afluenta, Moni, Kreditech, and Confio, which use cutting edge innovations to revolutionize MSME
   finance. Through these fintechs, IFC reaches hundreds of thousands of MSMEs.

•	 We also are promoting knowledge-sharing. The SME Finance Forum, which is managed by IFC, helps
   banks, fintechs and development banks learn from each other, link to new business and partnership
   opportunities, and lead in the industry-policymaker dialogue.




                                                                                                FOREWORD         vii
       The World Bank Group has taken on an ambitious goal of universal financial inclusion by 2020. The UN
       Sustainable Development Goals adopted by 193 member states calls for ensuring access to finance for small
       businesses, and the G20 leaders have also recognized the importance of financing SMEs as a critical piece
       of economic development. There is no doubt that closing the financing gap for small businesses has become
       a policy priority around the world. With co-operation and action by governments and the private sector, we
       believe that closing this gap for small businesses is achievable.


       Philippe Le Houérou
       Chief Executive Officer of IFC




viii    MSME FINANCE GAP
Executive Summary


M
          icro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) represent a significant part of the world
          economy, and are one of the strongest drivers of economic development, innovation and
          employment. Access to finance is frequently identified as a critical barrier to growth for
MSMEs.1 A growing body of literature has highlighted the extent to which MSMEs are credit constrained
across developing countries — including the importance of relieving this constraint to achieve higher growth.2
Creating opportunities for MSMEs in emerging markets is a key way to advance economic development
and reduce poverty. In this regard, it is also one of the major priorities of the World Bank Group and other
development institutions around the globe.

In recognition of the need to quantify the extent of the MSME finance gap, the International Finance
Corporation (IFC) partnered with McKinsey & Company in 2010 to produce an estimate of the gap.3 As the
first study of its kind, the aim was to produce approximate figures that could, at an aggregate level, highlight
this critical issue and the scale of the challenge. However, the assumption and methodology of the study
raised concerns about its use at a more granular level. For example, cross-country comparisons, crucial for
strategic policy decisions by international organizations and others, were not possible.

In response, a collaboration between various units at the IFC and the World Bank’s research unit developed
an innovative methodology that reassesses the gap and significantly moves this analytical work forward.
The team has estimated the systemic finance gap by utilizing more data from both the demand and supply
sides. As a result, it has produced more accurate, actionable country-level estimates of the gap.

In the developing economies studied,4 the potential demand for MSME finance is estimated at US
$ 8.9 trillion, compared to the current credit supply of $3.7 trillion.5 The finance gap from formal
MSMEs in these developing countries is valued at $5.2 trillion, which is equivalent to 19 percent
of the gross domestic product (GDP) of countries covered in this analysis. This in turn amounts to
1.4 times the current level of MSME lending in these countries. In addition, there is an estimated
$2.9 trillion potential demand for finance from informal enterprises in developing countries, which is



1. For example, see World Bank Enterprise Surveys: http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/research/enterprisenotes/topic/finance.
2. World Bank, Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial Inclusion. (Washington, DC: World Bank Group, 2013).
3. Stein, Peer, Tony Goland and Robert Schiff. Two Trillion and Counting: Assessing the Credit Gap for Micro, Small, and
Medium-size Enterprises in the Developing World. (2010).
4. This study covers 128 countries, of which 112 are low- and-middle income countries. The remaining low- and middle-income
countries for which the analysis was not carried out due to data unavailability together comprise only about 1 percentage of the
overall GDP of the emerging (low- and middle-income) economies.
5. The data source for the supply of MSME finance is the IMF Financial Access Survey — actual or extrapolated (if missing).



                                                                                                   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY               ix
    equivalent to 10 percent of the GDP in these countries. This research estimates that there are 65 million
    formal micro, small and medium enterprises that are credit constrained,6 representing 40 percent of all
    enterprises in the 128 reviewed countries.7

    Ostensibly, in comparison to the previous IFC estimate of the MSME finance gap, the level of the overall gap
    is larger. However, the increase in the estimate of the gap is primarily driven by changes in the methodology.
    It should not be necessarily interpreted as an increase in the gap, but rather as a more accurate re-calculation
    of the gap. Also, this robust methodology has the added benefit of being easier to update in future years.
    Thus, for the first time, the evolution of the gap will be captured, and the dynamic changes to the gap can
    be more accurately assessed.

    Data availability is the main hindrance to providing more granular estimates of the gap than can be provided
    here. Even with the currently proposed methodology, the lack of data imposed the need to make stronger
    assumptions than would be necessary if data availability was not an issue. As access to financing for
    MSMEs continues to be an issue of critical importance, there is an ongoing need to improve data collection
    efforts for MSME financing in developing countries.




    6. The credit-constrained MSMEs may be either partially or fully credit constrained.
    7. There are also a large number of informal enterprises lacking finance. However, due to the data limitations, this study does not
    estimate the number of informal businesses.



x   MSME FINANCE GAP
I. Introduction


A
       s in most economies, MSMEs in emerging markets are widely believed to be the engine of growth
       across. MSMEs employ a majority of the population and contribute significantly to economic
       growth. Yet, one of the main constraints to MSME growth has been access to finance. Given
the importance that MSMEs play in economic development and job creation, financing for MSMEs has
emerged as a popular topic of discussion and research (Hallberg 2001).

Over the last decade, many researchers and academics have tried to analyze the issue of MSME access
to finance, emphasizing their dependence on credit and cash flows. Beck and others (2014) concluded
that MSMEs appear to be severely underfunded. Ayadi and Gadi (2013) found that SMEs face numerous
obstacles in borrowing funds because they are small, less diversified, and have weaker financial structures.
This is implied by evidence pertaining to payment delays on receivables, declining liquidity, and an
increase in MSME insolvencies and bankruptcies. In addition, MSMEs find it difficult to provide high-
quality collateral at all times. They also experience difficulties in ensuring transparency with respect to their
creditworthiness.

Some studies show that MSMEs are more likely to face more credit constraints than larger firms. They also
rely more heavily on trade credit and informal sources of credit. Indeed, “throughout the developing world
access to credit is inversely related to firm size but positively related to productivity and financial deepening
in the country” (Kuntchev, Ramalho, Rodriguez-Meza, and Yang 2014).

Within-country evidence also points to credit constraints for MSMEs. For example, an impact evaluation
from India exploits variation in access to a targeted lending program. It finds that many SMEs are credit
constrained, and that providing additional credit to SMEs can accelerate their sales and profit growth
(Banerjee and Duflo 2012). In addition, research from Pakistan shows that a drop in subsidized credit led
to a significant decline in exports for small firms, but not for large firms. Large firms were able to replace
subsidized credit with credit at market interest rates. However, this was not true for small firms, thereby
indicating that small firms are credit constrained (Zia 2008).6

This study presents a new approach to the estimation of the unmet demand for financing from MSMEs in
developing countries. Importantly, it also describes the potential implications for the public-sector bodies,
private sector financial institutions and technology providers. The present research adds significant value
to the repository of data in the MSME space, and opens new opportunities for further investigation. It
estimates both supply of and demand for MSME finance on a global scale, which has never been done in



8. Another potential explanation for the findings is that small firms are less productive. Therefore, they cannot pay market interest
rates. However, over 95 percent of small firms have at least some credit at market interest rates. Moreover, Zia (2008) does not find
that more productive firms were less affected by the drop in subsidized credit.



                                                                                                              I. INTRODUCTION           1
    a comprehensive way. Although there are multiple regional and country-level studies, none have looked
    holistically at the entire universe of developing economies.

    With the primary motivation of developing a robust and replicable methodology for measuring the finance
    gap, the authors of this study have benefited from various data sources, such as the Bureau Van Dijk –
    Orbis data, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Financial Access Survey data, the Organisation for
    Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Financing SME and Entrepreneurs Scoreboard, and
    the World Bank Enterprise Survey data, among others.7 However, challenges remain with regard to the
    availability and reliability of good data (especially in the informal sector) necessary to make strategic
    decisions for servicing MSMEs. This highlights the need for further improvements in MSME-related
    data globally through investments in primary data collection (surveys) and secondary data aggregation
    (maintaining private and public data depositories). In addition, further investments are needed to facilitate
    the comprehensive standardization of improved data.

    The potential demand approach used in this research assumes that firms in developing countries have the
    same willingness and ability to borrow as their counterparts in developed markets. This approach estimates
    MSME equilibrium lending in developed economies according to the industry, age and size categories,
    and applies this benchmark to MSMEs in developing countries. It estimates the MSME finance gap as the
    difference between current supply and potential demand which can potentially be addressed by financial
    institutions. The study also estimates the potential demand for MSME finance in the informal sector by
    investigating the size of the shadow economy.

    This report is divided into five sections. The first section reviews the literature about financing MSMEs. The
    second section describes the methodology of the present research, data sources, and the model specification.
    The third section analyzes the results of the finance gap estimation, including regional comparisons, formal
    and informal MSME sector results, and gender disaggregated statistics. The fourth section elaborates on
    the implications of the finance gap for the public sector, including government agencies and multilateral
    organizations and lending institutions. Finally, the fifth section highlights implications for the private sector,
    including banks and non-bank financial institutions, as well as financial technology companies.




    9. There are other data sources of the supply and demand of MSME finance, such as originated by Microfinance Information
    Exchange (MIX), GSM Association (GSMA), Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI), the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
    (CGAP), Finscope, and the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF). However, they lack standardization and
    comprehensive country coverage, thereby making the data difficult to use in a global study.



2   MSME FINANCE GAP
II. Other Finance Gap Studies


T
      he challenge of access to finance as a constraint for MSMEs has been thoroughly established through
      research efforts. However, little research has been conducted about the difference between the supply
      and demand of financing to MSMEs to determine if a financing gap exists for MSMEs, and, if so,
what the size of such a gap would be. In recent years, researchers have tried to explore this question for
emerging markets in general, or for a smaller group of developing countries.

In 2010, for the first time, the IFC and McKinsey & Company tried to estimate the size of the MSME
financing gap. The results were released through the IFC Enterprise Finance Gap database. This study
was updated again in 2013 (IFC 2013) and eventually covered 177 economies. The study concluded that
the size of the gap in developing economies was around $ 2.1–$ 2.6 trillion, or about one-third of the total
outstanding MSME credit in these countries. Of the 85-100 million formal MSMEs in developing countries,
close to 60 percent are estimated to be either unserved, that is, they do not have a loan or overdraft —or
underserved, that is, they have a loan or overdraft, but still experience access to finance as a constraint.

Regional studies have mostly focused on Europe because the data quality at the firm level is much better
then in developing economies. As such, the OECD has been looking at this issue since 2006. They refer to
the SME finance gap as the “financing gap”. The first study the OECD (2006) undertook was a qualitative
assessment of how prevalent such a gap is in both OECD and non-OECD countries. The study concluded
that emerging economies have a more pervasive gap than in OECD countries. Subsequently, the OECD
(2016) started publishing an annual scorecard on SME financing, and explored options for alternative
sources of financing for SMEs to bridge both their financing and information gaps (OECD 2015). Using the
scorecard, the OECD now annually tracks core indicators for 37 OECD countries.

In 2013, the European Investment Bank (EIB 2013) conducted a series of studies to measure the financing
needs of its Eastern Partnership Programme Countries, including Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova,
and Ukraine. In its synthesis report containing the results from all five countries, the EIB tried to measure
the demand and supply of credit based on publicly available data. The measure for demand was the average
loan demanded by firms that received a loan. The measure for supply was based on outstanding loans to
SMEs in a given country. The study concluded that although the financial sectors in these countries are
doing an adequate job of providing financing to SMEs, there are sizeable gaps in rural areas, as well as in
the agricultural sector. There are also financing gaps for SMEs lacking collateral, for longer tenure credits,
and for SMEs whose owners have lower literacy levels.

The European Investment Fund (EIF) (2014) tried to quantify suboptimal investment situations and the
investment needs of SMEs through a pragmatic approach that incorporates a forward-looking element into
the market assessment. As such, the EIF complemented the comparison of supply and potential demand for
financing for SMEs with an analysis of SME finance market weaknesses. For each financial instrument,



                                                                          II. OTHER FINANCE GAP STUDIES          3
    the EIF tried to assess a mismatch between potential demand and supply. The resulting mismatch is their
    measure of the SME finance gap.8

    Supply was measured based on publicly available data, and expected demand was calculated based on
    reasonable estimates of average loan amounts multiplied by the number of expected applications. As the
    latter measures potential demand, it is also expected to take into consideration the fact that some SMEs
    may not apply for financing because they expect their applications to be rejected. This practical approach
    has been tested in multiple countries. Similar to the findings of Kuntchev and others (2013), the EIF also
    concluded that smaller and younger companies have bigger financing gaps.

    Based on the work of the EIB and the EIF, the European Union (EU) Commission estimated the SME
    financing gap for its member countries in 2013. The study concluded that for the years 2009-2012, the
    average SME financing gap for the EU was within the range of €20 to €112 billion per country. The study
    multiplied the average SME loan size by the proportion of financially viable SMEs that faced problems
    accessing financing between 2009 and 2012. This included SMEs that were refused loans, SMEs that had
    turned down bank loans, and those that were discouraged from applying for loans.

    Lopez de Silanes and others (2015) conducted a pan-European study estimating the difference between
    supply and demand in SME financing. In particular, they focused on five European countries: France,
    Germany, the Netherlands, Poland, and Romania. They concluded that the SME financing gap (as a share
    of GDP) in these countries is three to five times larger than that of the United States (US). This study used




    10. The European Court of Auditors (2012b, p. 18) sees “a full analysis of nationwide demand and supply of SME finance by type
    of financial instrument” as best practice for an assessment of a financing gap.



4   MSME FINANCE GAP
publicly available data on outstanding loans and equities issued to SMEs in order to estimate the supply
of SME financing. The demand for loans and equity among SMEs was computed using the Survey on the
Access to Finance of Enterprises (SAFE) of the European Central Bank (ECB) and publicly available data.
The authors built on the EIB methodology (2013) by using additional sources of data and a broader measure
of loan demand. The loan demand was measured by triangulating loans obtained versus loans desired by
SMEs. They also measured the loan demand of those firms that had applied for loans, but had been rejected.

A lack of cross-country statistics led multiple researchers to focus their work on country-level analysis of the
financing gap. Most of these studies relied on publicly available measures of the supply of credit. However,
some tracked different measures for actual demand, while others tried to measure potential demand. Singh
and others (2016) concluded that in 2014-15, a $0.77 billion financing gap existed for women-owned SMEs
in Bangladesh. This amount corresponds to an unmet financing demand for 60.2 percent of women-owned
SMEs. Similarly, IFC (2014) estimated that there was $5 billion in additional loans demanded by Mongolian
SMEs in 2014, of which 24 percent corresponds to demand by women-owned SMEs. In Indonesia, the IFC
(2016) estimated that 54 percent of SMEs were interested in obtaining a bank loan. Of these SMEs, the
potential demand for credit from women-owned SMEs in 2014 amounted to $6 billion. A similar study by
the IFC in 2012 estimated the potential demand gap by MSMEs in India to be $418 billion.

This study makes a unique contribution to the existing literature by providing estimates of the size of the
MSME financing gap across developing economies from both the demand and supply sides. As noted,
previous literature focused on regional- or country-level estimates due the paucity of data, and the only
other cross-regional estimates analyzed the gap only from the supply side. This report estimates the size of
the MSME finance gap using a potential demand approach, which is outlined in Section III. Essentially, it
models the potential demand for credit by MSMEs, and tries to match it with the supply of credit.

While arriving at this unique approach (Section III),
the team also tried to extend the work of Beck and
others (2013) to devise another measure. Beck and
others (2013) outline multiple frameworks to measure
potential demand using a financial possibility frontier,
or a constrained optimum to categorize different
problems of shallow financial markets that result in
a mismatch between supply and demand for financial
services.

A simple regression equation was used to estimate
the relationship between MSME outstanding finance
volumes and other country-level macroeconomic and
institutional characteristics (for example, population,
GDP per capital, lending rates, existence of credit
bureaus, the stability of the banking sector, and the
number of MSMEs). Assumptions about potential
values of some of the dependent variables were used
to estimate the frontier volume of potential demand for
MSME finance. The difference between this predicted
value of potential demand and the current volume of
outstanding MSME finance could have been another
measure of the MSME finance gap. This measure


                                                                            II. OTHER FINANCE GAP STUDIES          5
    would represent the additional MSME finance demanded by firms if the countries’ macroeconomic and
    institutional conditions improved. This approach concluded that the MSME financing gap in emerging
    economies exists and is sizeable.

    However, the size of the gap was sensitive to data limitations, including missing data and outliers. For
    example, as estimates of all countries depend on each other, changes in the data for one country sometimes
    led to big changes in estimated demand for another country. Furthermore, in order to use this macroeconomic
    model across multiple countries, the list of dependent variables that could be used was limited. In this
    regard, the team decided to only present the results of the potential demand approach (as outlined in Section
    III of this report).




6   MSME FINANCE GAP
III. Current Methodology


A
          ny proposed methodology to estimate the MSME finance gap faces a number of conceptual and
          data availability challenges. This section, guided by the leading question of why a finance gap
          might exist, discusses the proposed methodology in detail.

The first issue in developing an empirical methodology aimed at estimating the gap is conceptualizing what
a MSME finance gap actually means. According to the tenets of basic economic theory, under market-
clearing equilibrium interest rates, the amount of financing demanded equals the credit being supplied.
Thus, a “financing gap” is not a meaningful concept. However, subsequent economic literature has moved to
identifying peculiarities of finance that may lead to the existence of a financing gap without price distortions
because financiers may not supply loanable funds for a variety of reasons. For instance, some issues of
primary importance include the complications arising from asymmetric information, such as moral hazard
and adverse selection (Stiglitz and Weiss 1981).

Therefore, the core of an empirical strategy in estimating the financing gap is to frame the effect of these
challenges which leave firms unable to access external financing. The concept of a MSME financing gap
proposed here relies on estimating how much financing MSMEs in a country would have sought (willingness)
and been able to obtain (ability) if they operated in a better institutional, regulatory and macroeconomic
environment. On the supply side, this environment would allow financiers to make available more financing
as challenges, such as asymmetric information, would be mitigated.

The second, more practical issue relating to estimating the finance gap is the scarcity of broadly available
cross-country data on both the supply and the demand sides.

Several institutions collect data about the supply of finance. For example, IFC surveys approximately 400
financial institutions annually (the Reach Survey), and collects data on the loan portfolio to MSMEs, retail
and corporate customers. The data collection also includes deposit volumes, channels, and demographic
information of the client base of the financial institution (FI). Another example is an annual survey conducted
by MIX, which partners with 1,033 microfinance institutions to collect data about their loan portfolios,
deposits, gender financing, channels, margins and other outreach and profitability indicators.

Great progress has been achieved in improving these data sources. However, the data remains fragmented
and is not entirely representative of each developing country.9 The Financial Access Survey (FAS) of the


11. Other institutions conduct country-level diagnostics to collect supply-side data. For example, as a result of a partnership between
the UNCDF, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Livelihoods and Food Securities Trust Fund (LIFT) and
the Centre for Financial Regulation and Inclusion (Cenfri), the Making Access Possible initiative collects supply-side data through
the in-country research and interviews with key players (for example, Making Access Possible (for example, Myanmar Financial
Inclusion Roadmap 2014-2020)



                                                                                                III. CURRENT METHODOLOGY                  7
    International Monetary Fund (IMF) is a global data depository of statistics about outstanding loan portfolios
    of almost all of the financial institutions around the world. Although this database is not complete for all
    countries, it is a serious attempt to harmonize the data collection. Continued progress is expanding the
    coverage as well as the depth of MSME supply-side data, which will bolster further research on the topic.
    FAS data was used as a primary source of supply-side data for the purposes of the present study. It was
    supplemented by the data from the SME Scorecard of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
    Development (OECD), as described in more detail in Step 3 below.

    Estimations relating to the demand for financing require detailed firm-level data that is comparable across
    countries. Some institutions conducted in-depth, firm-level surveys and studies to identify demand for
    finance and constraints regarding access to finance at the country level, such as initiatives supported by
    development financial institutions, including the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP), IFC,10
    the World Bank, the Netherlands Development Finance Company (FMO), the UNCDF, FinScope,11and
    national statistical bureaus, among others.

    However, these surveys and studies lack cross-country harmonization. Thus, detailed firm-level data with
    comprehensive information about current financial standing and financing needs are unavailable at the
    global level. This restriction implies that any estimation of the financing gap has to rely on less complex,
    firm-level data sources, for example, data collected by the World Bank Enterprise Surveys. The lack of data
    also imposes the need to make stronger assumptions than would be necessary if data availability was not
    an issue.

    The lack of uniform data about the informal MSME market segment represents an especially serious
    constraint. Multiple agencies are working on collecting data from microfinance institutions, including MIX
    and the Groupe Speciale Mobile Association (GSMA) or mobile network operators, where many informal
    enterprises might be traced. However, there is no governing body or unified data aggregator which can be
    confidently used as a source of informality data across all developing countries. This study refers to the only
    known global research about the shadow economy by Schneider and others (2010), and an extension of this
    research by Schneider (2012) as a proxy for the informal MSME segment.


    Overview of Methodology
    The methodology proposed here for calculating the MSME finance gap relies on estimating the “potential
    demand” for financing by MSMEs in emerging economies, and then comparing it with the current supply
    of financing. The notion of potential demand expresses the amount of financing that MSMEs would need,
    and financial institutions would be able to supply if they operated in an improved institutional, regulatory
    and macroeconomic environment. Conceptually, this methodology concretely bases the calculation of the
    financing gap on underlying issues that give rise to it in the first place.

    For this purpose, and as a first step, the methodology entails benchmarking the prototypical financing
    environment where MSME credit markets function with minimal imperfections. How much do MSMEs of
    a certain size and a certain maturity level (age) operating in a certain industry/sector typically borrow under
    “ideal” conditions? The second step is to apply these benchmarks to MSMEs operating in the emerging



    12. Multiple studies, including Bangladesh, Indonesia, Mongolia, and Vietnam.
    13. Multiple country-level studies, including Cambodia, India, Myanmar, Pakistan, and Tanzania.



8   MSME FINANCE GAP
economies where the gap is to be calculated. This results in the estimated “potential demand”. Finally, the
third step is to compare the potential demand with the existing supply within these countries to quantify
the MSME finance gap. From a data availability standpoint, this approach also has the practical benefit of
requiring more detailed firm-level financial information only for MSMEs in the benchmarked developed
economies.

The underlying thrust of this methodology arises from assumptions first proposed by Rajan and Zingales
(1998). In particular, the methodology here relies on three assumptions set forward in their influential
paper, namely that: (1) “there are technological reasons for variability in dependence on external finance
across industries”; (2) “technological differences persist across countries”; and, therefore (3) “we can use
an industry’s dependence on external funds as identified in the United States as a measure of its dependence
in other countries”. Although Rajan and Zingales use these assumptions for a very different purpose, they
can peripherally guide the starting point of the methodology proposed here.

This proposed approach has a number of advantages, as well as limitations, over the other finance gap
estimation methods.


Advantages of the Methodology
By its very nature, the estimation of the finance gap requires contemplating a counterfactual scenario. As
discussed, computing the actual demand for the countries is not helpful, as it would equal supply under
market-clearing equilibrium conditions. The thrust behind the existence of a gap lies with those MSMEs
that would/could borrow more given certain improvements in the financing environment. This can also
be thought of as the higher willingness of financial institutions to finance credit-worthy MSMEs. IFC’s
previous study (2010) about the MSME finance gap used firm-level datasets to identify enterprises that
were credit constrained. It also made assumptions regarding how much these enterprises would want to
borrow.




                                                                             III. CURRENT METHODOLOGY          9
     The problems with the previous approach are primarily twofold: (1) the assumptions about how much credit
     constrained firms would borrow was highly arbitrary; and (2) the counterfactual under which the gap exists
     was not well defined. The problem stemming from the counterfactual definition was that it was difficult to
     comprehend the total increase in the demand for finance. The changes in the enabling environment would
     not only allow an expansion of access to those MSMEs currently without sufficient financing, but would
     also trigger even more borrowing by those MSMEs that currently had financing. On the supply side, the
     lack of a definition of the counterfactual also raised uncertainty about the bankability of those currently
     unserved or underserved MSMEs. In fact, the previous methodology did not consider how much financial
     institutions would want to finance. Hence, the bankability consideration was entirely absent.

     The methodology proposed here defines the counterfactual more concretely. By relying on a
     benchmarking approach, the regulatory and macroeconomic changes required for the gap to manifest are
     clearly defined.


     Limitations of the Methodology
     This methodological approach has several limitations. For example, the benchmarking exercise assumes that
     a MSME finance gap and market distortions in MSME lending do not exist in the benchmarked countries.
     In addition, the benchmarking concentrates simply on the debt-to-sales ratio. There is a strong assumption
     that debt levels are primarily a function of sales. The most important limitation, perhaps, is in terms of
     interpretation and usability. The MSME finance gap estimated utilizing this methodology captures the latent
     demand that is only realized over the long-term when these economies approach financial development and
     regulatory sophistication similar to that of the benchmarked countries. This may not be the most useful
     measure of the gap for some scenarios and countries. For example, in a low-income country with very
     little financial development and an inadequate enabling regulatory environment, the gap — when its level
     of development approaches that of an advanced economy — may not be the appropriate comparator. For
     this country, a much more actionable data feature could be the gap when benchmarked against a regional
     comparator.

     The methodology proposed here is fluid enough to be adapted for such a comparison. Data permitting,
     the ratios of debt-to-sales for a regional comparator can be utilized as the appropriate benchmark. For the
     purpose of this report, however, the benchmarked countries are defined globally so that the resulting gap is
     comparable across countries.

     Each of the three computation steps of the methodology are now described in more detail.

     Step 1: Benchmarking
     As outlined above, the first step of the methodology entails estimating the financing needs of MSMEs
     in benchmarked countries where credit markets function relatively smoothly. Rajan and Zingales (1998)
     use the United States as their sole benchmark. However, they acknowledge that any country with a well-
     functioning credit market can, in principle, be used to measure the industry’s dependence on external
     financing. A wider selection of benchmark countries will also broaden coverage to a diverse number of
     industries.

     Ten countries serve as benchmarks: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Israel, New
     Zealand, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. These countries are selected based
     on the criteria that they are high-income and rank highest on the “Getting Credit” module of the World


10   MSME FINANCE GAP
Bank’s Doing Business Index. The Getting Credit module explores two sets of issues—the strength of credit
reporting systems and the effectiveness of collateral and bankruptcy laws in facilitating lending. In addition,
income-level proxies are used for a host of characteristics related to regulatory efficiency. Together, these
two criteria drive the selection of countries in which the regulatory and institutional environment favors
well-functioning credit markets.

In the spirit of Rajan and Zingales’ original assumption, three broad industry groupings – Manufacturing,
Services and Retail – are chosen as the first category to benchmark MSME financing profiles. In addition,
departing from their assumption, two additional layers of disaggregation are introduced, namely the size
and age of MSMEs.

The additional granularity introduced by these two categories within an industry is based on guidance
from the existing literature. An extensive literature review has shown that smaller firms tend to be more
financially constrained than their larger counterparts (Beck and others 2005, 2006, and 2008; Cressy 2002;
IADB 2004; and Schiffer and Weder 2001). Meanwhile, younger firms are more likely to struggle in a
credit environment that lacks a strong regulatory environment because they have shorter credit histories
and typically do not have established relationships with lenders (Berger and Udell 1995; Chakrobarty and
others 2006; Cole 1998; Ezeoha and Botha 2012; and Steijvers and others 2009).

The firm-level information regarding the amount of borrowing by typical firms within these categories
in the ten benchmark countries is provided by Bureau van Dijk’s ORBIS database. It is a commercial
dataset, which contains administrative data on balance sheets and income statements for over 130 million
firms worldwide. The ORBIS database harmonizes the collected data into a standard “global” format that
facilitates within and cross-country comparisons of firms. Work done by Kalemli-Ozcan and others (2015)
to determine the representativeness of the ORBIS database on firms in select European countries finds that
ORBIS covers 75-80 percent of the economic activity reported in Eurostat. It also matches the official size
distribution of firms provided by Eurostat.




                                                                              III. CURRENT METHODOLOGY            11
     For each of the three categories described above, the mean debt-to-sales ratio is computed across firms in
     the ten countries. Debt is the sum of short-term loans12 and long-term debt.13 Other non-current liabilities,
     such as trade debts, are not included. Sales refers to the operating revenues of the company. To limit the
     effect of outliers, the top and bottom 5th percentile of the distribution of the variables is omitted from the
     analysis. The assumption inherent in the benchmarking relies on an unconstrained business environment
     that allows for a true financial equilibrium to emerge. Therefore, the post-global financial crisis years from
     2011-2015 are selected. The final dataset contains over 800,000 observations. Table 1 summarizes the
     computed mean debt-to-sales ratio for the intersection of each of the three categories.

     The summarized table 1 conforms to prevalent understandings of MSME financing needs in various
     categories. Young firms, defined as firms that commenced operations within five years, require more credit
     than their more mature counterparts within the same size and industry categories. For young firms, an
     increase in size is generally correlated with higher financing needs, whereas the opposite holds true for
     more mature firms. On average, holding other variables constant, MSMEs in the retail sector obtain the
     least amount of financing.

     An implicit assumption in the benchmarking exercise is that the observed use of financing by firms in
     these economies represents the actual demand. Furthermore, for the benchmarked countries, an additional
     supposition is that there is no potential demand beyond the actual demand. In other words, there is no MSME
     finance gap in these countries.


     Table 1: Mean Debt-to-Sales Ratios

      Size of MSME (employees)a                  0 to 9                 10 to 19           20 to 49          50 to 99           100 to 249

      Age of MSME                          Young      Mature       Young         Mature Young Mature Young Mature Young Mature

      Manufacturing                         0.34        0.28        0.32          0.22   0.33    0.21     0.31      0.20      0.34       0.19

      Retail                                0.25        0.21        0.22          0.17   0.22    0.16     0.25      0.14      0.31       0.14

      Services                              0.25        0.28        0.24          0.23   0.31   0.24      0.52      0.28      0.52       0.32

     Source: MSME Finance Gap study calculations (based on the Orbis dataset).

     a. There is significant variation in the definition of MSME size categories and often relies on a combination of employees, assets and reve-
     nues. Even for a categorization based on the number of employees, there is substantial variation in definitions across countries. This study
     defines micro enterprises as those with less than 10 employees, and MSMEs as those with less than 250 employees. This is the most widely
     used definition in the publications, and according to research by IFC’s MSME Country Indicators (2014), the most widely used definition by
     individual countries.




     14. The variables name in ORBIS is LOAN, and is defined as short-term financial debts (for example, to credit institutions), plus part of
     long-term financial debts payable within the year.
     15. The variables name in ORBIS is LTDB, and is defined as long-term financial debts with maturities longer than a year (for
     example, to credit institutions) in the form of loans and credits. LTDB stands for Long-Term Debt.




12    MSME FINANCE GAP
Step 2: Potential demand for MSME finance
The second step of the methodology entails applying the ratios obtained in the first step to the universe of
MSMEs in each category for all emerging economies. The World Bank Enterprise Surveys furnish this data
in a consistent and comparable manner across countries.

The Enterprise Surveys use a common questionnaire and a uniform sampling methodology to produce
survey data about manufacturing and service sector firms that are comparable across countries. In total,
133 emerging economies are covered by the Enterprise Surveys. Stratification of the sample is based on
three criteria: sector, firm size (the number of employees), and geographic location. The stratified random
sampling methodology is used to generate a sample large enough to be representative of the non-agricultural,
formal private economy, as well as key sectors and firm size classifications.

For the purpose of this methodology, it is crucial that the Enterprise Surveys provide estimates of the
universe of MSMEs within each category using the survey weights. In essence, for each of the 30 categories
shown in table 1, the Enterprise Surveys provide estimates for both the average sales and the total number
of firms. When applying the benchmark ratio of each category to the average sales and total number of
firms estimated by the Enterprise Surveys, summing up across the economy produces the potential MSME
demand for financing in each country.

An estimation issue was identified when comparing total sales calculated for the universe of firms through
the Enterprise Survey with known total aggregates from other sources. For example, for the manufacturing
sector, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) provides total sales (disaggregated
by the International Standard Industrial Classification [ISIC] industry classification) for a large array of
countries. Similarly, for the service sector, the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) provide
the total value added by the service sector (a lower-bound on sales). Using these comparisons, the total sales
for each of the categories under the respective industries was scaled up to compensate for non-universal
coverage of the Enterprise Surveys.16

The resulting potential demand for each country is interpreted as the hypothetical equilibrium amount of
financing for MSMEs in the country as a result of higher firm demand, as well as the higher propensity
by financial institutions to lend given their operations in an institutional, regulatory and macroeconomic
environment similar to that of the benchmarked countries.

Step 3: Existing supply of MSME finance
Existing lending to MSMEs by financial institutions is available from two data sources, namely the IMF’s
Financial Access Survey (FAS), and the OECD’s SME Scorecard.17 Both FAS and OECD instruct monetary
authorities to provide MSME data using their own local definition that reflects the local banking context.




16. In many countries, under-sampling by the Enterprise Survey is a known issue because, for example, of the sizes of the economies
and available sampling resources. The population of firms covered by the Enterprise Surveys does not include firms with fewer than
5 employees, as well as agriculture, extractive industries, personal services, financial services, education, healthcare, and utilities,
among others.
17. Other data sources reporting supply side data for microenterprises in particular were also considered. These included, for
example, data collected as part of the MIX Market Partnership and the GSM Association (GSMA).



                                                                                                III. CURRENT METHODOLOGY                   13
     The FAS is a cross-country, aggregated, supply-side database pertaining to access to, and the use of, financing
     and financial services by resident households and nonfinancial corporations, including by MSMEs. The FAS
     is administered annually and data is collected from national regulators and supervisors based on the IMF’s
     guidelines and survey formats. The FAS covers commercial banks, credit unions and financial cooperatives,
     deposit-taking microfinance institutions, as well as other non-deposit-taking financial corporations. The
     OECD’s Financing SMEs and Entrepreneurs report (2017) provides information on debt, equity, asset-
     based finance, and framework conditions for SME and entrepreneurship finance in 39 countries. When
     available, the FAS is the primary data source, and data from the OECD’s SME Scorecard is used to augment
     any missing data.

     Relevant to the analysis at hand, both datasets provide lending information specifically related to MSMEs.
     Although almost all countries report total lending activities, only 52 countries report disaggregated MSME
     lending through the FAS. The MSME lending volume for another 15 countries not covered by FAS is
     available through the OECD’s SME Scorecard. The reported MSME lending volumes were compared to
     total lending as well as private sector credit provided by the financial sector (IMF) to identify outliers.
     For countries where the ratios were too high or too low,18 the MSME lending data was substantiated
     through their central banks or through public information from statistical agencies. Furthermore,
     for another 3 countries not reporting to FAS or the OECD, MSME lending data was ascertained
     from credible country sources. The total MSME lending volume data is available for 71 countries.19

     For the remaining countries, a regression framework is proposed to predict the missing MSME volume. The
     following cross-sectional ordinary least squares (OLS) regression is estimated using country-level data:

     MSME Lending= α{MSME} + β{Macro} + γ{Banking} + η	                              (1)

     The dependent variable is the log of the current MSME lending in the country. MSME refers to a vector of
     country characteristics relating to MSMEs, specifically the number of MSMEs as a percentage of the total,
     the share of MSMEs with access to external financing, and the MSME lending volume as a percentage of
     the total. All of these variables come from the Enterprise Surveys. Countries where there are more MSMEs
     in the economy, and where there is more access to finance, are expected to have higher MSME lending
     volume.

     Macro refers to a vector of variables relating to the general macroeconomic environment, including
     population, GDP, and a dummy variable to indicate whether the country is fragile or conflict affected. All
     these variables are sourced from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. The first two macro
     variables relating to the size of the economy are general, positive predictors of MSME lending. The dummy
     variable reflecting fragility and conflict is expected to have a negative effect.




     18. In particular, the top and bottom 3 countries ranked by the ratios were considered for further substantiation. A few additional
     countries were chosen for further research when the ratios were flagged as an outlier for the country’s income group.
     19. These include both developed and emerging economies.



14   MSME FINANCE GAP
Finally, banking refers to a collection of variables relating to the banking, regulatory and institutional
environment, including the lending interest rate (WDI); the Z score; the Lerner Index;20 credit bureaus;
movable collateral registry dummies; contract enforcement, and distance to frontier (DTF).21

The lending interest rate conveys information about the price of financing directly, and the Lerner index
captures the market competition. A more competitive market is expected to serve MSMEs better, and
have higher MSME lending volumes. Establishing a credit bureau or collateral registry has been shown
to increase access to financing for MSMEs. The two remaining regulatory variables point to the general,
enabling regulatory environment that may be conducive to lending overall. The η refers to robust standard
errors. The use of logs helps deal with outliers and prevents negative predicted values. In addition, to reduce
noise and increase observations, three-year averages of all variables are used.

The primary motivation for the regression and the choice of variables lies in their predictive power. As
such, in a cross-sectional regression using aggregate country-level data, the volume of variables considered
means that multicollinearity is potentially an issue. Thus, an interpretation of signs and estimate sizes is
not prudent. However, the computation of the within-sample, mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) is
used to confirm good fit and predictive power. In addition, a series of deliberately curtailed sub-sample
regressions followed by “out-of-sample” predictions for countries omitted were conducted, and the MAPE
was found to be satisfactory. As before, all predicted MSME lending volume ratios were compared to total
lending, private sector credit provided by financial institutions, and GDP to check for the reasonableness
of the ratios.


MSME Finance Gap
Bringing together the potential demand calculated in step 2 with the current supply collated/computed in
step 3 produces the MSME finance gap for each country.

MSME finance gap = Potential demand – Existing supply 	                        (2)

This is the MSME finance gap, assuming firms in a developing country have the same willingness and ability
to borrow as their counterparts in well-developed credit markets and operate in comparable institutional
environments — and that financial institutions lend at similar intensities as their benchmarked counterparts.

Disaggregating by Firm Size and Gender Ownership
The nature of the calculation lends itself readily to calculating the potential demand for microenterprises
and SMEs separately in step 2. Following the World Bank Group’s definition of classifying firms employing
less than 10 permanent workers as microenterprises, the aggregations of potential demand are done



20. These two variables are banking sector stability and competition variables from the World Bank’s Global Financial Development
Database.
21. These three variables are provided by the IFC’s Doing Business dataset. DTF refers to the “Distance to Frontier” rating
mechanism of the Doing Business dataset. “The distance to frontier score aids in assessing the absolute level of regulatory
performance and how it improves over time. This measure shows the distance of each economy to the “frontier,” which represents
the best performance observed on each of the indicators across all economies in the Doing Business sample since 2005.” http://
www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploretopics/starting-a-business/frontier




                                                                                           III. CURRENT METHODOLOGY                 15
     separately for firms with less or greater than 10 employees. Separating out current volumes of micro-
     enterprise and SME lending is trickier. As no cross-country data with broad coverage of this disaggregation
     is available, the share of lending to microenterprises as compared to SMEs from the Enterprise Surveys was
     used to extrapolate separate current lending volumes. Finally, the microenterprise and SME finance gaps
     are computed, as in equation (2) above.

     The disaggregation of the finance gap for female- and male-owned firms is not as straightforward. A
     stronger assumption is used in disaggregating the microenterprise and SME finance gaps respectively into
     female- and male-owned enterprises, respectively. It uses the gender-owner firm’s share of overall sales
     as computed using data from the Enterprise Surveys. An important consideration is the classification of
     female- and male-owned firms. The IFC uses a definition that partly relies on a majority ownership stake by
     women to classify MSMEs as female-owned. In recent surveys, the Enterprise Survey has started collecting
     information about ownership percentages. However, the older surveys do not contain this information, and
     only indicate if any of the owners are female. This presents two possible options for the definition of female
     ownership:

     n	   Option 1: At least 50 percent female ownership, OR Sole Proprietorships that are female-owned, OR
          female participation in ownership and management (top manager).

     n	Option   2: Sole Proprietorships that are female-owned, OR female participation in ownership and
          management (top manager).

     Gender disaggregation using both of these definitions can be calculated. For cross-country comparisons
     across all emerging economies, the second option is suitable. The first option conforms to IFC’s definition
     even though the first criteria based on ownership percentages can only be applied to about 70 percent of the
     countries. The analysis presented in this report is based on Option 1, however the data for both options are
     available for download from http://www.smefinanceforum.org/data-sites.
             .




16   MSME FINANCE GAP
Informal Finance Gap
Cross-country data with broad coverage about the universe of informal firms, their economic activity and
their financing sources is not available.22 Both demand-side and supply-side data are missing. As such,
estimating the finance gap for the informal MSME sector is extremely difficult. Schneider (2012) is an
oft-cited paper that estimates the size of the informal economy. The author defines the “shadow” economy
as part of the economy that “includes all market-based legal production of goods and services that are
deliberately concealed from public authorities for a variety of reasons.” (Schneider 2012, 6).

Armed with assessments of the size of the informal economy, it is still far from a straightforward exercise
to arrive at an estimate of the informal firm finance gap. A stronger assumption regarding the demand for
financing by informal firms compared to their formal counterparts has to be made. Under the more idealized
institutional and regulatory environment that underlies all computations of the formal firm finance gap, it is
perhaps reasonable to assume that informal firms of similar sizes and sales as their formal counterparts would
have similar financing needs. Thus, the potential demand for the formal sector is used to proportionally
extrapolate the potential demand for the informal sector.

Using this extrapolation, a stronger implicit assumption is made regarding the structure of the informal
economy in terms of similarity of industry distribution to the formal economy. The final step of computing
the current volume and estimating the gap is neither feasible nor relevant. Presumably, the amount of
formal lending to informal firms is close to zero. Thus, the potential demand is the more relevant metric
to articulate the financing gap that may potentially arise if and when these firms formalize and become
serviceable by formal financial institutions.


Number of Credit-Constrained Enterprises
This report also complements the MSME finance gap by computing the number and percentage of
credit-constrained MSMEs.

There are a number of approaches that can be used to potentially identify whether a firm is credit constrained.
In the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys, for example, the firms are asked to self-rate the perceived scale
at which financing presents an obstacle. As a subjective measure, this identification is problematic.
Another approach is to look at firms that do not currently have a loan, a line of credit or overdraft protection.
Identification solely based on usage is problematic because firms without current financing may not require
external financing. Thus, a more robust and multidimensional identification strategy is required.

The estimation of the number of credit-constrained enterprises in this report relies on a proposed measure
by Kuntchev and others (2014). Based on a variety of questions (see box 1) regarding both usage of and the
ability to obtain new credit, enterprises are categorized as fully credit-constrained (FCC), partially credit-
constrained (PCC), and not credit-constrained (NCC) firms. Credit-constrained firms are defined as those
that are fully constrained (FCC) or partially constrained (PCC).23

22. The Enterprise Surveys have included a few surveys of the informal sector, but do not provide broad coverage across countries.
23. The data regarding categorization is based on current conditions faced by enterprises. For example, the categorization of
enterprises as not credit constrained (NCC) is only valid over the short run. Given macroeconomics and regulatory changes, or
changes in product offerings, these enterprises may demand more credit and potentially cease to be NCC. As noted, the Enterprise
Surveys only sample firms with 5 or more employees. Thus, the computation of the fraction of microenterprises belonging in each
credit constraint category is based on this sample. Under the assumption that smaller microenterprises face similar constraints, the
computed percentages are applied to the overall microenterprise population in the country.

                                                                                             III. CURRENT METHODOLOGY                  17
        Box 1. Credit-Constrained Enterprises: Methodology

        The figure below provides a schematic representation of the approach to define credit-constrained
        enterprises. Definitions of the various categories are included below the figure.
        Fully credit-constrained (FCC) firms are defined as those that find it challenging to obtain credit.
        These are firms that have no source of external financing. They typically fall into two categories:
        those that applied for a loan and were rejected; and those that were discouraged from applying either
        because of unfavorable terms and conditions, or because they did not think the application would be
        approved. The terms and conditions that discourage firms include complex application procedures,
        unfavorable interest rates, high collateral requirements, and insufficient loan size and maturity.
        Partially credit-constrained (PCC) firms are defined as those that have been somewhat successful
        in obtaining external financing. PCC firms include those that have external financing, but were
        discouraged from applying for a loan from a financial institution. They also include firms that have
        an external source of financing, and firms that applied for a loan that was then partially approved or
        rejected.
        Non-credit-constrained (NCC) firms are those that do not appear to have any difficulties accessing
        credit or do not need credit. Firms in this category encompass those that did not apply for a loan as
        they have sufficient capital either on their own or from other sources. It also includes firms that applied
        for loans that were approved in full.
        There are limitations to the credit constraint indicator. The indicator does not incorporate any
        information about the creditworthiness of the firm. Therefore, among the credit-constrained firms,
        there may be some that were rationed for good reasons, such as insufficiently productive projects or
        a poor repayment history.

                Correspondence betweens red constrained groups and questions in Enterprise Surveys

                                            Did the firm have any source of external finance?


                                           Yes                                              No


             Did the firm apply for a loan or line of credit?          Did the firm apply for a loan or line of credit?


                           No                        Yes                         No                    Yes


                       Why not?                                             Why not?


        Has enough      Terms and         Approved      Approved      Rejected        Has enough    Terms and       Rejected
          capital       conditions         in full       in part                        capital     conditions



                       Not Credit                                                Partially Credit        Fully Credit
                      Constrained                                                 Constrained            Constrained
                         (NCC)                                                        (PCC)                 (FCC)


     Source: Kuntchev and others (2014)

18    MSME FINANCE GAP
This report relies on the consolidated statistics provided by the MSME Country Indicators (IFC 2014) for
ascertaining the number of enterprises in each country. This information is available for the number of
microenterprises in 66 countries and for SMEs in 59 countries. For an additional 15 countries, the data has
been collected directly from government sources. For the remaining countries, it has been estimated based
on the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys (see box 2 below).



    Box 2. Estimation of the Number of MSMEs based on the World Bank Enterprise Surveys

    The number of MSMEs is extrapolated from Enterprise Survey (ES) data when Country Indicator
    (CI) data are not available, and an Enterprise Survey has been conducted recently. ES data alone
    understate the number of MSMEs because the ES only covers a subset of the population of existing
    enterprises. Specifically, the ES covers the formal, registered private sector of manufacturing and
    services firms. It does not include firms with fewer than 5 employees, as well as those pertaining to
    mining, oil and extractives, financial intermediation, utilities, healthcare, or education.

    This report compares ES to CI data for 65 countries where both exist. It finds that the ES to CI ratio
    averages 0.34 to one for SMEs and 0.065 to one for microenterprises. For the subset of countries
    where CI data is not available (but ES data is), the ES numbers are scaled by these ratios to estimate
    the number of establishments in each. For example, if the ES estimates that 500 SMEs exist in
    country X, 500 is scaled by 0.34 to extrapolate that there are 1471 (500/0.34=1471) SMEs in
    country X.

Source: MSME Finance Gap study calculations, World Bank Enterprise Surveys.




                                                                              III. CURRENT METHODOLOGY        19
IV. Quantifying the Finance Gap

Number of Enterprises
There are close to 162 million formal micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) in developing
countries, of which 141 million are microenterprises, and 21 million are SMEs (figure 1).24 Three countries
— Brazil, China and Nigeria — contribute 67 percent to the total number of MSMEs, which is equivalent to
109 million enterprises. There are close to 12 million SMEs in China alone, which represents 56 percent of
all SMEs in developing countries. China also has 44 million microenterprises, which represents 31 percent
of all microenterprises in developing countries.


Figure 1. Number of MSMEs in Developing Countries, millions




                                             MICROENTERPRISES
                                                  141.44

                                                                                              SMEs
                                                                                              20.75

                                                    TOTAL MSMEs
                                                       162.19




Source: IFC data and analysis.




24. The number of enterprises is larger than reported in the IFC Enterprise Finance Gap (2011) due to the following: (1) country
coverage has changed; (2) some countries (such as Brazil, China, Colombia, Nigeria, and Thailand, among others) improved data
collection and the data quality in the MSME space, which yielded the larger officially reported number of MSMEs.



                                                                                  IV. QUANTIFYING THE FINANCE GAP                  21
     There is a large concentration of enterprises in the East Asia region (64 million), followed by Sub-
     Saharan Africa, which has 44 million MSMEs, the majority of which (97 percent) are microenterprises (see
     figure 2). Nigeria, which is a large contributor to the enterprise count in Sub-Saharan Africa, has 37 million
     MSMEs. Latin America and the Caribbean, which is the third largest region by number of MSMEs, has 28
     million MSMEs, 26 million of which are microenterprises. This regional position is mainly driven by the
     large MSME segment in Brazil, which has 16 million MSMEs. In this regard, it is important to note that of
     the 132 countries for which the authors counted the number of businesses, this data has been determined by
     using the official country-level statistics for 96 and 74 countries, respectively. The data for the remaining
     countries has been extrapolated using the World Bank Enterprise Surveys.25


     Figure 2. Number of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises by Region


          80
                        64.1
           70

          60
                        15.5
                                                                                                                       44.2
           50

           40
                                                              27.5                                                      1.5
                                                                     1.3
           30
                                           12.4
           20
                                                  1.1                                               8.4
                                                                                       5.5
           10                                                                                          1.1
                                                                                             0.1
                        48.6               11.3               26.2                                                     42.7
                                                                                 5.4                7.3
            0
                        EAP                ECA                LAC                  MENA              SA                SSA

                                                              Micro        SME          MSME


     Source: IFC data and analysis.
     Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and
     North Africa; SA = South Asia; and SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.




     25. Refer to the Methodology Section of this report.



22    MSME FINANCE GAP
The number of MSMEs is the largest in Upper-middle-income countries, which includes Brazil and China –
the two largest contributors (see figure 3). Lower-middle-income countries are the second largest category,
which includes Nigeria – the third largest contributor.


Figure 3. Number of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises by Country Income Group

                                                            Numb r of MSMEs, millions
                                                                                      93.9
     100

                                                                                      16.4
      80

                                                        58.6
                                                                  2.8
      60



      40



      20
                          4.5                           55.9                           77.5                            5.2
                    3.4              1.1                                                                                     4.7
       0
                     Low-incom                  Low r-middl -incom             Upp r-middl -incom                  Hi h-incom

                                                                 Micro      SME       MSME

Source: IFC data and analysis.



Based on the approach explained in the methodology section of this report (box 1), it is estimated that in
developing countries, 21 percent (29.6 million) of microenterprises are fully-constrained, and 19 percent
(26.6 million) are partially constrained. However, 60 percent (85.2 million) remain financially unconstrained.
A similar picture can be observed in the SME segment in developing countries. In this context, 30 percent
(6.2 million) of SMEs are fully constrained, 14 percent (2.8 million) of SMEs are partially constrained, and
56 percent (11.7 million) are financially unconstrained. See figure 4.


Figure 4. Number of Financially-Constrained MSMEs

               Numb r of Micro nt rpris s                                                        Numb r of SMEs


     Unconstr in d                                   85.2                   Unconstr in d                                        11.7



P rtl Constr in d         26.6                                           P rtl Constr in d         2.8



  Full Constr in d         29.6                                           Full Constr in d                   6.2


                     0          20         40   60     80        100                         0      2    4         6    8       10      12
                                                            Millions                                                              Millions

Source: IFC data and analysis.



                                                                                             IV. QUANTIFYING THE FINANCE GAP                 23
     Map 1 shows the regional differences in the number of financially-constrained enterprises among developing
     countries included in this report.


     Map 1. Number of Financially-Constrained MSMEs Worldwide




     Source: IFC data and analysis.




24    MSME FINANCE GAP
Microenterprises
On average, 21 percent of microenterprises in developing countries are fully constrained, 19 percent are
partially constrained and 60 percent are unconstrained. South Asia has the largest proportion of financially
constrained microenterprises – both fully and partially constrained (54 percent), followed by Sub-Saharan
Africa (52 percent). Latin America has the lowest proportion of financially constrained microenterprise firms
(21 percent). Europe and Central Asian region has the second lowest proportion of financially constrained
microenterprises (27 percent). See table 2 and figure 5.


Table 2. Distribution of Microenterprises by Financial Constraint Level (%)

  Region                         Fully Constrained                     Partly Constrained                       Unconstrained
  EAP                                       34                                      7                                   59
  ECA                                       14                                   13                                     73
  LAC                                       10                                   11                                     79
  MENA                                      19                                   14                                     67
  SA                                        37                                   16                                     46
  SSA                                       12                                   40                                     48
  Total                                     21                                   19                                    60

Source: IFC data and analysis.
Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and North Africa;
SA = South Asia; and SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa




Figure 5. Distribution of Microenterprises by Constraint Level

                                                           Micro nt rpris s, millions


       EAP                    16.53                    3.34                                     28.73

       ECA        1.57               1.50                                               8.27


       LAC      2.54          2.87                                                  20.77


    MENA               1.03                 0.76                                            3.59


        SA                       2.73                              1.18                                 3.36

       SSA        5.24                             16.98                                              20.45


                                  Full Constr in d               P rt Constr in d              Unconstr in d


Source: IFC data and analysis.
Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and North Africa;
SA = South Asia; and SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.



                                                                                         IV. QUANTIFYING THE FINANCE GAP                        25
     Small and Medium Enterprises
     On average, 30 percent of SMEs in all developing countries are fully constrained, 14 percent are partially
     constrained and 56 percent are unconstrained. Sub-Saharan Africa has the largest proportion of financially
     constrained SMEs – both fully and partially constrained (54 percent), followed by South Asia (50 percent).
     Europe and Central Asia has the highest share of unconstrained SMEs (69 percent), with only 31 percent of
     firms fully or partially constrained. This is followed by the Latin America and the Caribbean region, with
     68 percent of financially unconstrained enterprises and only 32 percent of fully or partially constrained
     enterprises. See table 3 and figure 6.


     Table 3. Distribution of SMEs by Financial Constraint Level (%)

      Region                              Fully Constrained                      Partly Constrained                     Unconstrained
      EAP                                          33                                      11                                56
      ECA                                          17                                      14                                69
      LAC                                           9                                     22                                 68
      MENA                                         14                                     20                                 66
      SA                                           24                                     26                                 50
      SSA                                          28                                     25                                 46
      Total                                        30                                      14                                56

     Source: IFC data and analysis.
     Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and North Africa;
     SA = South Asia; and SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.




     Figure 6. Distribution of SMEs by Constraint Level


                                                                         SMEs, millions

           EAP                        5.18                        1.68                                    8.63

           ECA              0.19               0.15                                               0.77

           LAC       0.12                  0.30                                                   0.92

        MENA           0.02                   0.03                                                 0.10

            SA                0.27                             0.30                                         0.57

           SSA                     0.43                               0.39                                       0.71


                                                  Fully Constrained          Partly Constrained     Unconstrained


     Source: IFC data and analysis.
     Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and North
     Africa; SA = South Asia; and SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.



26    MSME FINANCE GAP
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises – Distribution by Income Groups
Further analysis demonstrates that countries in the high-income group have the highest proportion of
unconstrained micro, small and medium enterprises, that is, 81 percent (4.2 million MSMEs), with only
19 percent of financially constrained enterprises (one million). By contrast, countries in the low-income
group have the largest proportion of fully or partially constrained MSMEs, that is, 67 percent (3 million
MSMEs). Twenty-six percent of MSMEs in the Upper-middle-income countries are fully constrained (24.7
million), and 9 percent (8.2 million) partially constrained. Sixty-five percent of enterprises in this group
are financially unconstrained (61.0 million). Finally, countries in the Lower-middle-income group have 15
percent (8.9 million) fully-constrained MSMEs, 33 percent (19.5 million) partially-constrained MSMEs and
52 percent (30.2 million) unconstrained MSMEs. These figures demonstrate greater market opportunities
for financial institutions in the low and Lower-middle-income countries. See table 4.


Table 4. Distribution of MSMEs by Financial Constraint Level (%)

 Country Income Group                    Fully Constrained              Partly Constrained          Unconstrained

 Low income                                     42                             25                        33

 Lower-middle income                            15                             33                        52

 Upper-middle income                            26                               9                       65

 High income                                     7                              13                        81

 Total                                          22                              18                       60

Source: IFC data and analysis.




Formal Finance Gap
Although the MSME segment is important for the global economy, data remains scarce, incomplete and
fragmented. The present research attempts to complement existing data in the MSME space by estimating
the potential demand for and current supply of MSME finance in order to determine the finance gap in 128
developing countries. This study finds that of a total of $8.9 trillion in potential demand for MSME finance,
only $3.7 trillion is currently being supplied. See figure 7.

Figure 7. MSME Finance Gap

                                 MSME Finance Gap, US$ trillions


                            Current                      Finance Gap,
                           Volume, 3.7                       5.2



                                           Potential Demand,
                                                  8.9



Source: IFC data and analysis.



                                                                                     IV. QUANTIFYING THE FINANCE GAP   27
     The unmet demand for financing in the MSME segment in developing countries is valued at $5.2 trillion,
     which represents 19 percent of these countries’ cumulative GDP. This finance gap suggests that 59 percent
     of potential demand for MSME finance is unmet. Potential demand represents a long-term indicator of the
     financing needs of MSMEs in developing countries. In this context, these needs can potentially be met only if
     public sector institutions create favorable conditions for business development, and if private sector financiers
     find appropriate approaches to serve MSMEs within constantly changing macroeconomic environments.26

     The microenterprise finance gap is estimated at $718.8 billion, and the SME finance gap at $4.5 trillion.
     This unmet demand represents 81 percent of the potential demand from microenterprises, for a total of $882
     billion. The unmet demand from SMEs is 56 percent of the potential demand for this segment, valued at
     $8.1 trillion. The total volume of current MSME financing is unevenly distributed between microenterprises
     and SMEs — with 96 percent attributed to SME finance, and only 4 percent to microenterprise finance.

     Interestingly, the total MSME finance gap has a very different distribution, with a 14 percent share attributed
     to the microenterprise finance gap and 86 percent to the SME finance gap. Such imbalances indicate that
     microenterprises have relatively higher unmet needs from formal sources, which might be replaced with
     alternative sources, such as funding from friends and family, business partners, peer-to-peer markets or
     informal financing arrangements. Figure 8 illustrates the distribution of the potential demand by enterprise
     size and compares the current finance volume with the finance gap.



     Figure 8. Potential MSME Finance Demand Distribution


                             Micro nt rpris s                                       Sm ll nd M dium Ent rpris s



                                                Curr nt
                                                Volum
                                                 19%


                                      $882                                                        $8.1          Curr nt
                                      billion                                                    trillion       Volum
                                                                                  Fin nc
                                                                                                                 44%
                                                                                    G p
                                                                                    56%
                       Fin nc
                         G p
                         81%




     Source: IFC data and analysis.




     26. For one country in this analysis, Mauritania, the current volume of MSME finance is estimated at $611 million, and the
     estimated potential demand is $336 million. This results in a negative MSME finance gap of $275 million (the difference between
     potential and current needs). This may either reflect data issues or that MSMEs in the country are truly over-indebted.



28    MSME FINANCE GAP
Map 2 demonstrates the regional distribution of the MSME finance gap across developing countries.

Map 2. Formal MSME Finance Gap in Developing Countries




Source: IFC data and analysis.




                                                                 IV. QUANTIFYING THE FINANCE GAP    29
     Regional analysis of potential MSME demand demonstrates that it is highest in the East Asia and Pacific
     region – with almost 58 percent of the total global potential demand. This is mainly driven by the large
     demand and supply in China ($4.4 trillion and $2.5 trillion, respectively). The finance gap in Latin America
     and the Caribbean is the second largest after the East Asia region, and is mainly driven by Brazil ($0.6
     trillion). India is another big contributor country, with a finance gap of $230 billion, representing 68 percent
     of the total gap in the South Asia region (figure 9).


     Figure 9. Regional Distribution of MSME Potential Demand and Finance Gap (%)


                              Pot nti l D m nd                                               Fin nc G p

                       SSA                                                        SSA
                        5%                                                         6%                                   EAP
                                                           EAP
                                                                                                                        46%
                 SA                                        58%
                 6%                                                          SA
                                                                             6%
              MENA
               2%                                                         MENA
                                                                           4%


                 LAC
                 16%
                                                                                  LAC
                                                                                  23%
                                                                                                                  ECA
                             ECA                                                                                  15%
                             14%


     Source: IFC data and analysis.
     Note: EAP = East Asia and the Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and
     North Africa; SA = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.




30    MSME FINANCE GAP
The country coverage in this study was driven by data availability in the World Bank Enterprise Surveys,
which mostly cover developing countries. Sub-Saharan Africa has the largest number of countries (with
37 of the 128 countries), followed by Latin America and the Caribbean (with 30 of the 128 countries).
The Middle East and North Africa and South Asia regions had the smallest number of countries: 8 and
7 countries, respectively. (See tables 5 and 6). However, the estimation model developed here does not
depend on the country representation in the region.


Table 5. Country Coverage of Present Research
 Region                          Number of Countries in this Study           Number of Countries              Coverage (%)
 EAP                                               17                               38                              45
 ECA                                            29                                  58                              50

 LAC                                           30                                    42                             71
 MENA                                              8                                 21                             38
 SA                                                7                                  8                             88

 SSA                                            37                                   48                             77
 TOTAL                                         128                                 215                              60

Source: IFC data and analysis.
Note: EAP = East Asia and the Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and
North Africa; SA = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa; WBG = World Bank Group.




Table 6. Regional Distribution of MSME Potential Demand and Finance Gap

                   Number of          Number of MSMEs,       Potential Demand,            Current Volume,        Finance Gap,
 Region
                   Countries              millions              US$ billions                US$ billions         US$ billions

 EAP                    17                   64                      5,142                    2,755                2,387

 ECA                   29                     12                     1,279                     503                   776

 LAC                   30                    28                      1,395                     185                 1,209

 MENA                    8                     5                      221                       26                   195

 SA                      7                     8                      501                      164                   337

 SSA                    37                    44                      404                       70                   331

 TOTAL                128                   162                    8,942                     3,642                 5,235

Source: IFC data and analysis.
Note: EAP = East Asia and the Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and
North Africa; SA = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.




                                                                                   IV. QUANTIFYING THE FINANCE GAP                    31
     There is a wide dispersion with regard to the total MSME finance gap volume among regions. The highest
     proportion of the finance gap compared to potential demand can be found in both the Latin America and
     the Caribbean and the Middle East and North Africa regions – with 87 and 88 percent, respectively. The
     smallest proportion can be found in East Asia and Pacific – 46 percent (see figure 10). On average, the total
     MSME finance gap accounts for 59 percent of potential demand, with the remaining 41 percent of financing
     currently supplied by financial institutions.


     Figure 10. MSME Finance Gap as a Proportion of Potential Demand (%)

                                                   Pot nti l D m nd for MSME Fin nc
         100



         80
                     46%             61%             87%              88%             67%             82%              59%


         60



         40


                     54%             39%
         20                                                                                                            41%
                                                                                      33%
                                                                                                      18%
                                                     13%              12%
           0
                     LAP             LCA             LAC             MENA              SA             SSA              Tot l

                                                     Curr nt Volum                   Fin nc G p

     Source: IFC data and analysis
     Note: EAP = East Asia and the Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and
     North Africa; SA = South Asia; SSA= Sub-Saharan Africa.




32    MSME FINANCE GAP
As shown in figure 11, SMEs represent 14 percent of credit-constrained MSMEs in developing countries,
and account for 86 percent of the MSME finance gap. Microenterprises represent 86 percent of credit-
constrained MSMEs in developing countries, accounting for only 14 percent of the MSME finance gap.
The highest microenterprise finance gap is in the Middle East and Africa regions (over 20 percent), with the
lowest in the Latin America and the Caribbean region (9 percent). When examining the proportion of the
SME finance gap as compared to potential demand, the highest figures were found in Latin America and the
Caribbean and South Asia regions (with 91 percent and 86 percent, respectively).


Figure 11. Finance Gap and Population of Enterprises (%)


                        MSME Fin nc G p                                    P rc nt      of Cr dit-Constr in d MSMEs
100                                                               100                     7%      3%              4%
                                                                                 10%                      13%             14%
                                                                        26%
 80                                                                80
                                 71%             74%
 60             82%                      86%            86%        60
       88%               91%
                                                                                                 98%              96%
                                                                        74%      90%                      87%             86%
 40                                                                40                    93%

 20                                                                20
                                 29%             26%
       12%      18%                      14%             14%
                         9%
  0                                                                 0
       EAP      ECA      LAC     MENA    SA      SSA    Tot l           EAP     ECA      LAC    MENA      SA     SSA     Tot l
                        Micro nt rpris     SME                                                 Micro     SME


Source: IFC data and analysis.
Note: EAP = East Asia and the Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and
North Africa; SA = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.




                                                                                   IV. QUANTIFYING THE FINANCE GAP                    33
     The finance gap in Upper-middle-income countries constitutes close to 71 percent of the finance gap in the
     developing countries in this review. This can partially be attributed to the fact that over 30 percent of the
     countries (44 of 128 countries) are in this category, and partially to the fact that China (which has a very
     high potential finance demand and gap) is one of the countries in this category. The Lower-middle-income
     countries, which have the largest country coverage (with 47 of 128 countries), have a total MSME finance
     gap of $1.17 trillion, with 24 percent attributed to microenterprises and 76 percent attributed to the SME
     finance gap (see figure 12).


     Figure 12. Finance Gap according to Income Group

                Finance Gap per Income Group, US$ trillions         Potential Demand per Income Group, US$ trillions
                                           3.72
                                                                                                   6.94




                               1.17
                                                                                   1.47
                                                       0.30                                                  0.48
              0.05                                                   0.06

          Low-income      Low-middle- Upper-middle- High-income   Low-income   Low-middle- Upper-middle- High-income
                            income       income                                  income       income
                       Microenterprise 	   SME	    Total                       Microenterprise 	     SME	   Total


     Source: IFC data and analysis.



     Upper-middle-income countries account for 78 percent of potential demand and 71 percent of the finance
     gap. Fifty-eight percent of all MSMEs are in this category. Lower-middle-income countries have 36 percent
     of enterprises, and account for 16 percent of potential demand. They comprise 22 percent of the finance gap.
     High-income countries have 3 percent of MSMEs, and account for 5 percent of potential demand. They
     comprise 6 percent of the finance gap. Finally, low-income countries account for 3 percent of MSMEs, and
     1 percent of both potential demand and the finance gap.

     The finance gap as a proportion of potential demand is the highest in the low-income and lower-middle-
     income countries, with 80 percent in comparison with a total of 59 percent for all developing countries
     included in this study (see figure 13). The microenterprise finance gap as a proportion of the microenterprise
     potential demand is the highest in the lower-middle-income countries (94 percent), and lowest in the high-
     income countries (63 percent). The SME finance gap as a proportion of potential SME demand is highest
     in low-income countries (78 percent), as compared to 56 percent in all developing countries. The higher
     the proportion, the smaller the current lending volume. Thus, there is a larger opportunity for financial
     institutions to serve these enterprises in need. However, appropriate models must be established to tap into
     the potential returns and effectively manage the risks.




34    MSME FINANCE GAP
Figure 13. Finance Gap as Percentage of Potential Demand


    100
                                       94%
               89%
                                                                                                            81%
                     78% 80%                       80%        77%
     80                                      76%

                                                                                     63% 64% 64%
                                                                                                                   56%   59%
     60
                                                                      52% 54%


     40


     20


       0
                 Low-incom            Low-middl -incom        Upp r-middl -incom          Hi h-incom            Gr nd Tot l

                                                   Micro nt rpris        SME          Tot l


Source: IFC data and analysis.



In order to understand the scale of the estimated finance gap, it can be compared to the GDP of the countries
under review. On average, the MSME finance gap represents 19 percent of individual countries’ GDP. In
lower-middle-income and high-income countries, this indicator is 20-21 percent. In upper-middle-income
countries, it is 18 percent, and in low-income countries, it is 15 percent. Regionally, the dispersion of this
indicator is more evident, with the highest being in the Middle East and North Africa (26 percent) and the
lowest in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa (16% in each). Generally, the higher the ratio, the higher
the need for financing in relation to the size of the economy. This, in turn, provides further incentives for
financial institutions to tap into this market opportunity with the right tools and approaches.


Table 7a. Average Finance Gap as a Percentage of GDP (by region) EAP		ECA		LAC	
                                 EAP           ECA              LAC         MENA               SA           SSA           Total
 Finance Gap / GDP               22             20              18              26              16          16                19


Table 7b. Average Finance Gap as a Percentage of GDP (by income group)
                            Low income       Low-middle income Upper-middle income                     High income        Total
 Finance Gap / GDP               15                      21                          18                    20                 19

Source: IFC data and analysis.
Note: EAP = East Asia and the Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and
North Africa; SA = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.




                                                                                     IV. QUANTIFYING THE FINANCE GAP                  35
     Gender Finance Gap
     Women-owned businesses comprise 28 percent of business establishments and account for 32 percent of
     the MSME finance gap. Female-owned MSMEs are generally smaller than their male-owned counterparts
     and thus employ fewer workers: 18-19 on average versus 21-22 at male-owned MSMEs. The total MSME
     finance gap for women27 is estimated to be valued at $1.7 trillion, which is over 6 percent of total GDP.
     Despite their smaller average size, female-owned businesses account for an outsized share of the finance
     gap — with 24 percent of the total microenterprise finance gap ($173 billion) and 33 percent of the total
     SME finance gap ($1.5 trillion) attributed to these female-owned firms. (See figures 14 and 15, map 3, and
     tables 8 and 9).

     Figure 14. Gender Composition of the Finance Gap

               Microenterprise Finance Gap, US$ billions                                  SME Finance Gap, US$ billions

                                                          719                                          3,034              4,516
                                       473




                                                                                  1,482
                 173



             Women                    Men                Total                    Women                  Men               Total

     Source: IFC data and analysis.



     Figure 15. Women MSME Finance Gap as a Percentage of Current Volume of Finance

                 Women Microenterprise Finance Gap                                        Women SME Finance Gap

               Low-income                                   13%                   Low-income                           51%

      Lower-middle-income                          10%                   Lower-middle-income                               58%

      Upper-middle-income             4%                                 Upper-middle-income                    40%

               High-income                            11%                         High-income      17%

                       Total               5%                                             Total                 40%



     Source: IFC data and analysis.



     27. For the purposes of this analysis, a women-owned enterprise is defined as an enterprise that meets either of the following
     criteria: (1) at least 50 percent female ownership; (2) sole proprietorships that are female owned; and/or (3) female participation in
     ownership and management (top manager). Please, refer to the Option 1 in the Methodology section of this paper. The World Bank
     Enterprise Survey in three countries (Gambia, Mozambique, South Africa) has been conducted in 2006-2007 and did not contain
     extended questionnaire about the female participation in ownership and management. Therefore for these countries the authors
     have used only one indicator to define Women-owned enterprise, i.e. “Percent of firms with female participation in ownership”



36    MSME FINANCE GAP
Map 3. Formal MSME Finance Gap in Developing Countries attributed to Female Enterprises (US$ billions)




Source: IFC data and analysis.




                                                                IV. QUANTIFYING THE FINANCE GAP          37
     Table 8. Top Five Countries: Microenterprise Finance Gap for Women as a Share of the Total
     Microenterprise Finance Gap

      Microenterprise                 Women Finance Gap,         Total Finance Gap,        Women Finance Gap,
      Finance Gap                        US$ million                US$ million               percentage

      Morocco                              12,672                      14,138                     90

      Thailand                             45,126                     53,893                       84

      Benin                                    22                          27                      82

      Kenya                                  823                       1,086                       76

      Guinea                                  481                        665                       72

     Source: IFC data and analysis.



     Table 9. Top Five Countries by Share of SME Finance Gap for Women (to the total SME finance gap)

                                            Women Finance Gap,        Total Finance Gap,    Women Finance Gap,
      SME Finance Gap                          US$ million               US$ million           percentage

      Yemen, Republic of                              13,972              18,406                  76

      Timor-Leste                                        302                 408                  74

      Micronesia, Federated States of                     48                    68                70

      China                                         1,135,055          1,804,963                  63

      Mongolia                                           765               1.240                  62

     Source: IFC data and analysis.




38    MSME FINANCE GAP
East Asia has the highest proportion of the microenterprise finance gap attributed to women-owned
businesses (37 percent, $103 billion). The Middle East and North Africa region has the second highest
proportion of the female microenterprise finance gap (29 percent, $16 billion). The smallest proportion is in
Latin America and the Caribbean (5 percent, $5 billion). (See figure 16).


Figure 16. Microenterprise Finance Gap: Women-Owned Enterprises

                  120
                                 37%
                  100
                                                                              29%
                   80                            26%

                   60

                   40
                                                                                           10%
                   20                                                                                    9%
                                                              5%                                               8
                                 103             36                  5        16            4
                    0
                                 EAP             ECA          LAC            MENA           SA           SSA

                                       GAP, US$ billions           Wom n Fin nc G p s % of Tot l Fin nc G p

Source: IFC data and analysis.
Note: EAP = East Asia and the Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and
North Africa; SA = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.


East Asia has the highest proportion of the SME finance gap attributed to women-owned businesses
(59 percent, $1.2 trillion). Sub-Saharan Africa region has the second highest proportion of the female SME
finance gap (17 percent, $42 billion), while the smallest proportion is in Latin America and the Caribbean
(8 percent, $93 billion), and South Asian regions (8 percent, $23 billion). See figure 17.

Figure 17. SME Finance Gap: Women-Owned Enterprises (US$ billions)

                1,400

                1,200            59%

                1,000

                  800

                  600

                  400
                                                                             16%                       17%
                  200                            10%
                                            67             93 8%                           8%
                             1,236                                           22       23                42
                    0
                                 EAP             ECA         LAC            MENA           SA          SSA

                                       GAP, US$ billions      Wom n Fin nc G p s % of Tot l Fin nc G p

Source: IFC data and analysis.
Note: EAP = East Asia and the Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and
North Africa; SA = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.


                                                                                     IV. QUANTIFYING THE FINANCE GAP                  39
     Potential Demand in the Informal Sector

     Based on Schneider, Buehn and Montenegro’s (2010) research, it has been established that the employment
     structure and other macroeconomic factors (such as taxation, the regulatory burden, social security,
     and income level) influence the shadow economy. Using their estimates of the shadow economy in 107
     countries, the present research estimates that there is a $2.9 trillion potential demand for MSME finance in
     the informal sector in developing countries. This represents 11 percent of the GDP of these countries. Thus,
     the combined total formal and informal potential demand for MSME finance is estimated at $11.9 trillion
     in developing countries (see figure 18).
     	

     Figure 18. Potential Total Demand for MSME Finance


                     Formal and Informal Demand for MSME Finance, US$ trillions




                                                             2.9




                                                                                                11.9
                               8.9




                            Formal                         Informal                            Total


     Source: IFC data and analysis.




     The potential demand for MSME finance in the informal sector is the largest in East Asia and the Pacific
     region ($995 billion), followed by the Latin America and the Caribbean region ($756 billion). It is lowest
     in the Middle East and North Africa region ($69 billion). However, in absolute terms, the numbers might
     not be strictly comparable across regions because the informality data is available for only 110 countries
     of the 128 countries under review.28 Comparing the average informal potential demand for MSME finance,
     it is largest in East Asia and the Pacific ($55.3 billion) and smallest in the Middle East and North Africa
     ($7.7 billion). (See figure 19 and map 4).




     28. The number of regions with data about the informal MSME segment are as follows: 12 in EAP; 25 in ECA; 23 in LAC;
     6 in MENA; 6 in SA; and 35 in SSA.



40    MSME FINANCE GAP
Figure 19. Informal Potential Demand for MSME Finance (total and average)

         Total Informal Potential Demand, US$ billions                 Average Informal Potential Demand, US$ billions




                                              ECA, 625
                                                                                                 LAC, 25           SA, 24



                                                     SA, 166
                                                                                                                 SSA, MENA
                                                     MENA,
          EAP, 995          LAC, 756     SSA, 312                           EAP, 55                ECA, 22        8    8
                                                      69


Source: IFC data and analysis.
Note: EAP = East Asia and the Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and
North Africa; SA = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.



Map 4. Potential Demand in Informal Sector in Developing Countries




Source: IFC data and analysis.




                                                                                   IV. QUANTIFYING THE FINANCE GAP                    41
     Further comparison of the informal potential demand for MSME finance by country income groups
     demonstrates that it is highest in Upper-middle-income countries (which includes China) — $1998.0
     billion, and lowest in the low-income countries — $44.9 billion, as shown in table 10.


     Table 10. Informal Potential Demand for MSME Finance by Country Income Group

                                                                                              Informal Potential Demand,
      Income Group                                        Number of countries
                                                                                                      US$ billion

      Low income                                                     21                                       44.9

      Lower-middle income                                           36                                    729.6

      Upper-middle income                                           37                                   1998.0

      High income                                                    13                                   151.0

      Total                                                         107                                  2923.6

     Source: IFC data and analysis.



     The informal potential demand for MSME finance as a percentage of the formal potential demand for
     MSME finance in developing countries varies greatly across country groups and regions. It averages 33
     percent in the developing countries included in this review (110 countries). It is highest in lower-income
     countries (80 percent), which highlights the higher informality of markets in this category. It is lowest in the
     high-income countries (32 percent). Sub-Saharan Africa and the Latin America and the Caribbean regions
     have the highest informality. Indeed, informal potential demand represents 78 and 54 percent of formal
     potential demand in these regions, respectively (see figure 20).


     Figure 20. Informal Potential Demand for MSME Finance (as a percentage of formal potential demand)


              Av r     of Inform l s P rc nt         of Form l                 Av r   of Inform l s P rc nt      of Form l

       80                                                                 80
                80%                                                                                                  78%
        70                                                                70
       60                                                                 60
        50                                                                50                54%
                            51%                                                       50%
        40                                                                40                      46%
        30                                                  33%           30                             33%               33%
                                                  32%
                                        29%
        20                                                                20
                                                                                19%
        10                                                                10
         0                                                                0
                Low-   Low-middl      Upp r-middl Hi h-     Tot l               EAP   ECA   LAC   MENA    SA         SSA   Tot l
               incom     incom          incom     incom


     Source: IFC data and analysis.




42    MSME FINANCE GAP
V. Implications of the MSME Finance Gap

The Role of the Public Sector


A
        fundamental role of the government is to provide efficient regulation and supervision of the
        financial sector by creating an efficient regulatory framework. With respect to closing the MSME
        finance gap, two features are particularly important: the financial structure and competition. Recent
studies indicate that more financially diverse markets are associated with improved access to finance.29
Policy recommendations to support a more diverse financial landscape encompass improving competition
within the financial system, thereby allowing for a variety of financial institutions to operate.30 The broader
regulatory environment, and in particular tax administration and governance, may also influence access to
finance.31

Sometimes governments see direct intervention in the finance markets as a potentially useful tool. Commonly
used direct government interventions include state-owned bank lending to MSMEs or directed credit.
Success through these programs tends to be rare, but there are exceptions.32 Providing credit guarantees is
another common form of direct intervention. Policymakers encourage banks to lend to MSMEs by taking
on some of the credit risk, either through guarantees for a portfolio of loans or for individual loans.

Risk-sharing arrangements can increase lending by lowering the amount of collateral that a MSME needs to
pledge to receive a loan because the guarantor provides part of the collateral. Similarly, for a given amount
of collateral, a credit guarantee can allow higher risk borrowers to receive a loan. However, a concern with
risk-sharing arrangements is that they may not in fact lead to additional lending. Instead, banks may use
guarantees to lower risk on loans that they would have issued anyway.

A recent study found that 76 countries around the world had some form of interest rate caps on loans
(Munzele and Henriquez Gallegos 2014). Common reasons for imposing caps are to protect consumers
from excessive interest rates, to make loans more affordable, and to increase access to finance. However,



29. Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Singer (2013) find that dominance of the financial system by banks is associated with a lower use
of financial services by firms of all sizes. Other types of financial institutions, such as cooperatives and microfinance institutions
(MFIs), seem particularly suited to easing access to finance in low-income countries.
30. Love and Martínez Pería (2015) find low bank competition together with diminished access to finance by firms.
31. Firms may choose informal finance over formal financing options when the regulatory environment is weak (Safavian and
Wimpey 2007). The level of overall financial development also plays an important role for these SMEs by disproportionately
increasing credit access for small and young firms (Chavis, Klapper, and Love 2010).
32. See the 2013 Global Financial Development Report. The bulk of empirical evidence suggests that government ownership
of banks in developing economies has had negative consequences for a country’s long-run financial and economic development
(World Bank 2012).



                                                                        V. IMPLICATIONS OF THE MSME FINANCE GAP                          43
     studies have concluded that interest rate caps tend to decrease rather than increase access to finance, whereas
     market-oriented policies are more likely to be effective at improving access to finance.33

     Policymakers can take additional, more market-oriented actions to close the MSME finance gap. These
     actions include: (i) fostering the availability of credit information by improving corporate accounting
     and supporting information sharing between parties, including lenders and utility companies; (ii) passing
     movable collateral laws and supporting collateral registries; (iii) improving insolvency regimes; (iv)
     strengthening the legal, regulatory, and institutional infrastructure for factoring and leasing; and (v) creating
     an enabling environment for fostering innovation.

     The availability of detailed credit information with broad coverage is crucial for closing the SME finance
     gap. Firm financial statements and official documentation are essential parts of loan applications for many
     banks. However, the quality and reliability of these statements varies across countries and firms. MSMEs
     often lack the necessary technical knowledge for preparing the kind of sound financial statements needed for
     loan applications. Business development services may help them to build capacity in this area.34 Regulatory
     reforms that encourage informal firms to formally register with the authorities may also lead to better
     information and documentation about businesses.35

     Credit registries or bureaus provide records of firms’ current and past loans. In an effort to provide more
     information about firms that have not previously had a loan, some credit bureaus also collect payment
     histories for utility bills or other services in addition to information from commercial banks and non-bank
     institutions. Credit registry and bureau records can help lenders observe whether loans have been repaid
     successfully in the past, and whether firms have existing liabilities that may make them risky borrowers.

     Cross-country research shows that the presence of credit bureaus is associated with lower financing constraints
     and a higher share of bank financing for MSMEs.36 Credit information can be used to generate credit
     scores predicting repayment on the basis of borrower characteristics. Regarding the women-owned MSME
     segment, since women often do not have formal financial transaction histories, they disproportionately
     have no records. As a result, there is frequently no information by which to rate them—which further
     exacerbates their inability to obtain formal financing.

     Data from the World Bank Enterprise Surveys shows that about 79 percent of loans or lines of credit require
     collateral. This number is similarly high in most regions of the world. Movable assets such as machinery,
     equipment or receivables — as opposed to fixed assets, such as land or buildings — often account for
     most of firms’ capital stock, particularly for MSMEs.37 Banks are often reluctant to accept movable assets
     as collateral due to non-existent or outdated secured transactions laws and collateral registries. Many


     33. For more information, see the recent papers by: Helms and Reille 2004; Porteous, Collins, and Abrams (2010); Laeven (2003);
     and Munzele and Henriquez Gallegos (2014).
     34. Bruhn, Karlan, and Schoar (forthcoming) finds that management consulting services improve firms’ accounting and record
     keeping. However, the authors do not examine whether management services lead to better access to finance.
     35. For example, simplifying business registration procedures can encourage firms to register (Bruhn 2013; and Campos, Goldstein,
     and McKenzie 2015).
     36. See Love and Mylenko 2003 and Martinez Peria and Singh 2014. The 2013 Global Financial Development Report (World Bank
     2012) and IFC’s Credit Reporting Knowledge Guide (IFC 2012c) provide information on credit reporting institutions, as well as
     actions that governments can take to foster these institutions.
     37. In developing economies, 78 percent of the capital stock of businesses is typically in movable assets, and only 22 percent is in
     immovable property (Alvarez de la Campa 2011).



44    MSME FINANCE GAP
legal systems place unnecessary restrictions on creating collateral, leaving lenders unsure whether a loan
agreement will be enforced by the courts.38

Reforming movable collateral frameworks may enable firms to leverage their assets to obtain credit. Some
developing countries have successfully reformed these systems, including Afghanistan, Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, China, Colombia, Ghana, Mexico, Romania and Vietnam, among others.39 Overall, sound
collateral laws and registries can enable firms to use their own assets to guarantee loans. In addition, such
laws and registries may also reduce the need for publicly-sponsored guarantee schemes.

Insolvency regimes can help to close the MSME finance gap by supporting predictability and efficiency in
credit markets. An effective insolvency framework protects creditor rights, and specifies a mandatory and
orderly mechanism for the reallocation of assets of insolvent firms among stakeholders.40 Many countries
have significant legal gaps such that insolvency frameworks are unable to deal with MSMEs effectively. For
MSMEs that do not possess a distinct legal identity from their shareholders, it may be necessary to create
an entirely new legal framework for personal insolvency.41

Factoring is a financial transaction in which a firm sells its accounts receivable to a third party, called
the factor, at a discount (equal to interest plus service fees) and receives immediate cash. Since a more
creditworthy actor (the large buyer) is the liable party, the factor can issue credit at better terms than it
would grant if the riskier MSME were the direct borrower. Factoring may be particularly useful in countries
with weak judicial systems because factoring involves the outright purchase of accounts receivable by the
factor, rather than collateralization of debt. However, factoring requires an appropriate legal framework.42

Another financial product that can help close the MSME finance gap is leasing (Berger and Udell 2006).43
Leasing focuses on the firm’s ability to generate cash flow from business operations to service leasing
payments, rather than on its credit history or ability to pledge collateral. Leasing can generate business and
financing opportunities for both lessors and lessees.44 Leasing can allow firms to: (i) overcome technological
challenges through access to specialized equipment; (ii) access equipment or facilities when ownership is
not feasible; (iii) utilize assets in a flexible manner; (iv) manage cash-flow; and (v) benefit from a lessors’
exploitation of economies of scale in purchasing and servicing.




38. For example, about 90 percent of movable property that could serve as collateral for a loan in the United States would likely be
unacceptable to a lender in Nigeria (Fleisig, Safavian, and de la Peña 2006)
39. See Fleisig, Safavian, and de la Peña 2006. See also UNCITRAL 2010 for a guidebook on efficient and effective secured
transactions laws; Fleisig and others 2006 on the benefits of a single registry; and Love, Martínez Pería, and Singh 2016 for a recent
study covering movable collateral.
40. See Cirmizi, Klapper, and Uttamchandani 2012. Araujo, Ferreira, and Funchal 2012 examine the effects of a reform that
increased creditor protections and improved the efficiency of the bankruptcy system.
41. The SME Finance Policy Guide provides specific recommendations for the elements that such a framework should include
(IFC 2011b).
42. The UNCITRAL Legislative Guide on Secured Transactions (2010) includes detailed recommendations regarding the
establishment of a legal framework that is amenable to factoring transactions.
43. Brown, Chavis, and Klapper (2010) show that close to 34 percent of firms in high-income countries use leasing to finance new
investment, as compared to only 6 percent in low-income countries.
44. Fletcher and others (2005) provide a manual on leasing legislation, regulation, and supervision based on international best
practices and IFC’s technical assistance experience (see also IFC 2011a).



                                                                        V. IMPLICATIONS OF THE MSME FINANCE GAP                          45
     Technology is the key differentiator in the access to finance space. Governments can create innovative
     initiatives supporting technological progress and knowledge exchange. A number of sandbox efforts have
     emerged to enable and promote the interaction between financial institutions and technology firms. Such
     regulatory sandboxes usually entail “the temporary relaxations or adjustments of regulatory requirements to
     provide a “safe space” for startups or established companies to test new technology-based financial services
     in a live environment for a limited time, without having to undergo a full authorization and licensing
     process.”45 For example, the Monetary Authority of Singapore has created a “Regulatory Sandbox” for
     Fintech Experiments, which will enable financial institutions as well as non-financial players to experiment
     with financial technology solutions. It is expected to encourage experimentation with innovative fintech
     solutions, while the overall safety and soundness of the financial system is maintained (Monetary Authority
     of Singapore 2017). Another example of the regulatory sandboxes has been implemented in the U.K.,
     where companies willing to test their innovative products and services in the sandbox should apply to and
     be approved by the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). Participants of such sandbox are granted an
     access to knowledge, business assistance and potential waivers to certain regulations. They can test their
     products and services with the real customers, if qualify and approved by FCA (Faden 2016).


     The Role of the Private Sector
     Previous studies have enumerated the significant Return on Equity (RoE) that banks can make by having
     dedicated SME functions and a structured approach to servicing the SME segment. For example, a survey
     by more than 10 emerging market banks showed that a best-in-class SME bank could aim for over 23
     percent RoE performance, with a 15-18 percent differential in RoE compared to standard peers that did not
     have a structured approach in place (IFC 2012b). Moreover, IFC’s global SME banking global benchmarks
     have estimated that a best-in-class Return on Assets (RoA) for the SME portfolio is around 5 percent,
     compared to the total bank’s RoA of 4 percent. This includes compounded average annual growth rates on
     SME assets and liabilities of approximately 25-30 percent for a best-in-class bank, compared to 20 percent
     for the total bank’s assets. The microfinance industry has proven to be profitable as well. For example,
     MIX has estimated an average RoE of microfinance banks at 21 percent, and an even higher return of
     23.3 percent for rural microfinance banks in 2015. Their return on asset figures were 3.4 and 3.6 percent,
     respectively (MIX 2015).

     Despite these positive findings, financial institutions in developing markets, including banks and MFIs,
     often find it hard to enter and operate in the MSME market. Some FIs use either a corporate banking
     or consumer banking model, that without adaptation and customization, has proven not to work well in
     targeting MSMEs. Typical challenges include: having high levels of informal businesses; a lack of reliable
     data; and lack of collateral coverage to hedge the perceived high risks. In addition, FIs in developing
     markets often have inappropriate processes, products and services, risk frameworks, and sales and servicing
     models to serve the segment profitably.

     As identified by the present research, the unmet demand — that is, the finance gap —in developing
     countries presents a significant business opportunity for financial institutions. However, since this segment
     is drastically different from both retail and corporate banking, FIs need to utilize the appropriate models and
     approaches to effectively tap into the revenue opportunity, while at the same time mitigating the potential
     risks.


     45. Regulatory Sandboxes Provide “Safe Spaces” for Fintech Payment Services Innovation, Faden Mike, https://www.
     americanexpress.com/us/content/foreign-exchange/articles/regulatory-sandboxes-for-innovative-payment-solutions/



46    MSME FINANCE GAP
In order to stay profitable and competitive in the MSME market, financial institutions (FIs) should undertake
a number of initiatives, including: (i) designing a business model; (ii) segmenting the customers; (iii)
tailoring the products and services toward customer needs; (iv) developing credit assessment techniques
and risk management capabilities; (v) establishing effective sales and delivery channels; and (vi) ensuring
strong technology infrastructure.

FIs that adhere to best practice standards tend to diversify their income sources among both lending and
non-lending products. One of the strategies is to diversify the product offering and deepen the relationship
by offering product bundles. Banks such as ICICI bank in India and Santander Bank in Brazil have proven
to be successful in utilizing this strategy (IFC 2012b).

Other institutions have placed a lot of emphasis on developing non-financial services (NFS) to increase
customer loyalty, improve client retention rates, differentiate product offerings to the MSME market,
increase the growth of their portfolios, and/or improve their customer service levels (IFC 2012d). Two
of the leading banks in this area, including Türk Ekonomi Bankasi (TEB) Bank in Turkey and Standard
Chartered Bank (in developing markets), have recognized the importance of NFS as an additional revenue
enhancer.

Another bank in Lebanon – BLC, with support of IFC, developed the “We Initiative” (www.we-initiatve.
com ) as a cross-bank platform for supporting women with financial services in Lebanon. The program
includes learning and development programs for women and unique financial products based on the specific
environment for women in Lebanon. Services include collateral-free loans and mother’s fiduciary accounts
for their children. The program has yielded impressive results. For example, from 2012-2015, loans to
women grew by 8.0 percent as compared to 7.0 percent for the bank as a whole. Deposits grew by 8.8
percent for women as compared to 4.0 percent for the total bank. Finally, gross income grew by 8.4 percent
for women as compared to 4.5 percent for the bank as a whole. Women’s non-performing loans (NPLs)
stood at 2.5 percent in 2015 as compared to 5.7 percent for the bank as a whole. Moreover, women’s SME
NPLs were 5.5 percent as compared to the total bank SME NPL rate at 7.4 percent (IFC 2016).




                                                           V. IMPLICATIONS OF THE MSME FINANCE GAP              47
     Technology and digital financial services are also playing an increasingly larger role in the provision of
     finance and payment services to the MSME market segment. There has been a proliferation of companies
     operating in this space, which can be grouped into the following categories: (i) marketplace lending; (ii)
     supply chain financing (SCF); (iii) non-cash merchant payments; and (iv) alternate data, advanced analytics,
     and underwriting process automation. Given that all these companies either provide direct financing or
     enable financing by other financial institutions, they are often referred to as fintechs or technology platforms.
     Marketplace lending provides credit to individuals or MSMEs through online platforms that match lenders
     and investors with borrowers. In some instances, the platforms provide direct lending to the ultimate
     beneficiaries and take balance sheet risks, whereas in other cases they simply connect businesses that need
     financing with investors who have a higher risk appetite. These types of platforms provide individuals or
     MSMEs with an alternative way to access credit, and provide investors a way to lend directly (World Bank
     2017).

     The innovation of these platforms is mainly that financing takes places on an unsecured basis. Credit
     modeling and assessment is done using innovative credit-scoring models, and the underwriting process
     is very efficient — often outcompeting traditional banking loans in terms of both speed and time (World
     Economic Forum 2015). An example of these marketplace lending platforms in emerging markets includes
     Cumplo in Chile, which offers receivable financing and direct financing to SMEs. Another example,
     LendingKart Group in India, is a direct financier providing working capital loans to small businesses using
     big data and proprietary scoring models to assess creditworthiness.

     Supply chain finance technology platforms can facilitate access to finance to both suppliers that sell products
     to corporates, and to the distributors that purchase goods from the corporates. Most of the suppliers and
     distributors are also MSMEs. According to Saleem, Hommes, and Sorokina (2017), a bank considering
     launching or scaling up its supply chain finance business would typically have the following two options
     to enable its SCF operations. It could use a bank-led platform, or it could contract a bank-independent
     platform. The latter might be done through developing an internal IT infrastructure or adopting another
     bank’s platform. The former might be done by licensing the external technology solution, outsourcing the
     needed functionality as “Software as a Service” or participating in SCF marketplaces.

     Banks can select platforms that best match their needs and fill the gaps in their own technology infrastructure.
     Examples of SCF-focused platforms include: Ariba, Demica, GT Nexus, Kyriba, Misys, Orbian, Premium
     Technology, Prime Revenue, and Taulia, among others. Each platform has different levels of maturity,
     complexity, product offering, and geographic coverage. Supply chain finance solutions can take various
     forms to address different challenges (Saleem, Hommes and Sorokina 2017).

     Electronic payment solutions have also contributed to expanding access to credit for MSMEs because
     of the creation of the digital footprint created by their transaction history. Cash transactions conducted
     by merchants are not visible to financial service providers, but the situation changes dramatically once
     transactions become electronic. Indeed, this transaction history can be used to assess the creditworthiness
     of a particular business (World Bank 2017). Mobile point-of-sale (MPOS) technologies are now playing an
     important role in many markets. Square (US), Geo Pagos (Argentina), Kopo Kopo (Kenya) are examples
     of MPOS solutions, offering a variety of services, including payment processing, cash advances, targeted
     short message service (SMS) marketing solutions and business intelligence services.




48    MSME FINANCE GAP
Advanced analytics based on alternative data from mobile phone usage patterns, social media presence,
merchant/purchase habits and historical transactional behavior can be used to make better and more efficient
sales and credit decisions. With worldwide operations, Lenddo is an example of such a platform, offering
credit scoring services through application and social data verification using non-traditional data. Tala,
which launched its services in Kenya in 2014, uses a combination of demographic, geographic, financial,
and social information from mobile phones, utility contracts, and other sources to create risk scores and
credit recommendations in real-time. FarmDrive in Kenya, focused on small farmers, is also collecting and
aggregating alternate datasets from multiple sources that are then used to build credit scores for the farmers.
Partnerships between financial institutions and fintechs can create a synergy by combining the scale and
resources of traditional financial institutions and the innovative knowledge and advanced algorithms
of the fintech companies. Some examples of partnerships that are currently taking place include Tiaxa
partnerships with Diamond Bank in Ghana, with Finca in Tanzania, and with IBA in Congo. M-Shwari,
which launched operations in November 2012, established a strategic partnership between the Commercial
Bank of Africa (CBA) and Safaricom. CBA in Tanzania is now offering products through M-Pawa, which
provides an opportunity for consumers to save or borrow money through their mobile phones. This offering
was introduced in May 2014, and attracted many customers who could only initially borrow a small amount
(a couple of dollars). As they build their credit history, they can increase their credit borrowing limits.




                                                           V. IMPLICATIONS OF THE MSME FINANCE GAP                49
Conclusion


T
       his report appraised empirical research regarding the existence and size of the micro, small and medium
       (MSME) enterprise finance gap in developing countries. A theoretical and empirical framework is
       presented to articulate and measure this gap at the country level, based on the interaction between
supply and demand of finance for MSMEs. This research estimates that there are 65 million formal micro,
small and medium enterprises that are credit constrained, representing 40 percent of all enterprises in the
128 reviewed countries. Of these developing economies surveyed, the potential demand for MSME finance
is estimated at US$ 8.9 trillion, as compared to the current credit supply of $3.7 trillion. The finance gap
attributed to formal MSMEs in developing countries is valued at $ 5.2 trillion, which is equivalent to 19
percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) of the 128 countries. This in turn amounts to 1.4 times the
current level of MSME lending to these countries.

The finance gap in the informal MSME market is another important aspect of this study. In this context,
there is an estimated $ 2.9 trillion in potential demand for finance from informal enterprises in developing
countries. This figure is indeed sizeable, and is equivalent to 10 percent of the GDP in these countries.

In addition to contributing to the limited, but growing literature which tries to measure the size of the
enterprise finance gap for emerging markets, this study introduces a new and a more systemic methodology
to measure the gap. This revised methodology examines the gap from both a demand and supply constraint
perspective. Many MSMEs may have a higher “potential” demand for financing. However, this demand
often goes unacknowledged because the owner of the enterprise knows that is not likely to be met. Similarly,
the supply of credit in these markets is a constraint. Financial institutions prefer to lend money to enterprises
with better documentation, and an established track record. In other words, financial institutions prefer to
supply credit to low-risk enterprises.

The results of this report also raise some pertinent questions: Has the enterprise finance gap increased in
recent years? Can there be a dynamic measure of this gap which can be regularly updated so that interventions
toward reducing the gap can be measured? Throughout this study, the authors have tried to pre-empt and
address these concerns. First, the findings indicate that the increase in the estimate of the finance gap from
the 2011 measure is primarily driven by changes in the methodology. This should be interpreted as a holistic
recalculation of the gap from both the supply and demand perspectives. Second, this robust methodology
has the added benefit of being easier to update in future years. Thus, for the first time, the evolution of the
gap can be captured, and the dynamic changes to the gap over time can be more accurately assessed.

This study highlighted the key market-enabling policies that governments might pursue to close the MSME
finance gap. The public sector has an important role in reforming the institutional environment, providing
regulatory frameworks, and fostering competition and other market-oriented policy actions. Policy
recommendations to support a more diverse financial landscape encompass improving competition within
the financial system, as well as allowing a variety of financial institutions to operate. In addition, both


                                                                                                 CONCLUSION         51
     directed lending programs and risk-sharing arrangements can have positive effects on MSME access to
     finance and growth. However, it can be a challenge to effectively design and manage them. Lastly, mounting
     evidence suggests that solid credit information systems, movable collateral frameworks and registries, and
     efficient insolvency regimes can increase lending to MSMEs. Governments are encouraged to continue
     developing and improving the financial infrastructure to enable greater MSME lending.

     The private sector benefits from market-enabling policies set by the public sector, and is able to directly
     intervene and promote financial inclusion. Private sector initiatives focusing on building the capacity of
     traditional financial institutions — such as banks, non-bank FIs, credit unions, savings and loan associations
     among others — can help them to better serve the MSME segment. The implementation of a targeted MSME
     strategy, coupled with capacity building of staff and management, are crucial for successful penetration to
     these underserved markets. A targeted MSME strategy could include the design of directed business models,
     sales and customer management policies, specialized credit risk models, and tailored products and services.

     In addition to the traditional financial institutions, technology and digital financial services providers can
     play a significant role in providing finance and payment services to the MSME market segment. A variety
     of fintech players, such as marketplace lenders, payment and supply chain finance platforms, among others,
     can significantly contribute to closing the finance gap either by operating on their own or by partnering with
     the larger, traditional financial institutions.

     There are a number of ways in which this study can be improved and expanded as part of a comprehensive
     research agenda to better understand the financing needs of MSMEs in developing and emerging economies.
     First, it is important to update the estimations at regular intervals. Most initiatives to reduce the finance gap
     would require assessment using an accurate country-level measure that is not only comparable with other
     countries, but also consistent across time. Second, there is value in disaggregating the MSME finance gap
     estimates by industries and sectors. For instance, the financing need for MSMEs in the manufacturing
     sector may be different from those of the services sector. The current methodology is flexible enough to
     accomplish this goal, provided that more granular data is collected at the sectoral level. Third, the proposed
     methodology can be adapted for better usability and interpretation by changing the benchmarked country.
     For example, data permitting, the debt-to-sales ratio for a regional comparator can be utilized as the
     appropriate benchmark. Fourth, the precision of the proposed methodology can be improved by extending
     the benchmarking to a more robust matching algorithm that goes beyond summarizing the results in the
     three categories, namely industry, size and age.

     An area of further research could include the proposed regression framework to estimate the supply of
     MSME finance. When a sufficiently long panel of these country-level variables emerges, the framework
     may be used to understand how these individual regulatory environments distinctly shape the MSME
     financing sphere. Finally, more research is needed on topics related to the role of private- and public-sector
     interventions, specifically how reforms in these areas may affect the MSME finance gap. Such research is
     necessary to inform policy makers and private sector participants about the costs and benefits of different
     interventions. It would also allow for the design of interventions which can better target the reduction of the
     MSME finance gap in the future.




52    MSME FINANCE GAP
Bibliography

Alvarez de la Campa, Alejandro. 2011. “Increasing Access to Credit through Reforming Secured
Transactions in the MENA Region.” Policy Research Working Paper 5613, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Araujo, Aloisio P., Rafael V.X. Ferreira, and Bruno Funchal. 2012. “The Brazilian Bankruptcy Law
Experience.” Journal of Corporate Finance 18(4): 994–1004.

Ayadi, R. and S. Gadi. 2013. “Access by MSMEs to Finance in the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean:
What Role for Credit Guarantee Schemes?” MEDPRO Technical Report No. 35/April.

Ayyagari, Meghana, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2014. “Who Creates Jobs in
Developing Countries?” Small Business Economics 43: 75–99.

______.2011. “Small vs. Young Firms across the World: Contribution to Employment, Job Creation, and
Growth.” Policy Research Working Paper 5631, World Bank, Washington, DC.

______. 2008. “How Important Are Financing Constraints? The Role of Finance in the Business
Environment.” World Bank Economic Review 22 (3): 483–516.

Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Duflo. 2014. “Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Testing Credit Constraints
Using a Directed Lending Program.” The Review of Economic Studies 81(2): 572–607.

______. (2011). Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty.
Public Affairs. New York: Perseus Books.

Beck, T., H. Degryse, R. De Haas and N. Van Horen. 2014 “When Arm’s Length is Too Far”, VoxEU,
25 July. See: http://voxeu.org/article/smes-lending-relationship-lending-vs-arm-s-length.

Beck, Thorsten and Asli Demirgüç-Kunt. 2006. “Small and Medium-Size Enterprises: Access to Finance
as a Growth Constraint.” Journal of Banking and Finance 30, 2931–2943.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Dorothe Singer. 2013. “Is Small Beautiful? Financial Structure,
Size, and Access to Finance.” World Development 52, 19–33.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and María Soledad Martínez Pería. 2011. “Bank Financing for
SMEs: Evidence Across Countries and Bank Ownership Types.” Journal of Financial Services Research
39(1): 35–54.




                                                                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY       53
     Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Luc Laeven, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2006. “The Determinants of
     Financing Obstacles.” Journal of International Money and Finance 25 (6): 932–52.

     Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic, 2008. “Financing Patterns Around the
     World: Are Small Firms Different?” Journal of Financial Economics 89, 467–487.

     ______. 2005. “Financial and Legal Constraints to Firm Growth: Does Firm Size Matter?” Journal of
     Finance 60, 137–177.

     Benavente, José Miguel, Alexander Galetovic, and Ricardo Sanhueza. 2006. “FOGAPE: An Economic
     Analysis.” Working Paper 222, University of Chile Department of Economics, Santiago, Chile.

     Berger, Allen and Gregory Udell. 2006. “A More Complete Conceptual Framework for SME Financing.”
     Journal of Banking and Finance 30 (11): 2945–66.

     ______.1995. “Relationship Lending and Lines of Credit in Small Firm Finance.” Journal of Business,
     68(3):351–381.

     Berger, Allen, Leora Klapper, and Gregory Udell. 2001. “The Ability of Banks to Lend to Informationally
     Opaque Small Businesses.” Journal of Banking and Finance 25 (12): 2127–67.

     Berger, Allen, W. Scott Frame, and Nathan Miller. 2005. “Credit Scoring and the Availability, Price, and
     Risk of Small Business Credit.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 37(2): 191–222.

     Brown, Gregory, Larry W. Chavis, and Leora Klapper. 2010. “A New Lease on Life: Institutions, External
     Financing, and Business Growth.” AFA 2008 New Orleans Meetings Paper, American Finance
     Association, Duke University, Durham, NC.

     Bruhn, Miriam. 2013. “A Tale of Two Species: Revisiting the Effect of Registration Reform on Informal
     Business Owners in Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics 103: 275–283.

     Bruhn, Miriam, Dean S. Karlan and Antoinette Schoar. Forthcoming. “The Impact of Consulting Services
     on Small and Medium Enterprises: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in Mexico.” Journal of Political
     Economy.

     Campos, Francisco, Markus Goldstein and David McKenzie. 2015. “Short-term impacts of Formalization
     Assistance and a Bank Information Session on Business Registration and Access to Finance in Malawi.”
     Policy Research Working Paper 7183, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Chakraborty, Atreya, and Charles X. Hu, 2006. Lending Relationships in Line-of-Credit and Non-line-of-
     Credit Loans: Evidence from Collateral Use in Small Business. Journal of Financial Intermediation
     15(1), 86–107.

     Chavis, Larry, Leora Klapper, and Inessa Love. 2010. “International Differences in Entrepreneurial
     Finance” Enterprise Note 11, World Bank, Washington, DC.




54    MSME FINANCE GAP
Cirmizi, Elena, Leora Klapper, and Mahesh Uttamchandani. 2012. “The Challenges of Bankruptcy
Reform.” World Bank Research Observer 27 (2): 185–203.

Cole, Rebel A., 1998. The Importance of Relationships to the Availability of Credit, Journal of Banking &
Finance 22 (6–8), 959–977.

Cowan, Kevin, Alejandro Drexler, and Álvaro Yañez. 2015. “The Effect of Credit Guarantees on
Credit Availability and Delinquency Rates.” Journal of Banking & Finance 59: 98–110.

Cressy, Robert, 2002. Funding Gaps: A Symposium. Economic Journal 112 (477): 1–16.
de la Torre, Augusto, Juan Carlos Gozzi, and Sergio Schmukler. 2007. “Innovative Experiences in Access
to Finance: Market-Friendly Roles for the Visible Hand?” Policy Research Working Paper 4326, World
Bank, Washington DC.

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, European Investment Bank, and The World Bank.
2016. What’s Holding Back the Private Sector in MENA? Lessons from the Enterprise Survey.
Washington, DC: The World Bank.

EIB (European Investment Bank). 2013. “Private Sector Financing and the Role of Risk-bearing
Instruments”. Luxembourg, EIB.

EIF (European Investment Fund). 2014. “Guidelines for SME Assess to Finance Market Assessments
(GAFMA)”. Working Paper 2014/22.

European Union Commission. 2013. “Ex-ante Assessment of the EU SME Initiative”. Commission Staff
Working Document. http://www.dgfc.sepg.minhafp.gob.es/sitios/dgfc/es-ES/ipr/fcp1420/p/Prog_Op_
Plurirregionales/Documents/Eval_ex_ante_SME_initiative.pdf.

Ezeoha A, Ferdi Botha. 2012. “Firm Age, Collateral Value, and Access to Debt Financing in an Emerging
Economy: Evidence from South Africa”. South African Journal of Economic Management Sciences
15(1):55–71.

Faden, Mike. 2016. Regulatory Sandboxes Provide “Safe Spaces” for Fintech Payment Services
Innovation. American Express.

Fleisig, Heywood, Mehnaz Safavian, and Nuria de la Peña. 2006. Reforming Collateral Laws to Expand
Access to Finance. Washington DC: World Bank.

Fletcher, Matthew, Rachel Freeman, Murat Sultanov, and Umedjan Umarov. 2005. Leasing in
Development: Lessons from Emerging Economies. Washington, DC: International Finance Corporation.

Hallberg, K., 2001. “A Market-Oriented Strategy for Small and Medium-Scale Enterprises”.
Discussion Paper 40, International Finance Corporation, Washington DC.

Helms, Brigit, and Xavier Reille. 2004. “Interest Rate Ceilings and Microfinance: The Story So Far.”
CGAP Occasional Paper 9. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, Washington, DC.




                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY        55
     Imaeva, Guzelia, Irina Lobanova, and Olga Tomilova. (2014. Financial Inclusion in Russia: The
     Demand-Side Perspective. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, Washington, DC.

     IADB, 2004. “Unlocking Credit: The Quest for Deep and Stable Lending”. Inter-American Development
     Bank and Johns Hopkins University Press, Washington, DC.

     IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2016. Gender Smart Business Solutions: Banco BHD León
     Uses Women-Centered Design to Grow its Market in The Dominican Republic. IFC, Washington, DC.

     ______. 2016. “BLC Bank – Lebanon: Leading in Banking on Women – A Study”. July.

     ______. 2012a. Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Finance in India: A Research Study on Needs, Gaps
     and Way Forward. Washington, DC: IFC.

     ______. 2012b. Customer Management in SME Banking. A Best in Class Guide. International Finance
     Corporation, Washington, DC.

     ______. 2012c. Credit Reporting Knowledge Guide. IFC, Washington, DC.

     ______. 2012d. Why Banks in Emerging Markets are Increasingly Providing Non-Financial Services to
     Small and Medium Enterprises. Washington, DC: International Finance Corporation.

     ______. 2011a. Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion. IFC, Washington, DC.

     ______. 2011b. SME Finance Policy Guide. IFC, Washington DC.

     Stein, Peer, Tony Goland and Robert Schiff, 2010. “Two Trillion and Counting: Assessing the Credit Gap
     for Micro, Small, and Medium-size Enterprises in the Developing World.”

     Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent Sorensen, Carolina Villegas-Sanchez, Vadym Volosovych, Sevcan Yesiltas.
     2015. “How to Construct Nationally Representative Firm Level data from the ORBIS Global Database,”
     NBER Working Papers 21558.

     Klapper, Leora. 2006. “The Role of Factoring for Financing Small and Medium Enterprises.” Journal of
     Banking and Finance 30 (11): 3111–30.

     Kuntchev, Veselin, Rita Ramalho, Jorge Rodríguez-Meza, Judy S. Yang. 2014. “What Have We Learned
     from the Enterprise Surveys Regarding Access to Credit by SMEs?” World Bank Policy Research
     Working Paper No. 6670.

     ______. 2013. “What Have We Learned from the Enterprise Surveys Regarding Access to Credit by
     SMEs.” Policy Research Working Paper 6670. World Bank, Washington, DC. http://go.worldbank.org/
     DXJ0WEEQU0

     Laeven, Luc. 2003. “Does Financial Liberalization Reduce Financing Constrains?” Financial
     Management Association 31 (4): 5–34.




56    MSME FINANCE GAP
Larraín, Cristián, and Jorge Quiroz. 2006. “Estudio para el fondo de garantía de pequeños empresarios.”
Mimeo.

Lelarge, Claire, David Sraer, and David Thesmar. 2010. “Entrepreneurship and Credit Constraints:
Evidence from a French Loan Guarantee Program.” In Josh Lerner and Antoinette Schoar, eds.
International Differences in Entrepreneurship. University of Chicago Press, pp. 243–73.

F. Lopez de Silanes, F, J. McCahery, D. Schoenmaker, and D. Stanisic. 2015. “The European Capital
Markets Study: The Estimation of the Financing Gap of SMEs”. Duisenberg School of Finance,
Amsterdam.

Love, Inessa, and María Soledad Martínez Pería. 2015. “How Bank Competition Affects Firms’ Access to
Finance.” World Bank Economic Review 29 (3): 413–48.

Love, Inessa, María Soledad Martínez Pería, and Sandeep Singh. 2016. “Collateral Registries for
Movable Assets: Does their Introduction Spur Firms’ Access to Bank Finance?” Journal of Financial
Services Research 49: 1-37.

I. Love, N. Mylenko. 2013. “Credit Reporting and Financing Constraints.” World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper 3142.

Maimbo, Samuel Munzele and Claudia Alejandra Henriquez Gallegos. 2014. “Interest Rate Caps around
the World: Still Popular, but a Blunt Instrument.” Policy Research Working Paper 7070, World Bank,
Washington, DC.

Martínez Pería, Maria Soledad and Sandeep Singh. 2014. “The Impact of Credit Information Sharing
Reforms on Firm Financing?” Policy Research Working Paper 7013, World Bank, Washington, DC.

MIX. 2015. Global Outreach & Financial Performance Benchmark Report.
Maimbo, Samuel Munzele, Henriquez Gallegos, and Claudia Alejandra. 2014. “Interest Rate Caps
Around the World: Still Popular, but a Blunt Instrument.” World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper No. 7070. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2513126

Myanmar Information Management Unit. 2014. Making Access Possible: Financial Inclusion Roadmap
2014-2020.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2016. Financing SMEs and
Entrepreneurs 2016: An OECD Scoreboard. OECD Publishing, Paris.

______.2015. New Approaches to SME and Entrepreneurship Financing: Broadening the Range
of Instruments, OECD Publishing, Paris.

______.2006. «The SME Financing Gap: Theory and Evidence», Financial Market Trends, Vol.
2006/2.




                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY      57
     Porteous, David, Daryl Collins, and Jeff Abrams. 2010. “Interest Rate Policy.” Policy Framing Note 4,
     Financial Access Initiative. January.

     Rajan, R.; Zingales, L., 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth. American Economic Review, 88(3),
     559–86.

     Safavian, Mehnaz, and Joshua Wimpey. 2007. “When Do Enterprises Prefer Informal Credit?”
     Policy Research Working Paper 4435. World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Safavian, Mehnaz, and Siddharth Sharma. 2007. “When Do Creditor Rights Work?” Policy
     Research Working Paper 4296. World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Saleem Q., M. Hommes, and A. Sorokina. 2017. Technology Enabled Supply Chain Finance for
     SMEs. IFC, Washington, DC.

     Schiffer, Mirjam and Beatrice Weder, 2001. “Firm Size and the Business Environment: Worldwide Survey
     Results.” Discussion Paper 43. International Finance Corporation, Washington, DC.

     Schneider, Friedrich. 2012. “The Shadow Economy and Work in the Shadow: What Do We (Not) Know?”
     IZA Discussion Paper No. 6423.

     Schneider, Friedrich, Andreas Buehn and Claudio E. Montenegro.2010. “New Estimates for the Shadow ‘
     Economies all over the World”. International Economic Journal, 24: 4, 443– 461.

     Schoar, Antoinette. 2010. “The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneurship.”
     Innovation Policy and the Economy 10: 57–81.

     Sharma, Siddharth. 2007. “Financial Development and Innovation in Small Firms”
     Policy Research Working Paper 4350. World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Singh, Sanjana, Radhika Asrani, and Anupama Ramaswamy. 2016. “Study on Mapping the Market
     Potential and Accelerating Finance for Women Entrepreneurs in Bangladesh.” International
     Finance Corporation, Washington, D.C. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
     handle/10986/26433 License: CC BY-NC-ND 3.0 IGO.”

     Steijvers, Tensie and Wim Voordeckers, 2009. Collateral and Credit Rationing: A Review of Recent
     Studies
     as a Guide for Future Research. Journal of Economic Surveys, 23(5 S1): 924–946.

     Stein, Jeremy. 2002. “Information Production and Capital Allocation: Decentralized vs. Hierarchical
     Firms.” Journal of Finance 57 (5): 1891–921.

     Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss. 1981. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
     Information.” American Economic Review 71(3): 393—410.




58    MSME FINANCE GAP
UNCITRAL. 2010. Legislative Guide on Secured Transactions. United Nations, New York.
World Bank. 2017. “Guidance Note on Incorporating Digital Finance Services Approaches to WBG
Operations in SME Finance”. World Bank, Washington, DC.

______. 2014. Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial Inclusion. Washington, DC.

______. 2013. Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial Inclusion. World Bank,
Washington, DC.

______.2012. Global Financial Development Report 2013: Rethinking the Role of the State in Finance.
World Bank, Washington, DC.

______. 2011. Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion. World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Economic Forum. 2015. The Future of FinTech: A Paradigm Shift in Small Business Finance.
Zia, Bilal H. 2008. “Export Incentives, Financial Constraints, and the (Mis)allocation of Credit: Micro-
level Evidence from Subsidized Export Loans.” Journal of Financial Economics 87 (2): 498–527.




                                                                                          BIBLIOGRAPHY     59
Annex: MSME Finance Gap 2017

Country         Region      Incomelevel   Number of       Current             MSME         MSME Finance
                                           MSMEs          Supply           Finance gap      gap / GDP
Afghani-     South Asia     Low income       75,864        31,962,467      4,690,624,693       24%
stan
Albania      Europe &       Upper mid-        78,107    1,678,947,542      1,077,970,254        9%
             Central Asia   dle income
Angola       Sub-Saharan    Upper mid-       27,603     2,707,014,766     34,178,102,486       33%
             Africa         dle income
Antigua      Latin America High               3,030        97,837,209        287,585,857       22%
and Bar-     & Caribbean   income
buda
Argentina    Latin America Upper mid-       589,781    13,240,770,257     85,883,903,135       15%
             & Caribbean   dle income
Armenia      Europe &       Lower mid-       26,166      1,266,114,349     1,145,072,303       11%
             Central Asia   dle income
Azerbaijan   Europe &       Upper mid-      261,950     6,894,776,091      6,805,414,229       13%
             Central Asia   dle income
Bahamas,     Latin America High               6,258    2,282,670,600          60,474,014        1%
The          & Caribbean   income
Bangla-      South Asia     Lower mid-     2,761,932   18,937,042,371     38,972,713,376       20%
desh                        dle income
Barbados     Latin America High               15,164      245,721,426        852,791,724       19%
             & Caribbean   income
Belarus      Europe &       Upper mid-       80,209     4,492,537,962     18,424,867,354       34%
             Central Asia   dle income
Belize       Latin America Upper mid-         7,058        137,114,912      462,955,462        26%
             & Caribbean   dle income
Benin        Sub-Saharan    Low income         9,150      113,662,320       689,205,366         8%
             Africa
Bhutan       South Asia     Lower mid-       24,464       192,401,293         91,389,034        5%
                            dle income
Bolivia      Latin America Lower mid-       225,451    2,224,300,904       1,703,075,687        5%
             & Caribbean   dle income
Bosnia and   Europe &       Upper mid-      161,295     5,332,374,105        774,689,474        5%
Herzegov-    Central Asia   dle income
ina
Botswana     Sub-Saharan    Upper mid-        13,137    1,425,602,197      2,669,630,855       19%
             Africa         dle income
Brazil       Latin America Upper mid-     15,738,452   57,048,523,506    626,023,562,478       35%
             & Caribbean   dle income



                                                                                              ANNEX       61
     Country         Region      Incomeleval   Number of        Current              MSME           MSME Finance
                                                MSMEs           Supply            Finance gap        gap / GDP
     Bulgaria     Europe &       Upper mid-       371,299       7,495,751,836      6,478,198,896        13%
                  Central Asia   dle income
     Burkina      Sub-Saharan    Low income        41,718        382,454,699      1,609,940,885         15%
     Faso         Africa
     Burundi      Sub-Saharan    Low income         3,799        227,941,840        490,969,888         16%
                  Africa
     Cambodia     East Asia &    Lower mid-      376,069          571,765,294     3,709,338,045         21%
                  Pacific        dle income
     Cameroon     Sub-Saharan    Lower mid-       93,030        1,661,946,877      8,714,894,256        30%
                  Africa         dle income
     Cape Verde Sub-Saharan      Lower mid-         9,719         232,061,311        290,118,728        18%
                Africa           dle income
     Central      Sub-Saharan    Low income       22,326          30,623,390        242,920,736         16%
     African      Africa
     Republic
     Chad         Sub-Saharan    Low income         5,170        282,238,635       1,134,072,276        10%
                  Africa
     Chile        Latin America High income      834,085       21,856,804,104     8,433,423,295          4%
                  & Caribbean
     China        East Asia &    Upper mid-    56,061,600   2,483,952,766,729   1,890,328,123,161       17%
                  Pacific        dle income
     Colombia     Latin America Upper mid-      2,311,539       4,573,057,029     56,207,522,736        19%
                  & Caribbean   dle income
     Congo,       Sub-Saharan    Low income      319,090         446,934,153      9,304,515,830         26%
     Dem. Rep.    Africa
     Costa Rica   Latin America Upper mid-         41,068      5,050,556,846      4,765,025,589          9%
                  & Caribbean   dle income
     Côte         Sub-Saharan    Lower mid-      203,491        1,426,843,718      2,355,285,515         7%
     d’Ivoire     Africa         dle income
     Croatia      Europe &       High income      153,262       7,256,471,842      9,496,554,331        19%
                  Central Asia
     Czech        Europe &       High income     939,049      29,935,445,460       71,491,146,931       39%
     Republic     Central Asia
     Djibouti     Middle East & Lower mid-         2,805          65,413,570         146,558,734         9%
                  North Africa  dle income
     Dominica     Latin America Upper mid-          2,433          57,579,279        69,096,974         13%
                  & Caribbean   dle income
     Dominican    Latin America Upper mid-        791,236       3,474,739,423     12,959,360,152        19%
     Republic     & Caribbean   dle income
     Ecuador      Latin America Upper mid-       700,999       4,049,685,700      17,937,808,957        18%
                  & Caribbean   dle income
     Egypt,       Middle East & Lower mid-      2,453,567       2,819,748,677     46,722,358,190        14%
     Arab Rep.    North Africa  dle income
     Estonia      Europe &       High income      65,907       2,253,754,880       5,273,410,808        23%
                  Central Asia
     Ethiopia     Sub-Saharan    Low income      136,633        1,687,733,587      4,290,163,843         7%
                  Africa




62   MSME FINANCE GAP
Country        Region      Incomeleval   Number of      Current            MSME           MSME Finance
                                          MSMEs         Supply          Finance gap        gap / GDP
Fiji        East Asia &    Upper mid-       10,011      251,675,667      1,084,830,273        25%
            Pacific        dle income
Gambia,     Sub-Saharan    Low income        9,558       50,651,573         97,953,281        12%
The         Africa
Georgia     Europe &       Upper mid-     106,858      1,169,986,126     2,486,794,402        18%
            Central Asia   dle income
Ghana       Sub-Saharan    Lower mid-       26,190     2,738,047,528     4,992,806,125        13%
            Africa         dle income
Grenada     Latin America Upper mid-         1,951       89,347,054         175,912,721       18%
            & Caribbean   dle income
Guatemala   Latin America Lower mid-       184,468       670,610,775    15,850,041,239        25%
            & Caribbean   dle income
Guinea      Sub-Saharan    Low income       12,684        79,019,051     1,184,565,076        18%
            Africa
Guinea-     Sub-Saharan    Low income       10,402        33,211,702       130,050,139        12%
Bissau      Africa
Guyana      Latin America Upper mid-        22,765       619,118,537       117,394,765         4%
            & Caribbean   dle income
Honduras    Latin America Lower mid-       127,330     1,136,203,890     2,986,194,753        15%
            & Caribbean   dle income
Hungary     Europe &       High income    689,510     17,264,339,344    36,712,035,622       30%
            Central Asia
India       South Asia     Lower mid-    1,563,999   139,455,882,221   230,062,869,817        11%
                           dle income
Indonesia   East Asia &    Lower mid-    2,480,152   56,612,630,954    165,852,545,872        19%
            Pacific        dle income
Iraq        Middle East & Upper mid-       224,610     1,501,801,029   69,849,704,659         41%
            North Africa  dle income
Jamaica     Latin America Upper mid-        10,438       432,143,613     2,717,638,556        19%
            & Caribbean   dle income
Jordan      Middle East & Upper mid-      156,060      2,308,450,774     6,582,119,054        18%
            North Africa  dle income
Kazakh-     Europe &       Upper mid-    1,290,000    9,509,760,067     47,071,024,239        26%
stan        Central Asia   dle income
Kenya       Sub-Saharan    Lower mid-    1,560,500    3,854,957,054     19,326,332,625       30%
            Africa         dle income
Kosovo      Europe &       Lower mid-      103,697     1,653,642,974       342,253,144         5%
            Central Asia   dle income
Kyrgyz      Europe &       Lower mid-     298,500         91,889,281     1,403,743,130        21%
Republic    Central Asia   dle income
Lao PDR     East Asia &    Lower mid-      126,695      439,038,255      2,608,571,859        21%
            Pacific        dle income
Latvia      Europe &       High income      79,053     8,376,864,416     1,237,839,309         5%
            Central Asia
Lebanon     Middle East & Upper mid-       170,504    5,656,696,819      8,855,459,275        19%
            North Africa  dle income




                                                                                             ANNEX       63
     Country         Region      Incomeleval   Number of       Current            MSME          MSME Finance
                                                MSMEs          Supply          Finance gap       gap / GDP
     Lesotho      Sub-Saharan    Lower mid-         7,827     130,556,822        165,869,803        8%
                  Africa         dle income
     Lithuania    Europe &       High income      127,227    5,739,945,537    25,640,325,863       62%
                  Central Asia
     Macedonia, Europe &         Upper mid-        75,140    1,926,626,388        24,262,574        0%
     FYR        Central Asia     dle income
     Madagas-     Sub-Saharan    Low income       210,918      305,447,031      2,678,170,824       27%
     car          Africa
     Malawi       Sub-Saharan    Low income        21,098        9,422,754       477,042,915         7%
                  Africa
     Malaysia     East Asia &    Upper mid-       645,136   69,935,901,865    21,454,214,934         7%
                  Pacific        dle income
     Mali         Sub-Saharan    Low income         4,582     860,934,578        371,543,928        3%
                  Africa
     Mauritania   Sub-Saharan    Lower mid-        2,305        611,111,327     (275,459,789)       -5%
                  Africa         dle income
     Mauritius    Sub-Saharan    Upper mid-        40,112    2,435,207,831       428,581,666        4%
                  Africa         dle income
     Mexico       Latin America Upper mid-      4,048,543   27,045,681,152    163,917,536,619       14%
                  & Caribbean   dle income
     Micronesia, East Asia &     Lower mid-         1,139      33,000,000          77,922,441      24%
     Fed. Sts.   Pacific         dle income
     Moldova      Europe &       Lower mid-       49,444      671,503,966       894,338,409         14%
                  Central Asia   dle income
     Mongolia     East Asia &    Lower mid-        72,473     698,933,740      1,293,202,307        11%
                  Pacific        dle income
     Montene-     Europe &       Upper mid-        19,869      530,128,322       631,854,361        16%
     gro          Central Asia   dle income
     Morocco      Middle East & Lower mid-      1,410,000     7,305,641,193   36,673,779,968       37%
                  North Africa  dle income
     Mozam-       Sub-Saharan    Low income        28,474     205,296,601       1,345,068,141       9%
     bique        Africa
     Myanmar      East Asia &    Lower mid-      128,094     2,740,317,090    13,838,600,855        21%
                  Pacific        dle income
     Namibia      Sub-Saharan    Upper mid-        71,262      139,597,172      1,788,611,879       15%
                  Africa         dle income
     Nepal        South Asia     Low income        99,411      730,830,641      3,601,276,163       17%
     Nicaragua    Latin America Lower mid-        173,742      242,772,450      3,111,643,152      25%
                  & Caribbean   dle income
     Niger        Sub-Saharan    Low income        8,084      329,239,323       3,123,437,438      44%
                  Africa
     Nigeria      Sub-Saharan    Lower mid-    36,994,578      101,349,729    158,131,971,746      33%
                  Africa         dle income
     Pakistan     South Asia     Lower mid-     2,958,129    2,843,781,068    42,169,608,424        16%
                                 dle income
     Panama       Latin America Upper mid-        34,883     6,053,916,662    21,269,386,679        41%
                  & Caribbean   dle income




64   MSME FINANCE GAP
Country          Region      Incomeleval   Number of        Current           MSME           MSME Finance
                                            MSMEs           Supply         Finance gap        gap / GDP
Paraguay      Latin America Upper mid-        14,616      2,507,273,201     3,970,951,794        14%
              & Caribbean   dle income
Peru          Latin America Upper mid-      1,197,963    22,501,282,121    10,179,430,798         5%
              & Caribbean   dle income
Philippines   East Asia &    Lower mid-      816,759     15,248,794,855   221,793,419,218        76%
              Pacific        dle income
Poland        Europe &       High income   1,520,404     55,072,943,816   107,851,883,087        23%
              Central Asia
Romania       Europe &       Upper mid-      407,410    18,232,839,393     45,871,481,609        26%
              Central Asia   dle income
Russian       Europe &       Upper mid-    1,669,439    134,058,734,022   222,020,514,626        17%
Federation    Central Asia   dle income
Rwanda        Sub-Saharan    Low income      123,390        217,157,882     1,273,776,437        16%
              Africa
Samoa         East Asia &    Lower mid-        1,945        136,455,641       35,668,064          5%
              Pacific        dle income
Senegal       Sub-Saharan    Low income       22,270       493,738,437        915,447,621         7%
              Africa
Serbia        Europe &       Upper mid-      84,082       5,136,836,096    10,089,573,405        28%
              Central Asia   dle income
Slovak        Europe &       High income    446,409       8,822,770,352    18,264,992,545        21%
Republic      Central Asia
Slovenia      Europe &       High income     137,460      7,225,596,416     7,980,425,474        19%
              Central Asia
Solomon       East Asia &    Lower mid-        3,050         43,213,645       173,839,087        15%
Islands       Pacific        dle income
South         Sub-Saharan    Upper mid-      667,432     41,462,741,608    30,342,558,100        10%
Africa        Africa         dle income
South         Sub-Saharan    Low income         7,313       139,925,153      291,354,886          3%
Sudan         Africa
Sri Lanka     South Asia     Lower mid-     935,736       2,282,135,557     17,119,256,169       21%
                             dle income
St. Kitts     Latin America High income        2,738       136,508,645        96,395,974         10%
and Nevis     & Caribbean
St. Lucia     Latin America Upper mid-         4,870        154,355,714       191,512,736        13%
              & Caribbean   dle income
St. Vincent   Latin America Upper mid-         4,819         27,165,450       231,198,647        31%
and the       & Caribbean   dle income
Grenadines
Sudan         Sub-Saharan    Lower mid-       13,088      1,087,084,350    21,690,686,257        26%
              Africa         dle income
Suriname      Latin America Upper mid-         1,598       256,808,343       969,522,749         20%
              & Caribbean   dle income
Swaziland     Sub-Saharan    Lower mid-      162,853        119,893,187     1,822,841,863        45%
              Africa         dle income
Tajikistan    Europe &       Lower mid-      155,291       239,528,518       1,451,766,421       18%
              Central Asia   dle income




                                                                                                ANNEX       65
     Country         Region      Incomeleval   Number of       Current           MSME          MSME Finance
                                                MSMEs          Supply         Finance gap       gap / GDP
     Tanzania     Sub-Saharan    Low income    3,162,885     1,327,618,892     5,787,227,422       13%
                  Africa
     Thailand     East Asia &    Upper mid-    2,872,026   112,777,964,028   40,743,237,597        10%
                  Pacific        dle income
     Timor-       East Asia &    Lower mid-        4,138        11,699,086      449,108,541        32%
     Leste        Pacific        dle income
     Togo         Sub-Saharan    Low income      14,892        232,454,157     389,955,574         10%
                  Africa
     Tonga        East Asia &    Lower mid-       9,355         76,317,957      164,816,153        38%
                  Pacific        dle income
     Trinidad   Latin America High income         19,186     1,522,268,219    4,522,897,594        16%
     and Tobago & Caribbean
     Tunisia      Middle East & Lower mid-       601,416    6,005,002,488     6,873,526,885        16%
                  North Africa  dle income
     Turkey       Europe &       Upper mid-    2,587,319   152,283,092,698   80,249,986,670        11%
                  Central Asia   dle income
     Uganda       Sub-Saharan    Low income       25,133       531,364,911    4,869,014,554        18%
                  Africa
     Ukraine      Europe &       Lower mid-     364,237     6,806,902,953    33,052,156,041        36%
                  Central Asia   dle income
     Uruguay      Latin America High income      150,165     3,490,723,240    5,859,001,746        11%
                  & Caribbean
     Uzbekistan Europe &         Lower mid-       95,231     1,732,099,219    11,789,541,678       18%
                Central Asia     dle income
     Vanuatu      East Asia &    Lower mid-        1,578        97,341,953      135,124,860        17%
                  Pacific        dle income
     Venezuela,   Latin America Upper mid-      251,033      4,204,524,489   157,314,192,661       42%
     RB           & Caribbean   dle income
     Vietnam      East Asia &    Lower mid-      447,091    11,204,738,662   23,609,833,957        12%
                  Pacific        dle income
     Yemen,       Middle East & Lower mid-      400,235       698,632,009    18,969,214,616        53%
     Rep.         North Africa  dle income
     Zambia       Sub-Saharan    Lower mid-       21,416     1,552,991,438    3,687,604,402        17%
                  Africa         dle income




66   MSME FINANCE GAP
