The World Bank’s Role as Mediator in the 1950s


NUMBER 086
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: SEPTEMBER 2016




                            November 2017
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains
exhibits originally published on the Archives’ external
website beginning in 2002. When the Archives’ website was
transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made
available as a series on the World Bank’s external database,
Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight
key events, personalities, and publications in the history of
the World Bank. They also bring attention to some of the
more fascinating archival records contained in the Archives’
holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the
Archives’ website.
September 19, 2016 marks the 56th anniversary of the
signing of the Indus Basin treaty by India and
Pakistan. The agreement signified the end of a long
dispute between the two countries and opened the
door for increased economic development in the
region. The World Bank and its president at the time,
Eugene Black, played an important role as mediator in
the nearly decade long negotiation. This was not,
however, the only time the nascent institution took on
this role. A small number of prominent Bank-led
mediation efforts in the 1950s illustrate how the Bank
extended itself beyond the provision of loans in order
to facilitate increased development.                          World Bank President
                                                              Eugene R. Black
The World Bank’s first foray into the mediation of
international disputes was the result of an invitation to participate in failing
negotiations between Iran and Great Britain about the proposed nationalization of
Iran’s oil industry. In the spring of 1951, the Shah of Iran signed a law
nationalizing the Iranian oil industry that was controlled by the predominantly
British Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (AIOC). The Bank, which maintained expertise
in technical and financial matters, was called upon to mediate the thorny legal,
technical, and financial issues involved in resolving the dispute. Between
November 1951 and April 1952, World Bank officials, led by Vice President
Robert L. Garner, attempted to find middle ground between the two parties.
Though ultimately unsuccessful, some of the terms discussed during the Bank-
led negotiations were incorporated into the final 1954 settlement.

                                                  A more successful and
                                                  considerably longer example of the
                                                  World Bank’s role as mediator is
                                                  the Indus Basin dispute between
                                                  India and Pakistan. Following the
                                                  1947 partition of India, the Indus
                                                  Basin river system was divided
                                                  between the Dominion of Pakistan
                                                  and the Union of India. The Indus
                                                  Basin supported more than 50
The signing of the Indus Water Treaty,            million people and fed the largest
September 19, 1960: (left to right) Prime
Minister Nehru of India; President Ayub Khan of   irrigation system in the world, and,
Pakistan; and World Bank Vice President Sir       by 1951, negotiations between the
William Iliff (file #30263783).                   two nations on its use were not
progressing. World Bank President Eugene Black approached the leaders of
India and Pakistan with the offer of mediation and other services. Inaugural
meetings were held in Washington, DC on May 6, 1952. Over the next eight
years, negotiations focused on the division of current water use, the
implementation of the agreed upon division, and the provision for new
developmental uses. The incredibly involved and technical negotiations resulted
in the Indus Waters Treaty, signed on September 19, 1960.

President Black and the World
Bank became involved in
another negotiation that
exploited the Bank’s financial
and technical expertise when it
led talks between Egypt, the
United States, and Great
Britain on the financing of a
High Dam on the Nile River in
Egypt. Between 1954 and
1956, Black led efforts to
negotiate funding for the           Meeting in Cairo, Egypt featuring (left to right) World
                                    Bank President Black, Egypt Prime Minister Nassar,
construction of a massive dam       and Egypt Finance Minister Kaissouni (file
that would make more water          #30290119).
available for agriculture and
provide much-needed power for industry. More than any other instance of World
Bank mediation, however, these negotiations were influenced by politics and the
exigencies of the Cold War. During the negotiations Egypt leveraged its role as a
potential ally for both the Soviet Union and United States while on the other side
the US and Great Britain weighed the potential benefits of such a significant
investment in an unstable region. By 1956 the parties stepped back and no
agreement was reached; the High Dam was ultimately funded by the Soviet
Union with construction beginning in 1960. While the Bank’s efforts didn’t find
success on this issue, it gained sufficient trust from the countries involved.
Consequently, in 1958 Egypt and Great Britain requested the aid of the World
Bank in resolving claims stemming from the expropriation of the Suez Canal
Company.

The World Bank Group Archives preserves and makes accessible records
relating to the activities of the World Bank, including those instances when the
Bank played the role of mediator. Below you will find links to special finding aid
inventories for each of the mediation cases described above. Many of the
records in these lists have been declassified according to the World
Bank’s Access to Information Policy and digitized. They are available
electronically by clicking on the hyperlink folder title. To request access to other
records from the inventories or records identified through our Archives
Holdings website, submit an Access to Information request.

The content of this exhibit is primarily based on Edward S. Mason and Robert E.
Asher’s The World Bank since Bretton Woods (1973).



                    Aswan High Dam Records




                     Indus Basin Records




                     Iran Oil Nationalization Records
