Pope Paul VI’s Encyclical: “On the Development of
Peoples”

NUMBER 089
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: AUGUST 2015




                            November 2017
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains
exhibits originally published on the Archives’ external
website beginning in 2002. When the Archives’ website was
transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made
available as a series on the World Bank’s external database,
Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight
key events, personalities, and publications in the history of
the World Bank. They also bring attention to some of the
more fascinating archival records contained in the Archives’
holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the
Archives’ website.
Pope Francis will visit Washington D.C. on September
22-24. While a stop at the offices of the World Bank
Group are not on his schedule for this trip, the Bank and
the Catholic Church share many objectives with regard
to the development of the world’s poorer countries. This
commonality of ideals and principles was perhaps
articulated most effectively in an encyclical titled "On the
Development of Peoples" disseminated by Pope Paul VI
in 1967.

In the late 1960s, when Paul VI’s message was
published, the World Bank’s understanding of and
involvement in development was broadening to include         Pope Paul VI.
social and humanitarian aspects. Paul VI’s discussion of
development is wide-ranging and includes sections on the origins of poverty and
inequality, the challenges to development, and the need for action, among
others. However, he makes social issues, such as health, nutrition, education,
and personal fulfillment, central to his understanding of development:

"Freedom from misery, the greater assurance of finding subsistence, health and
fixed employment; an increased share of responsibility without oppression of any
kind and in security from situations that do violence to their dignity as men; better
education—in brief, to seek to do more, know more and have more in order to be
more: that is what men aspire to now when a greater number of them are
condemned to live in conditions that make this lawful desire illusory." (9)

                            Pope Paul VI’s timely message garnered significant
                            attention by World Bank Group staff. In a statement to
                            the World Bank Group Board announcing the
                            encyclical’s publication, Luis Escobar, Executive
                            Director of Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay, and
                            Uruguay, expresses his enthusiasm for Paul VI’s vision.
                            After quoting a portion of Paul VI’s text that discusses
                            the importance of organized planning and study in
                            development approaches, Escobar wonders,
                            rhetorically, "Could we think of a better way of outlining
                            the objectives of the World Bank?" Escobar goes on to
                            describe his positive impressions of Paul VI’s
"On the Development of      discussion of trade relations, collaboration between
Peoples", published 1967.   nations, and the role development plays in promoting
                            harmony among peoples.
Escobar’s statement is filed alongside other records that describe Bank staff
reaction to Paul VI’s encyclical and their subsequent participation in
development-focused committees and programs organized by the Catholic
Church and other religious groups. Visit our Archives Holdings website to find
descriptions of other records that provide evidence of the intersection between
the Bank, development, and religious groups. Then, visit our Access to
Information page to submit a request or to communicate with an archivist.
    INTERNATIONAL     BANK   FOR RECONSTRUCTION    AND    DEVELOPMENT

                                               DECLASSlFlED
                                                 JUl 3 1 2013         CONFIDENTIAL
                                               WHO ARcmvES            SecM67 -102
FROM:     The Secretary                                               April   4,   1967


                  Meeting of Executive Directors! April   4,   1967

           STATEMENT BY MR. LUIS ESCOBAR ON THE POPE'S ENCYCLICAL
                       "ON THE DEVELopr1ENT OF PEOPLES"


1.    Last week the world press published the Encyclical letter that His
Holiness, Pope Paul VI, addressed to the bishops, priests, religious, the
faithful and to all men of goodwill "On the Development of Peoples".

2.    I should like to take the liberty of calling the Board's attention to
the substance of the Encyclical, as I find a basic and fundamental coinci-
dence between the ideals proclaimed by the Pope and the essential principles
of philosophy and policy underlying the activities of the World Bank. I
would do the same if similar statements had been made by other important
religious or temporal leaders as, Mr. Chairman and members of the Board, to
my mind, these constitute an expression of support and encouragement from
an outside party to all of us who, in one way or another, contribute to the
Bank's daily operations.
3.    Without going into or even mentioning the various interesting chapters
dealing with different aspects of economic growth and social progress, I
should like to point out that they too strengthen and, in truth, provide an
invaluable support for the principles and the policies which are being
followed at the regional level of the Inter-American system within the
Alliance for Progress, in accordance with the Charter of Punta del Este.

4.    I also want to acknowledge - from the outset - that many people -
including myself - would make more than one qualification to some of the
statements contained in the Encyclical; but this is not what interests me
on this occasion. I shall only allow myself to underline what the Pope has
said with regard to international cooperation between rich and poor countries
as I feel that, amongst his many statements, this is the point which bears
the most direct relationship to our work here.

5.    After suggesting - or, better said, clearly indicating - that the
benefits of cooperation amongst countries do not only go to those who
receive but also to those who give, he states:

                  i
Distribution,.:
     Executive Directors and Alternates
     President
     President's Council
     Executive Vice President, IFC
     Deputy Executive Vice President, IFC
L    Department Heads, Bank and IFC



                                                                •
                                      - 2 ..


               "In order to be fully effective, these efforts ought not to
           remain scattered or isolated, much less be in competition for
           reasons of power or prestige: the present situation calls for
           concerted planning. A planned program is of course better and
           more effective than occasional aid left to individual goodwill.
           It presupposes, as we said above, careful study, the selection
           of ends and the choice of means, as well as a reorganization of
           efforts to meet the needs of the present and the demands of the
           foreseeable future. More important, a concerted plan has advan-
           tages that go beyond the field of economic growth and social
           progress; for in addition it gives significance and value to
           the work undertaken. While shaping the world, it sets a higher
           value on man."
     6.    Could we think of a better way of outlining the objectives of the
     World Bank?

     7.    Immediately following - and with a realism that reminds us of the
     work of our staff on Supplementary Financing - he goes on to speak of
     equity in trade relations:

                "The efforts which are being made to assist developing
           nations on a financial and technical basis, though considerable,
           would be illusory if their benefits were to be partially nullified
           as a consequence of the trade relations existing between rich and
           poor countries. The confidence of these latter would be severely
           shaken if they had the impression that what was being given them
           with one hand was being taken away with the other."

     8.    His thinking on the necessity of collaboration amongst countries which
     forces them to overcome, on occasion, the great obstacle of exaggeratedly
     nationalistic feelings rendering the achievement of the objective difficult,
     is most opportune:

               "Nationalism isolates people from their true good. It would
          be especially harmful where the weakness of national economies
          demands, rather, the pooling of efforts, of knowledge and of
          funds, in order to implement programs of development and to
          increase commercial and cultural exchange." ••• ''V-Je hope that
          the countries whose development is less advanced will be able
          to take advantage of their proximity in order to organize among
          themselves, on a broadened territorial basis, areas for con-
          certed development: to draw up programs in common, to coordinate
          investments, to distribute the means of production and to organ-
          ize trade. We hope also that multilateral and international
          bodies, by means of the reorganization which is required, will
          discover the ways that will allow peoples which are still under-
          developed to break through the barriers which seem to enclose
          them and to discover for themselves, in full fidelity to their
          own proper genius, the means for their social and human progress."
('
                                  - 3 -


9.    On previous occasions, Mr. Chairman, I have had the opportunity of
talking about this matter in this Board and, especially, when commenting on
the summary that Mr. Orvis Schmidt gave us of the last meetings of the
Inter-American system held in Buenos Aires.

10.    At the end of the Encyclical, the Pope has coined a phrase that we
might want to borrow from time to time: "Development is the new name for
peace. II

           "Excessive economic, social and cultural inequalities among
      peoples arouse tensions and conflicts and are a danger to peace."
      ••• 'Teace cannot be limited to a mere absence of war, the result
      of an ever-precarious balance of forces. No, peace is something
      that is built up day after day.If ••• "The peoples themselves have
      the prime responsibility to work for their own development. But
      they will not bring this about in isolation. Regional agreements
      among weak nations for mutual support, understanding of wider
      scope entered into for their help, more far-reaching agreements
      to establish programs for closer cooperation among groups of
      nations - these are the milestones on the road to development
      that leads to peace.1I ••• "This international collaboration on a
      worldwide scale requires institutions that will prepare, coordinate
      and direct it, until finally there is established an order of
      justice which is universally recognized. With all our heart, we
      encourage these organizations which have undertaken this collabora-
      tion for the development of the peoples of the world, and our
      wish is that they grow in prestige and authority."

11.   I am one of those who think that our individual happiness is greatly
increased by believing that our work is not only a means of earning our
living but also a way of contributing to the community, in whatever way we
interpret or visualize it: at the local, national or international level.
Obviously, in this institution, we and our staff have to think and believe
that we are effectively rendering a service to the well-being of humanity
and to bettering relations between peoples; I have always thought that an
international civil servant must have a true vocation for service if he is
to perform his duties well and, at the same time, be happy in discharging
them. And now, one of the world's spiritual leaders tells us that we are
practically dedicated to what appears to be mankind's most important task
at the present time. It is for this reason that I have thought it fitting
to take note of this fact in this Board; I consider that it is good for us
to know what is thought of our duties and responsibilities, and for statesmen
and civil servants throughout the world to ponder on these important decla-
rations - which are, in my judgment, an historic event - for to the extent
that these thoughts are translated more and more into policies, the world
will be able to look to its future with greater optimism and we will have
the illusion of having fulfilled our duties with greater efficiency.
