The Records of the Global Environment Facility


NUMBER 087
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JANUARY 2016




                             November 2017
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains
exhibits originally published on the Archives’ external
website beginning in 2002. When the Archives’ website was
transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made
available as a series on the World Bank’s external database,
Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight
key events, personalities, and publications in the history of
the World Bank. They also bring attention to some of the
more fascinating archival records contained in the Archives’
holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the
Archives’ website.
On December 12th, 2015, delegates from 196
countries signed a historic global climate change
agreement in Paris, France. The Global Environment
Facility, or GEF, along with the Green Climate Fund
(GCF), were named the financial mechanisms of the
Paris agreement. That the GEF was given this role
was no surprise: the GEF has been engaged in
similar activities for more than twenty years.

Established in October 1991 as a pilot program
within the World Bank Group, the GEF was designed
to assist in the protection of the global environment  Cover of GEF folder.
and to promote environmental sustainable
development by providing grants and concessional funding to support
development projects with environmental benefits. In 1994, the GEF moved out
of the World Bank and became a permanent and separate institution. However,
the World Bank continued to serve as its Trustee and provide administrative
services.

                     Because of its continued affiliation with GEF, the World
                     Bank has custody of GEF archival records. The World Bank
                     Group Archives preserves these records and makes them
                     available to researchers in line with approved policies. On
                     our Archives Holdings website, you can find a description of
                     the Records of the Global Environment Facility. This
                     collection, or fonds, contains records relating to the activities
                     of GEF, including project monitoring and assessment, policy
                     and standards development, and corporate affairs and
Moeen Qureshi         liaison.

The Global Environment Facility fonds contains only the records created or
received by GEF after it began operations. Researchers interested in records
that provide information on the creation of GEF and the Bank’s role in its
establishment can find this information in other sources. For example, the subject
files of Moeen Qureshi in the Moeen Qureshi files sub-fonds of the Individual
Staff Members fonds. Qureshi served as World Bank Senior Vice President,
Operations (SVPOP) in the years leading up to the creation of GEF and was
active in its planning and negotiations. His records contain revealing
correspondence, memoranda, and reports from 1989 to 1991 discussing these
activities.
A particularly interesting example from Qureshi’s records is presented below. By
late 1989, the World Bank as well as France and other European countries
determined that there was sufficient support for a meeting of potential donors for
a new environment fund. A meeting was planned for March 15 and 16, 1990, in
Paris. It was the Bank’s responsibility to encourage attendance by
representatives of 18 prospective donor countries. The records sampled below
provide a view of the work that went into drafting the invitation that Bank
President Barber Conable ultimately disseminated. The suggestions made by
Qureshi and Cofinancing Vice President Koji Kashiwaya exhibit the type of
sensitivity and thoroughness necessary for this type of communication.

The records of the Global Environment Facility are just one avenue towards
learning about how development and the environment intersect. Visit
our Archives Holdings site to search for other records related to the topic and
then visit our Access to Information page to submit a request or to communicate
with an archivist. Also, check out our new World Bank Group Archives
website and find out about other resources available through the World Bank and
the Archives.
                                       THE WORLD BANK



•
                                          Name                               Room No,
                                                                                        ,
                                                                                        •
                                                                                        t

                  Me s s r s .   (<tttfiJi'rJ
                                 Thalwitz                                               I
                                                                                        f




                   To Handle                               Note and File
                    Appropriate Disposition                Prepare Reply
                   Approval                                Per Our Conversation
                   Information                             Recommendation
            Remarks



    .v-
                     This is a draft letter Mr. Conable
              is planning to send out next week .



•                             Do you have any comments?



                                                     Marianne Haug




          ,From




                                                 "   "
     .   ,
                                         THE WORLD BANK
                                         Washington, D.C. 20433
                                                U.S.A.


    RBER B. CONABLE


                                                                  DRAFT

                                                                  January 24, 1990
              Dear Mr. Minister:


                        During 1989, a number of proposals for an environmental fund to
              address issues of global concern were made. More specific proposals were
              made by certain Governments at the Development Committee and during the
              Bank/Fund Annual Meeting in September. Consultations with donors were
              undertaken on an informal basis in recent weeks in order to establish how
              they would wish to see these Lde'as pursued.  It appears that there is broad
              agreement on the notion of providing additional concessional resources to
              support environmental actions with global implications, where the current
              funding arrangements do not provide borrowing countries with sufficient
              incentive to do so. During these consultations, five categories of global
              issues were identified:   energy efficiency and conservation, transboundary
              pollution, tropical forestry, biodiversity, and technology transfer (as in
              the case of CFC substitution).   There is, of course, a diversity of views
              among the donors on the relative priorities of these areas.

                        In order to discuss these issues further in a forum which brings
              together interested donors, as well as the representatives of UNDP and



•
              UNEP, since they are key actors in this.area, we intend to hold a
              preliminary meeting on March 15-16, 1990 in Paris to which your Government
              is invited. I have asked Mr. Ernest Stern, Bank's Senior Vice President
              for Finance, to chair these discussions. A list of donors and agencies
              invited to this meeting is attached. Further details and a discussion
              paper will be sent to you shortly.

                        I urge your Government's participation in these discussions since
              the Bank needs broad-based guidance in shaping its own strategy. Would you
              please let Mr. Stern know the composition of your Government's delegation,
              which we assume in some cases may include representatives of more than one
              ministry.   I look forward to the start of these discussions and to your
              continued support of the World Bank Group in this area of vital concern.

                                                                  Sincerely,




              Mr.
              Ministry of




•
              Attachment
              cc: ED
•                                                            Attachment


                          MEETING ON ENVIRONMENTAL FUNDING
                              Paris, March 15-16, 1990



    Governments Invited

       Australia
       Austria
       Belgium
       Canada
       Denmark
       Finland
       France
       Germany, Federal Republic
       Italy
       Japan
       Netherlands
        Norway
        Saudi Arabia
        Spain
        Sweden
        Switzerland
        United Kingdom
        United States




•
    Agencies Invited                       e   "




       UNDP
       UNEP
           THE WORLD BANK



                       January 25, 1990


Mr. Kashiwaya:
:t:tr. Vergin (



       Could you please let me have
your reac tions.




          MOEEN A. QURESHI
    Senior Vice President, Operations
                                                                                                                                                                                .:

  '.                                                                                                                                            ._   • ...:._. __   <..!   - •• ...;   ~:.~:_ ......... - ..:. ••• :-.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;:i:;'_: :._......:._>_:._~.~ • ...:._~.~ i.,::,_ •   .:_r,. •   ._ ,'_,:_';'"   ':;""---



                                                                                             ..•.        -




•••                                                                                                                                                                                                                      THE WORLD BANK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,: ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .    j,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .,I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Name                                                                                      Room No.
                                                                                                                 .    ".:.

                                                   ,,'                                                                 ',,_       .. .z                             Messrs. '~\#it§ •
                                                                                                                                           t

                                                                                                                 ~.                                                                                  Thalwitz
                                         _ ''::
                                                         '.-
                                                       ,'_
                                                               _
                                                                                                             "




                                           ,-,           .




. ~'.     ,              ... :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '.'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Note and File                                    (.~:
                                                                                                                                                                           Appropriate Disposition                                                                                  Prepare Reply
                                 .   :   ~'   ..   '


                                                                                                                                                                           Approval                                                                                                 Per Our Conversation
                                                                                                                                                                           Information                                                                                               Recommendation

                                                                                                                                                         . Remarks
                                                                                                                                   -·1
                                                                                                                                  :-J
                                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                     _.:)                                  This is a draft letter Mr. Conable
                                                                                                                                      .,
                                                                                                                                      '.,
                                                                                                                                                                    is plannirg tp send out next week .

                                                                                                                                                                                           Do you have any comments?
                    ..    ..                                                                                                        ,_ J
                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                     -.    ';

                                                                                             .. ,..: <~'. :"
                                                                                             .-                                                                                                                                                         Marianne Haug
                                                                                '.'
                                                                                .;
              ~"_         .                                                                       ....
                                                                   .. :;. ...
                                                  _",j: ' .....

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "

                                                                                                                                                      From
                                                                                                                                  ....
                                                                                      :"'.



                                                                                                                        r     >

  '.,"_




                                                                                                                                                "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ...

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .....
                                                                                                                                   ~ '..



••
                                                                                                                              "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              . ... "'.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~,    '
    '.                                   THE WORLD BANK
                                                                  -
                                         Washington, D.C. 20433
                                                U.S.A.




         Dear Mr. Minister:


                    During 1989, a number of proposa     for an environmental fund to
         address issues of global concern were made. More specific proposals were
         made by certain Governments at the Development Committee and during the
         Bank/Fund Annual Meeting in September.     Consultations with donors were
         undertaken on an informal basis in recent weeks in order to establish how
         they would wish to see these ideas pursued.      It appears that there is broad
         agreement on the notion of providing additional concessional resources to
         support environmental actions with global implications, where the current
         funding arrangements do not provide borrowing countries with sufficient
         incentive to do so.     During these consultations, five categories of global
         iss).les were identified:   energy efficiency and conservation, transboundary
         pollution, tropical forestry, biodiversi~y, and technology transfer (as in
         the case of CFC substitution).     There is, of course, a diversity of "views
         among the donors on the relative priorities of these areas.
                              "   ~Q~o
                   In order tO~iSCUSS these issues further in a forum which brings
         together interested onors, as well as the representatives of UNDP and
         UNEP, since they are key actors in this·area,   we intend to hold a
         preliminary meeting on March 15-16, 1990 in Paris to which your Government
         is invited.   I have asked Mr. Ernest Stern, Bank's Senior Vice President
         for Finance, to chair these discussions.    A list of donors and agencies
         invited to this meeting is attached.   Further details and a discussion
         paper will be sent to you shortly.

                   I urge your Government's participation in these discussions since
         the Bank needs broad-based guidance in shaping its own strategy. Would you
         please let Mr. Stern know the composition of your Government's delegation, "
         which we assume in some cases may include representatives of more than one
         ministry.   I look forward"to the start of these discussions and to your
         continued support of the World Bank Group in this area of vital~concern.

                                                                  Sincerely.   1~.J..J1

         Mr.
         Ministry of




•
         Attachment
         cc: ED
    '.                                                              Attachment


                               MEETING ON ENVIRONMENTAL   FUNDING
                                   Paris, March 15-16,    1990



         Governments Invited

            Australia
            Austria
            Belgium
            Canada
            Denmark
            Finland
            France
            Germany, Federal Republic
             Italy
             Japan
             Netherlands
             Norway
             Saudi Arabia
             Spain
             Sweden
             Switzerland
             United Kingdom
             United States

         Agencies Invited                        ,   ,

             UNDP
             UNEP




•
                                                   The World Bank
                                                   Washington,0.C.20433
                                                           U.S.A.



     EEN A. QURESHI
    nior Vice President, Operations

                                                                          January 26, 1990




                      Ms.   Haug:


                      Marianne:

                                        Draft Letter on Global Envirornnental Fund


                                I suggest a couple of changes. 'Ihe insert is designed to take
                      into cognizance the contribution of grant :funcl; by several donors who
                      have already contributed or pledged grant funds for technical
                      assistance :

                      1)          Replace the fourth sentence of the first paragaph, whiCh
                      reads: "It appears that             " with "It appears that there is broad
                      agreement on the notion of providing additional concessional resources
                      to support envirornnental actions. with global implications.      While
                      several donors I contributions of t.eqmiqil assistance grant funds have


•                     supported, and will continue to support, important local envirornnental
                      initiatives    in the recipient countries, this does not provide these
                      countries with sufficient
                      with international

                      2)
                                                     incentive to address envirornnental issues
                                             implications."

                                  Please insert "al.so" in the 3rd line of the 2nd paragraph,
                      i. e. " .... since they are also key actors in .... ",




                 cc:    Mr. Kashiwaya




•
       THE WORLD BANK liFe     I MIGA

       OFFICE MEMORANDUM
            DATE:   January 25, 1990

              TO: Mr. Moeen A. Qureshi, OPNSV

           FROM: Koji Kashiwaya, CFSVP

       EXTENSION:   70795

        SUBJECT:    Draft President's Letter on Global Environmental Fund




                    1.       I think that a sentence should be inserted that refers to the
                    contribution of grant funds by several donors in support of technical
                    assistance for environmental projects. Otherwise, this letter may
                    cause unnecessary negative reactions by donors who have already
                    contributed or pledged grant funds for technical -s'S'ista'Y'rc'e,
                                                ~,.~           --_,                 ._
    ~--2~~I suggest the following amendment to the draft. Replace                   .
          the fourth sentence of the__..:f,rst paragraph, which reads "It appears
          that          " with "It appear's that there is broad agreement on the
/         notion of providing additional concessiona1 resources to support
          environmental actions with global implications. While several donors'
          contributions of technical assistance grant funds have supported, and
          will continue to support,' important .loca1 environmental issues of the
       ') lrtJttrow€rs, this does not provide &9rrgwi,ag GQ.1.1.~S- with sufficient
          incentive to address ...... 1 environmental issues." ~     ; ..~
                                                                 ~




                                                                            I~
                    cc:     Messrs.     Vergin, Bock, Taylor




•
