                                           80631
      Check My School
Linking ICTs and Citizen Monitoring

A Discussion of Initial Impact & Key Lessons




             A Project of ANSA EAP in the Philippines
                          A gap between government and schools
                          Araullo High School in Manila, Philippines, had a population of 5,000 students but only
                          two functional toilets. “A lot of toilets are not working; they don’t flush well or at all,”
                          explained student Maricar Dicdican. “Some of the students end up getting a UTI (urinary
                          tract infection) because they would rather hold their urge to go to the bathroom than use
                          the facilities in the school.” Parent Emma De Mesa observed that over her decade-long
                          experience as a PTA president, the “fastest” response to a petition to the Department of
                          Education to address school problems has been about a year. “If you are not so lucky
                          sometimes, the request will outstay a number of principals and will last for several PTA
                          president terms.”

                          Araullo High School is only one of thousands of schools across the country struggling with
                          a range of problems, from the conditions of the toilets, to student-teacher ratios, to the
                          condition and availability of textbooks, among others. The underlying cause is systemic:
                          Philippines’ Department of Education is highly centralized, the largest organization in the
CHECK MY SCHOOL:          government, thus it faces challenges in managing its resources. The Department of
                          Education has a database that tracks the physical conditions of schools and related issues,
  QUICK FACTS             but needs to improve the integrity of its data. Most importantly, there is a gap between
                          the government and reality on the ground, with no institutionalized way to close it.

 Started in January
  2011                    Check My School closes the gap
 Operating in 14 areas   Out of this need, and through collaboration between the Affiliated Network for Social
                          Accountability – East Asia Pacific (ANSA-EAP) and the Philippines Department of
 Geo-coding of 8,687     Education, Check My School was born in January of 2011. Check My School is an
  schools completed       interactive platform which enables citizens – especially school administrators, parents and

 38 million education    students – to give the government direct feedback on any factor they observe to be
                          weakening the quality of their schools. Check My School is a promising example of
  data sets made          citizens, civil society organizations (CSOs), and government working together to ensure
  available               that the services government provides are not only delivered to citizens, but delivered at

 21 infomediaries
                          an appropriate standard of quality. On Tuesday, May 1, 2012, WBI held an event, “Check
                          My School – Linking ICTs and Citizen Monitoring” to take stock of the initiative’s first year
  (information            and crystallize preliminary lessons for other, similar initiatives that are taking shape

  intermediaries)         around the globe.

 1,053 volunteers        Dondon Parafina, network coordinator for ANSA-EAP and the driving force behind Check

 Monitoring 245          My School, explained how the initiative works. The website uses Google Maps technology
                          and mobile phone messaging. By clicking on a particular school on the Google GPS (global
  schools                 positioning system) map, users can log a complaint if a teacher fails to show up, textbooks
                          are falling apart, or they observe another problem that is the responsibility of the
                          Department of Education. The website captures and tracks a variety of information on the
                          condition of the school and presents the information in a clear format for both citizens
                          and government. In building the initiative, ANSA-EAP emphasized identifying and
                          mobilizing the right people in government, along with students, parents, teachers, recent
                          graduates, and ensuring that stakeholders with various perspectives are engaged and
                          collaborating throughout the process.

                                   Opes sed nonummy tation verto augue pecus.
                                    Venio regula ea vel fatua incassum.
                                    regula eum consectetuer ut mos tamen enim.
                                   Feugait regula. Ut amet opes ideo gemino et
 CHECK MY SCHOOL – LINKING
ICTs AND CITIZEN MONITORING
 Promoting social accountability one
  school at a time in the Philippines,
 Moldova, and beyond took place May
1, 2012, and was sponsored by the World
Bank Institute, the Human Development
  Network, and the Open Development
           Technology Alliance.


PRESENTER:
Dondon Parafina, Network Coordinator,
Affiliated Network for Social
Accountability, East Asia and the Pacific
                                            Positive preliminary results
Region (ANSA-EAP)                           Students, parents, and the school administration of Araullo High School used the platform
                                            to report the toilet problem, and make an overall assessment of the school across a
DISCUSSANTS:
                                            number of critical categories, to the Department of Education. “Through Check My
Aleem Walji, Manager, World Bank            School,” Emma De Mesa reports in a video that documents problems in various schools
Institute Innovation Practice               that citizens and the government resolved collaboratively, “there was action done on our
Oleg Petrov, Knowledge Coordinator,         request within a week.” While still in the start-up phase, Check My School is already
World Bank ICT Sector Unit                  producing observable results.
Michael Trucano, Senior ICT & Education
                                            Check My School has become one of the most cited citizen feedback initiatives within the
Specialist, World Bank Human
                                            World Bank. While the project is still evolving, trying to understand some of the key
Development Network
                                            contributors to its initial success should be helpful to others who are gestating similar
MODERATOR:                                  projects. Over the last decade, and with increasing intensity in the wake of events like the
Rachel Winter Jones, Senior                 rise of Ushahidi after the 2007 Kenyan elections and more recently, the Arab Spring, there
Communications Officer, World Bank          has been increasing focus on the possibility for new technology not just to give citizens a
Institute                                   voice in fragile circumstances, but also as a practical everyday tool to help their
                                            governments work better. While technology holds exciting promise, the May 1 event
                                            demonstrated that by itself it does not cause change or solve problems. Aleem Walji,
                                            manager of the WBI innovation practice, emphasized that new technology employing
                                            citizen input interfaces does not always work at the outset, and needs to be developed
                                            over time so that it functions in the right way for each local context. At this early stage, it
                                            is hard to predict how far the impact of Check My School will reach – whether it will
                                            function as a short-term problem-solving tool for concerns like the toilets at Araullo High
                                            School, or whether it may become a component of broader reaching, more systemic
                                            change. But it is clear that the impact is positive, and that the positive impact is a function
                                            of much more than technology. Technology clearly improves efficiencies in the process,
                                            but in the end, Walji said, “the efficiency and effectiveness of *citizen feedback+ initiatives
                                            depend on the people” behind the technology.
                                   More than technology
                                   Because the Philippines has just a 25% internet penetration rate, Check My School was
                                   hardly guaranteed success; the people behind the technology were centrally important.
                                   Parafina and his collaborators needed to innovate to give the schools the access they
                                   needed. ANSA-EAP created a network of “Infomediaries” (information intermediaries),
                                   capable and technology-literate volunteers drawn from the community who enable others
                                   to take action on problems they find in their local schools. The creation of Infomediaries
                                   also was part of a process of systematizing the review of schools both to make sure they
                                   are thoroughly checked, and to put the conditions in place so that Check My School can
                                   maintain ongoing operations.

                                   Check My School’s initial success was won on the strength of a lot more than technology.
                                   One of ANSA’s important approaches was to leverage and align already existing local
                                   initiatives and knowledge. Similar homegrown initiatives (such as Textbook Count and
                                   Bantay Eskwela) that already had some isolated successes provided lessons and points of
SELECTED RESULTS                   entry. ANSA wanted to create a program that took on problems in the schools from a
                                   more holistic perspective, to build economies of scale and aggregate impact.

 Gabaldon School Building         Another key factor behind Check My School’s success was participants’ sense of
  rehabilitated, Alangalang        motivation, along with the relationships and networks that ANSA helped to cultivate.
  Central School, Leyte            ANSA provided broad support, particularly in cultivating the relationships with the

 Renovation of school             Department of Education, and in mobilizing a diverse range of stakeholders. The
                                   government’s commitment both came out of and helped to reinforce an enabling
  building, Putik Central          environment that supports transparency initiatives and citizen engagement. WBI has
  School, Zamboanga City           nurtured the project, raising awareness about the Check My School model, building
 Commitment to increase           relationships for the project within the World Bank, and helping others learn how to

  funds for school, Dumaguete      incubate similar initiatives. WBI has also provided technical and financial assistance, and is

 Textbooks replenished, Sta.
                                   continuing to support the planning for the next phase of the initiative.

  Fe Central School, Leyte         The project already has produced concrete results beyond Araullo High School, ranging
 Computer and internet            from investigations into financial anomalies to renovations of entire schools, but Check
                                   My School is still in the start up phase. Michael Trucano, Senior ICT and Education
  provision, Dualing High
                                   specialist, cautioned that intense early attention and rushing to measure results might
  School, North Cotabato           “smother the project” before it has had time to mature organically.
 Legal cases filed against
  anomalous transactions,
  Pagadian City
 Toilet donated by school
  alumni, Lt. Andres Calungsod,
  North Cotabato
 Renovation of toilets, Araullo
  High School, Manila
Lessons for start-up projects
Many of the audience’s questions reflected other versions of the project
or parallel projects springing up around the world, reinforcing that the
idea is widely relevant. Stories from other countries highlighted the need
to ensure that each version fits appropriately in the country context,
where governments may be harder to persuade, CSOs may not be
sufficiently supported, among other factors. These other evolving
projects can learn from the challenges facing a pilot in Moldova pilot that
Oleg Petrov (knowledge coordinator, ICT sector unit) described. Inspired
by Philippines, the Moldova version of Check My School is in the incipient
phase, and does not yet have the critical country ownership or
momentum that will be necessary for its success. Parafina suggested that
Moldova should map the key stakeholders and then target and nurture
champions for the project. His experience in the Philippines illustrates
that constructive engagement to create a collaborative partnership
between civil society and government was fundamental to the project’s
initial success.

Moving forward, WBI will play a role in facilitating South-South learning
so that other partners can leverage ANSA-EAP’s knowledge and
experience. Undoubtedly, this new iteration of Check My School will
evolve differently, reflecting challenges specific to the individual country
context. For example, with a diminishing population in Moldova, funding
levels do not always reflect the size of the current student body. A Check
My School project there could help stakeholders control the appropriate
levels of funding for each school, and ensure that funding is in line with
student population. Once the right people behind the technology are in
place, connected to each other, and have established a collaborative
relationship with the government of Moldova, this new initiative can look
forward to its own success.




FURTHER INFORMATION
ANSA-EAP (http://www.ansa-eap.net)
The Affiliated Network for Social Accountability in East Asia and the Pacific (ANSA-EAP) is a non-profit
organization housed in the Ateneo School of Government, Ateneo de Manila University. ANSA-EAP helps
improve governance by:
    linking civil society organizations in a network
          advocating and practicing social accountability

Check My School in the Philippines: http://checkmyschool.org/
Moldova Check My School initiative: http://afla.md/institutions/all/

Contacts:
Luiza Nora at WBI: lnora@worldbank.org
Meg McDermott at WBI: mmcdermott@worldbank.org
Dondon Parafina at ANSA EAP: donsquare@gmail.com
