                                                                          80700




  Scaling Up Knowledge sharing
 for Development- A Working Paper
     for the G-20 Development Working
                Group, Pillar 9

Implementation of the G20 Multi-Year Action Plan: Knowledge sharing
Sharing development experiences, including through North-South, South-South
and triangular cooperation, contribute to the adoption and adaptation of the
most relevant and effective development solutions. We encourage international
organizations such as the UN, World Bank, OECD and Regional Development
Banks that operate knowledge sharing platforms to strengthen and broaden
sources of knowledge on growth and development. We agree that knowledge
sharing initiatives should be mainstreamed in each pillar of this Multi-Year Action
Plan.

Action -Enhance the Effectiveness and reach of knowledge sharing:

“We request the Task Team on South-South Cooperation and UNDP to
recommend how knowledge sharing activity, including North-South, South-South,
and triangular cooperation, can be scaled up. These recommendations should
include measures to broaden knowledge sources, improve brokering functions,
strengthen the dissemination of best practices and expand funding options.”




_____________
Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                      1
                                                  Disclaimer

          This paper is based on “knowledge sharing” concepts used by International
          Organizations (UNDP, OECD, and World Bank) and other institutions, including the
          Task Team on South-South Cooperation. It relies on analysis conducted globally by the
          mentioned international organizations, as well as on case stories and studies from
          across all regions collected over the past two years by the Task team on South-South
          Cooperation1. Acknowledging that there are other sources of information residing in
          other countries, bilateral donor agencies, institutions and other international
          organizations that were not used in the preparation of this paper, due to its scope and
          time constraints, the authors would like to refer the reader to view the wider evidence
          and case stories available at the below mentioned websites2.




1
    Launched in September 2009, the Task Team on South-South Cooperation (TT-SSC), is a Southern-led platform
    hosted at the OECD-DAC Working Party on Aid Effectiveness (www.southsouth.info)
2
    www.southsouth.info; www.oecd.org; www.undp.org; www.worldbank.org/wbi

                  _____________
                  Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
                  A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                                                2
             Introduction

              1. The objective of this working paper is to recommend, at the request of the G-20,
                  how Knowledge sharing (KS), through North-South, South-South, and triangular
                  cooperation, can be scaled up in support of growth and development processes.
                  The paper has been developed by a working group, consisting of representatives
                  of the Task Team on South-South Cooperation and UNDP (the two mandated
                  partners) as well as OECD and World Bank Institute. The working group
                  collaborates closely with the Steering Committee for Pillar 9, which, besides the
                  Working Group members, also includes Korea and Mexico as co-facilitators for
                  Pillar 9, France as this year’s G-20 Chair, and Colombia and Indonesia as co-chairs
                  of the Task Team on South-South Cooperation3.


              2. The paper is organized into four sections:

             I.   A description of how knowledge sharing is increasingly viewed as a
                  complementary third leg to financial and technical cooperation in the changing
                  global development landscape;

            II.   A set of emerging, evidence-based lessons for knowledge sharing as a
                  development tool;

           III.   Proposed recommendations from the G-20 to scale up knowledge sharing;

           IV.    Next steps on the short and medium term.

              3. Annex 1 is a glossary of terms related to knowledge sharing. Annex 2 is an
                  illustrative evidence base drawing on the case studies that the Task Team on
                  South-South Cooperation has been collecting in collaboration with the academia
                  from the South. Annex 3 is the G-20 document spelling out details on the Pillar 9
                  of the Multi-Year Action Plan on knowledge sharing.



3
    More information on Pillar 9 of the G-20 Multi-Year Action Plan on knowledge sharing can be found in Annex 2

                   _____________
                   Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
                   A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                                                   3
I.      The Changing Global Development
        Landscape - Knowledge sharing as a
        Distinct Development Tool

1. The global development landscape is changing rapidly. New sources of growth
     have emerged, with corresponding capacity for savings and investment, and
     international assistance. As a result, the options for development cooperation
     are expanding, now that an increasingly diverse group of actors is engaged in
     supporting growth and development globally.


2. There is a growing recognition that, in a world of multi-polar growth, there is no
     “one size-fits-all” model of development or development cooperation.
     Traditional development assistance provided through North-South cooperation -
     mainly finance coupled with technical cooperation - has led to development
     outcomes benefitting millions of people in the developing world, but also
     revealed the ways in which to address technical cooperation shortcomings
     particularly through embedding demand-driven capacity development in
     national processes, including through development knowledge sharing.


3. South-South Co-operation has also been increasingly an important source of
     bilateral technical cooperation and development knowledge transfer, in many
     cases also accompanied by a significant transfer of financial resources. Fifty years
     of North-South and South-South development co-operation have led to
     increased interest in identifying how in development cooperation can lead to
     greatest impact.


4. New forms of cooperation such as triangular cooperation, engaging both
     development assistance providers from the North and the South in support of
     developing countries, are emerging as significant opportunities to promote both
     learning on development experiences and to maximize resources, capacities and
     knowledge.


     _____________
     Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
     A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                            4
5. The new sources of growth in the world economy are generating new sources of
   knowledge and development experience. There is growing recognition that the
   knowledge on what works and does not work to generate growth and
   sustainable development can be found increasingly in developing economies. As
   a result, flows of knowledge are becoming more and more multi-directional,
   including South-South, North-South, and South-North.


6. These flows are also a reflection of the growing interest among many middle-
   income and some low-income countries to share their accumulated development
   experiences. While North-South knowledge sharing has been the norm, the
   growth of South-South sharing of knowledge has exponentially grown, or come
   to the surface, particularly over the past several years. Section 2 provides some
   key concepts, mechanisms used, and lessons learned based on a sampling of
   bilateral and multilateral South-South exchanges.


7. This increasingly diverse supply of development experiences is met by a growing
   demand for knowledge sharing. More specifically, this demand is expressed by
   development practitioners and policy makers in developed and developing
   countries who want to explore new ideas and approaches, learn from each other,
   including through sharing their own experiences, and build horizontal
   partnerships based on equity, trust, mutual benefit and long-term relationships.
   The new possibilities for collaboration, made possible through the continuous
   expansion of information and communications technologies (ICTs) and, a new
   generation of rich, interactive technologies, are feeding this demand for
   practitioners and policy makers to be connected to each other directly.


8. It is important to understand that the demand of development practitioners for
   knowledge sharing is not only a demand to be connected to codified or academic
   information. It is to be connected to each other’s practical experiences of the
   how-to of development and policy reform as peers. Both the peer-to-peer
   practitioner dimension of the relationship and the practical, how-to dimension of
   knowledge are essential characteristics of knowledge sharing and learning.




    _____________
    Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
    A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                       5
9. One way to characterize knowledge sharing experiences and modalities is by
   looking at the actors involved. Unilateral knowledge sharing takes place when
   the knowledge seekers explore the existing universe of relevant knowledge,
   usually   codified   in   physical    or   virtual   libraries   and   information
   repositories/databases. Multilateral knowledge sharing takes place when several
   knowledge seekers engage in a mutual, peer-to-peer exercise, exchanging their
   experiences and practices. Bilateral knowledge sharing takes place when the
   knowledge seekers engage in a bilateral exchange to share their respective
   experiences. While multilateral knowledge sharing is often facilitated by
   international organizations, bilateral knowledge sharing often involves
   government-to-government co-operation programmes. This paper focuses on
   bilateral and multilateral knowledge sharing.


10. As practitioners engage in direct exchanges with peers who are or have been
   struggling with similar concrete development challenges, they find the
   inspiration to enrich the analysis and understanding of their own circumstances,
   opportunities, and constraints. This is especially the case when perspectives of
   different stakeholders are reflected in the exchanges. This helps to strengthen
   their capacity to interpret the experiences and learning from their peers, in the
   context of their own local circumstances, and to draw and adapt those lessons
   that are relevant for them.


11. Knowledge sharing that involves a broad spectrum of national stakeholders
   serves as a critical tool for strengthening the bases for endogenous capacity
   development. It provides space for a mutually beneficial learning process that
   strengthens the individual and collective capacity of practitioners/experts and
   policy makers to lead and take charge of their own development process.
   Moreover, there is emerging evidence that this peer-to-peer learning process
   through knowledge sharing, not only strengthens local ownership and
   leadership, but improves and nurtures the enabling environment for designing
   and implementing difficult development policy reforms. This in turn helps build
   more effective governments.




    _____________
    Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
    A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                        6
12. In this sense, knowledge sharing is a concept that is distinct from technical
   assistance or technical cooperation. While technical cooperation can contain a
   knowledge sharing component, and indeed some of the technical cooperation
   programs of non-traditional development assistance providers have a large
   component of it, the larger share of technical cooperation is essentially different
   from knowledge sharing. This technical cooperation is intended and designed to
   provide a one-way transfer of much needed capacity, in the form of knowledge
   or technology, from sources that are external to the local context.


13. Knowledge sharing, when done well, is internal to the local context, and provides
   a critical complement to the transfer of technical assistance and finance, as it
   nurtures the local capacity and domestic leadership to adapt development
   solutions and guide development assistance to be efficient and sustainable.


14. As knowledge sharing is multi-directional in nature, one important role of
   traditional and non-traditional development assistance providers lies in, among
   others, making available their own development experiences to be shared with
   others. In addition, they have a critical role to play in assisting partner countries
   develop their own capacities to meaningfully engage in knowledge sharing, both
   as providers and as receivers. This is where the models of triangular cooperation
   become particularly relevant to knowledge sharing.              Intrinsically multi-
   directional, triangular cooperation has the potential to enable new types of
   horizontal partnerships between developed countries and win-win-win situations
   among developed and developing countries.


15. In the current global landscape, the G-20 decision to scale up knowledge sharing
   as part of the Seoul Multi-year Action Plan could not be more timely. The
   development community – both countries and international organizations – are
   engaging more decisively and developing mechanisms to better facilitate
   knowledge sharing.      Early lessons learnt from growing global practice are
   beginning to provide useful insights into what works and does not work. The
   time is ripe for all the stakeholders to work together and tackle the constraints,
   so that knowledge sharing can be scaled up as a cornerstone of the capacity
   development agenda.

    _____________
    Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
    A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                           7
II. How to share knowledge – What the evidence is
    showing
16. The Seoul Multi-Year Action Plan encouraged international organizations that
   operate knowledge sharing platforms to strengthen and broaden sources of
   knowledge on growth and development. The UNDP, OECD, the World Bank and
   the Task Team on South-South Cooperation in preparing this paper took stock of
   the knowledge sharing mechanisms that are operative in each organization with
   a view to supporting the Multi-Year Action Plan process to scale up and
   mainstream knowledge sharing in all its pillars.


17. This process is at an early stage and in any case only covers a subset of the
   universe of international organizations knowledge sharing mechanisms. The
   analysis of international organization’s knowledge sharing mechanisms shows
   that there is substantive capacity in these mechanisms to facilitate and support
   scaling up knowledge sharing operations at country, regional and global level. In
   this respect, the international organizations’ global outreach, accumulated cross-
   country and cross-sectoral development knowledge and experience invested
   capacity in research, convening power, resource mobilization capacity are
   important strengths. This analysis of mechanisms coupled with the evidence
   from case studies and stories gathered by the Task team on South-South
   Cooperation have led to the identification of mechanisms with the following
   dimensions and functionalities. It is important to note that more than one of
   these dimensions/functionalities can often be found within a knowledge sharing
   mechanism:

      Brokering mechanisms to systematically match demand and supply for
       knowledge, in support of bilateral and multilateral knowledge sharing.

      Implementation support for a wide variety of knowledge sharing, including
       unilateral knowledge sharing through on-line databases and libraries,
       communities of practice, structured policy dialogues among government
    _____________
    Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
    A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                        8
       officials and related networks; workshops and study tours, knowledge fairs,
       global networks that cater for in-country capacity to design and implement
       knowledge sharing, including through use of information and communication
       technologies.

      Benchmarking quality knowledge sharing and monitoring for results, through
       documenting of North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation case
       studies, developing good practice and lessons learnt, convening G-20
       members and partners in face-to-face events, peer reviews, and the
       development and application of        comprehensive results frameworks for
       capacity development.

      Funding knowledge sharing operations designed to mobilise partners and
       resources to facilitate knowledge sharing transactions. Funds and facilities
       can be made available to government and non-government stakeholders
       seeking access to specific knowledge in other countries.

18. The increased awareness of the value of knowledge sharing as a form of
   development cooperation has led, in recent years, to increased efforts to map
   emerging practices, analyze country-led and multilateral experiences, marshal
   evidence on good practice, draw lessons, and assess the potential for scaling up.
   This work that the international organizations and Task Team on South-South
   Cooperation have been actively engaged in is being informed also by rich
   academic literature on studies of how knowledge is managed and shared within
   complex organizations. Some key findings are well noted below:

      Knowledge is not a static entity, a stock that can be delivered unchanged and
       transferred between contexts. Knowledge is often characterised by
       significant levels of information which is not codified and information that is
       embodied/residing in people or institutions.

      Knowledge sharing is most of all about people, not about heavily formalized
       systems or technologies. Knowledge sharing happens when people interact
       with each other. Context is also crucial, in particular in the development
       sector, where an approach that works in one context won’t necessarily
       transfer well into another context.

   _____________
   Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
   A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                         9
                      Successful knowledge sharing involves extended learning processes, rather
                       than simple communication as the knowledge that is shared needs to be
                       internalised, adapted and applied to the local context and needs.
                       Approaches to knowledge sharing that only rely on the codification of
                       knowledge into databases that operate on a pull basis have proved to be less
                       effective4

                      The use of instruments such as practitioner networks on knowledge sharing
                       and communities of practice, as well as the smart use of information and
                       communication     technologies    (ICTs)   can    considerably   enhance   the
                       pedagogical and cost-effectiveness of the learning experience. However,
                       while these technologies offer great opportunities to facilitate knowledge
                       sharing, the introduction of ICTs by themselves does not promote more
                       effective knowledge sharing.

            19. Furthermore, this paper has drawn upon an important body of analytical work on
                   case studies undertaken by the Task Team on South-South Cooperation. This
                   work was peer reviewed by experts and Southern academics and contributes to
                   implementing the Task Team mandate in view of the Busan 4th High-Level Forum
                   on Aid Effectiveness (see Annex 2). This work which is growing in volume and
                   depth and yielding some early lessons that are well worth noting in considering
                   how knowledge sharing can be scaled up.

                      Political commitment to provide sustained support to knowledge sharing as
                       a development priority underpinned by consistent funding is critical. This
                       provides a strong guarantee of country leadership and alignment to national
                       priorities and institutional development goals.

                      A clear division of labour between policy-makers and practitionershas
                       proven its worth under different country contexts in several geographic
                       regions. Knowledge sharing has the most impact when it involves policy
                       makers and practitioners who have first-hand experience with the reform
                       processes and understand the inherent capacity and political economy
                       constraints of those reform processes. Experts and practitioners are the

4
    Snowden 2010

                   _____________
                   Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
                   A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                                        10
    source of first-hand experience and are in the best position to lead the cycle
    of activities and programs, in a spirit of peer-to-peer equity, trust, mutual
    benefit and long-term engagement. As such, they provide the technical and
    know-how complement to the equally necessary political commitment and
    steer provided by the policy-makers.

   Brokering.There is a need for brokering mechanisms, which can match up
    knowledge demand and supply in an effective way and at acceptable
    transaction costs. It is often difficult to know what aspects of knowledge are
    important or which elements need to be transferred. Therefore, it is
    important to create the space for the relevant practitioners to be connected
    directly to each other. The brokerage role of the knowledge sharing
    mechanisms must be demand‐driven, credible and impartial, in order to allow
    partners to judge a solution’s scalability, adaptability and effectiveness with
    respect to their specific needs.

   Today, knowledge sharing is still faced by ‘brokering bottlenecks’ that
    hamper effective matching of the demand and supply of knowledge. These
    bottlenecks have their source both on the demand (e.g. lack of capacity to
    identify what is needed) and supply side (e.g. lack of information on what is
    available). An encouraging sign is that new, and more mechanisms that
    address these constraints are emerging. In this sense, triangular cooperation
    is considered as an important step forward bringing benefits to all involved
    parties and supporting development of intermediary countries’ capacity for
    South-South cooperation. Countries, including at the sub-national level, are
    investing in their institutional capacities to share and learn, often relying on
    specialized focal points connected with peers around the world.

   Triangular Cooperation has proven itself to bring together and complement
    the strengths of traditional donors, middle-income countries and low-income
    countries. However, to effectively promote knowledge sharing through
    triangular technical cooperation, Governments must ensure that the
    initiatives supported are demand-driven and foster mutual accountability.
    Additional measures to deepen the analysis of transaction costs and establish
    guidelines for better technical cooperation are also required.

_____________
Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                       11
   At the global and regional levels, several multilateral institutions are gearing
    up to serve as connectors of demand and supply of development knowledge
    and expertise, aiming to support countries as key actors of North-South,
    South-South and triangular activities.       A fundamental pre-requisite for
    effective brokering concerns the knowledge seeker’s capacity to articulate
    needs and demand, as well as to participate effectively in the knowledge
    exchange and internalise the relevant knowledge (see below under “countr y
    capacity”).

   Results-oriented design and implementation.Very few knowledge sharing
    activities and programs track and evaluate systematically the results
    achieved in terms of intermediate capacity outcomes and development
    impact.   Knowledge sharing is effective when the knowledge seeker is
    capable of internalizing the relevant aspects, using and adapting them to suit
    specific needs.

   Moving in this direction will provide more opportunities to scale up on an
    informed basis. Most knowledge sharing programs are designed around
    activities using a mix of one-time and process based modalities such as field
    visits, study tours, and workshops to engage practitioners. Even the best of
    these show difficulties to promote a longer-term collaboration among
    practitioners as tangible returns are often not clear for end-users of the
    knowledge exchange.

   Moreover, the majority of these exchanges are involving a rather narrow
    group of players. While such partnerships make sense, the effectiveness and
    impact of knowledge sharing tends to increase substantially where the
    experiences and perspectives of a wide range of stakeholders are captured,
    including those of local authorities, academia, civil society, private sector and
    professional associations.

   Country capacity. Sound in-country institutions are key to scaling up
    knowledge sharing, and should be complemented with efficient and high-
    quality service provision. Governments should develop a strategic approach
    to knowledge sharing and identify what institutional setting would work
    more effectively in their specific setting to promote efficient participation
_____________
Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                        12
    and long-term, institutional learning. Testing and innovation is important,
    but important lessons from the capacity development debate should also be
    taken into account, to avoid repeating mistakes and make the best use of
    scarce resources.

   A focus on strengthening systems rather than individuals’ capacities seems
    particularly relevant. Managing the administrative and logistical aspects of
    knowledge sharing often overstretches the available capacities of
    governments and institutions engaged in this type of development activities,
    and high-quality service providers for operational and strategic activities are
    much needed.

   Sustained funding for knowledge sharing. Sustainability of knowledge
    sharing, scaling up and achieving development outcomes depend on
    programmatic approaches underpinned by predictable, medium-term
    financial commitments. However, financial resources for knowledge sharing
    are still limited and often earmarked for one-off or short-term activities.
    Funding sources and mechanisms that incorporate financial and in-kind
    contributions by different partners from policy and practice domains should
    be sought as they can help create a sense of shared responsibility and mutual
    accountability.

   Quality.    Although good progress is being made, available evidence on
    knowledge sharing experiences remains limited, and knowledge sharing
    good practices are not yet available.      Documenting and analysing the
    knowledge shared, as well as the methodology used, is essential for learning,
    accountability, transparency and outreach. Encouraging examples of in-
    country analytical capacities show that continued learning could be scaled up
    through broad partnership with specialized academia.




_____________
Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                      13
III. Recommendations                        for    G20:         Scaling        Up
     Knowledge sharing
20. Recommendations in this section cover areas where G-20 leadership can catalyze
   collective action in knowledge sharing and support doing the right things as well
   as doing things right to scale up knowledge sharing. The recommendations also
   seek to have direct relevance for policy and practice within G20 and beyond,
   looking ahead to generate concrete results from the Seoul Development
   Consensus and its multi-year action plan leading to the Cannes Summit this year
   and the G-20 Summit under Mexico’s Presidency next year.


21. Moreover, the recommendations emerging from this report should enrich the
   discussions taking place in other global development processes working on
   knowledge sharing, like the one leading to the Busan 4th High-Level Forum on
   Aid Effectiveness.

22. The G-20 recognizes that knowledge sharing is a distinct tool for promoting
   growth and development that is complementary to finance and technical
   cooperation. It calls upon countries as well as international organizations that
   work on development to consider it explicitly in their strategies and programs
   and mainstream it measurably into their development operations.


23. G-20 governments commit to promoting knowledge sharing among
   themselves and with other countries. In this respect, they commit to make
   their development experiences available and broaden the available
   knowledge base. Where appropriate, they also commit to actively engage in
   existing knowledge sharing platforms and encourage participation from
   developing countries in these exercises. Given the richness of their own
   development experiences, they also commit to use the above mentioned good
   practices for KS and promote exchanges among its members on their own
   cooperation initiatives and practices.


24. G-20 governments, when engaging in KS exercises, including through
   technical cooperation provided through multilateral, bilateral, and triangular

    _____________
    Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
    A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                       14
    channels commit to promote country leadership and engage in horizontal
    partnerships. Greater information sharing at country level on KS activities
    promoted by each G20 would contribute to that goal.


25. The G-20 encourage all stakeholders to adopt the following practices:

   The policy-practice balance. Effective knowledge sharing requires both political
    commitment and the leadership of practitioners in implementation. National
    policy-makers should fully and deliberately support knowledge sharing through
    predictable medium-term financial contributions, a clear policy frame of
    reference, and sustained engagement. Practitioners should take the lead in
    implementation through peer-to-peer experience sharing mechanisms and
    activities.

   Brokering. Smart, efficient and demand-driven brokering captures, channels and
    manages information, knowledge, experiences and capacities accumulated by
    developed and developing countries, including through multilateral programmes.
    Countries and international organizations should ramp up their collaboration to
    provide easier access to relevant development experiences, which now reside on
    diverse platforms or are not yet captured or documented. Multilateral institutions
    can act as connectors to link countries to relevant knowledge and open-up their
    knowledge sharing platforms and processes, which can maximize
    complementarities with country-led and, triangular knowledge sharing
    mechanisms.

   Result-oriented design and implementation. Knowledge sharing activities and
    programs should be designed and implemented with a results framework in mind.
    This will lead to capacity development outcomes, which in turn contribute to the
    overall development goal. When appropriate, knowledge exchanges should
    extend beyond government-to-government relationships and also encompass
    non-state actors to ensure a diversity of perspectives. The exchanges should also
    make smart use of a blend of knowledge sharing tools, e.g. face-to-face, video
    conferences, and on-line collaborative tools, to promote continuous long-term
    interactions among practitioners.




     _____________
     Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
     A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                         15
   Country capacity. Countries are encouraged to develop deliberate and concrete
    institutional arrangements to formulate their knowledge sharing strategy and
    coordinate knowledge sharing activities building on lessons learned from
    technical cooperation and capacity development experiences. G-20 governments
    and international organizations should assist partner countries in upgrading their
    institutional capacity to engage in, coordinate and manage knowledge sharing,
    and to translate the shared experiences into locally relevant development
    solutions.

   Funding. The G-20 governments, and other countries providing development
    cooperation (including South-South Cooperation) and triangular cooperation,
    should create spaces in their assistance portfolio so that knowledge sharing can
    be promoted and scaled up through political commitment and sustained funding.
    International organizations and countries providing development cooperation
    should aim to mainstream knowledge sharing through their operational
    programs. Cost sharing mechanisms should be pursued as much as possible to
    increase shared responsibility and ownership.

   Quality. Efforts aiming to strengthen the individual and collective capacity of
    stakeholders in documenting, systematizing and monitoring evidence of
    knowledge sharing should be supported. The investment in in-country analytical
    capacities, including through partnerships with specialized academia, especially in
    the South, will help ensure continued country-led learning, rigorous assessments
    of results with quality benchmark knowledge sharing, and a deeper understanding
    of good knowledge sharing practices.



26. The G-20 requests the partnership of mandated international organizations
    (UNDP, OECD, World Bank) and the Task Team on South-South Cooperation
    to continue its evidence-based learning process on knowledge sharing. The
    ambition should be to turn it into a practice of systematic learning with the
    goal    to    continuously    identify    good    practice,    and    refine   the
    quality benchmarks for results-oriented knowledge sharing. They also
    request the partnership to support the mainstreaming of the knowledge
    sharing into the other G-20 development pillars.


     _____________
     Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
     A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                          16
IV.        Next steps
27. Feedback knowledge sharing from G-20 countries at the Cape Town G-20
   Development Working Group meeting will help refine the options for scaling-up
   and for mainstreaming knowledge sharing in other pillars of the Multi-Year
   Action Plan. The partners working on this pillar will subsequently recommend to
   the G-20 through the pillar’s co-facilitators additional elements on how to
   operationalize and mainstream knowledge sharing in general and with specific
   reference to individual pillars of interest, building on a continuous consultation
   with the involved international organizations and the members of the Task Team
   on South-South Cooperation.


28. Demonstration of Concept (July–October 2011). Leading up to the Cannes
   Summit, the mandated organizations for Pillar 9 will demonstrate the concepts
   elaborated in this paper, by applying them to the social protection component of
   the “Growth with resilience Pillar” of the G-20 Multi-Year Action Plan. This
   application will be done through i) a combination of new knowledge sharing
   methods and instruments; ii) the mapping out of already on-going knowledge
   sharing activities in that pillar; iii) examining existing triangular cooperation
   framework and identifying how they promote knowledge sharing and how
   might they be applied along the Multi-Year Action Plan pillars.


29. The demonstration of concept exercise will draw lessons learnt which will be
   used to inform the later mainstreaming of knowledge sharing through the other
   interested pillars as well as to sharpen the emerging best practice principles.
   Those lessons learnt will be added to the final report for Pillar 9.


30. Mainstreaming (November 2011-October 2012). During the next G-20 cycle,
   and building on the deliberations of the G-20, Pillar 9 partners in response to the
   Multi-Year Action Plan, propose to mainstream knowledge sharing in other
   pillars, according to the G-20 priorities. As per concrete implementation
    _____________
    Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
    A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                         17
   modalities on how to scale-up and mainstream knowledge sharing, Pillar 9
   partners will recommend to the G-20 specific options, also taking into account
   the work done with the “demonstration of the concept” work on Growth with
   Resilience. The division of labor between the organizations involved will be done
   based on their comparative advantages, both thematically as well as with regard
   to the knowledge sharing modalities required.

31. Consolidation of Partnership for Knowledge sharing (on-going). The current
   partners involved in the implementation of Pillar 9 recognize the need for an on-
   going, evidence-based learning process on knowledge sharing and to further
   develop good practices and facilitate coordination among countries and
   international organizations. By the end of the current G-20 French presidency at
   the Cannes Summit, the partnership will i) prepare refined best practice
   principles for knowledge sharing based on solid evidence generated in
   collaboration with specialized academia; ii) compile a list of focal points for
   knowledge sharing in G-20 countries and relevant international organizations; iii)
   develop a proposal for a knowledge sharing partnership platform, listing existing
   knowledge sharing mechanisms and explaining how they work, with a view to
   offer a one-stop shop to knowledge seekers on polices related to the pillars of the
   Multi-Year Action Plan on Development; iv). participate in various events
   organized at global and regional level such as OECD-Korean Development
   Institute Knowledge Sharing Workshop (11-12 July, Paris) to expand and deepen
   the discussion on knowledge sharing. In addition, Pillar 9 partners will investigate
   the feasibility of establishing a more formal Global Partnership for knowledge
   sharing, involving more organizations as well as country partners.




    _____________
    Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
    A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                          18
Annex 1 – Glossary of terms, knowledge sharing frameworks
and instruments




           Knowledge sharing :
                  sharing of development models and solutions which have
                   proven successful in one or several countries, and might be, in
                   partnership, transferred and adapted in other/s

                  direct access to valuable and hard-to-codify information on
                   public policies for development constructed on evidence-
                   based approaches, built on the expertise of policy makers and
                   practitioners

                  a process whereby people, organizations and society as a
                   whole, adapt knowledge generated by others in order to
                   strengthen their own capacity over time as an effective tool for
                   sustainable development and generation of results

             Technical Cooperation:
                  It is often associated with actions aimed at strengthening
                   individual and organisational capacity by providing expertise
                   (short and long term technical assistance personnel,
                   institutional twinning arrangements, mobilisation of Diaspora,
                   etc.), training and related learning opportunities (peer
                   exchange, tertiary education, etc.), and equipment.

                  There are two basic types of technical cooperation: (1) free-
                   standing technical cooperation (FTC), which is the provision of
                   resources aimed at the transfer of technical and managerial
                   skills or of technology for the purpose of building up general
                   national capacity without reference to the implementation of
                   any specific investment projects; and (2) investment-related

         _____________
         Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
         A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                      19
          technical cooperation (IRTC), which denotes the provision of
          technical services required for the implementation of specific
          investment projects.

     South-South Cooperation (SSC) - exchange of resources,
     technology and knowledge between and among developing
     countries. It has been going on for more than 50 years. Increasingly
     S-SC involves a complex mosaic of governmental and non-
     governmental actors, and instruments ranging from one-off
     activities to budget support and large-scale loans.

     Triangular Cooperation - an arrangement under which donor and
     international    organizations     support    specific   South-South
     cooperation programmes/projects by providing technical, financial,
     and material assistance.        In addition, many of them support
     development of countries’ capacity for South-South cooperation;
     information-sharing and “match-making”; as well as knowledge-
     sharing and networking among developing countries. A subset of
     this cooperation is trilateral cooperation which involves at least one
     traditional donor providing assistance to two or more partner
     countries engaged in South-South Cooperation.

     Brokering - the ability to systematically capture and effectively
     match supply and demand of knowledge, experience and capacities
     with lower transaction costs.

     Implementation - the ability to successfully share and transfer
     knowledge between relevant practitioners using a broad spectrum
     of approaches, tools and instruments, including study tours,
     workshops, video conferences, help desk support

     Quality - the understanding and application of results-oriented
     approaches to knowledge sharing to realize longer run benefits for
     capacity development of country institutions, and systems.

     Funding - the understanding of how financial instruments can be
     used to promote knowledge sharing, and catalyze development
     effectiveness.

_____________
Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                              20
Annex 2 – The evidence base5
The table below is illustrative of the findings stated in chapter 26.

       Countries partnering in the                                      Full title of case study
              experience
Laos, Burma, Cambodia, Thailand and        A Case Study on the Ayeyawady-Chao Phraya-Mekong Economic Cooperation
Vietnam                                    Strategy (ACMECS) – Human Resource Development Programme
African Union member states                Lessons from the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) for South-South
                                           Knowledge Exchange, South-South Cooperation, Capacity Development and
Brazil, CARICOM members                    Development  Effectiveness
                                           Technical Cooperation  in the Field of HIV/AIDS between CARICOM/PANCAP and
                                           the Federal Republic of Brazil”
Colombia and 25 Caribbean states           Colombian Cooperation Strategy with the Caribbean Basin / “Caribbean
                                           Strategy”
China and African partners                 Forum on China-Africa Cooperation
Indonesia and 19 countries in Asia and     Indonesia-Japan-Training on Artificial Insemination of Dairy Cattle
Africa
India, Brazil, and South Africa            India Brazil and South Africa (IBSA): Public-Private Sector Initiative to Create a
                                           Conducive Environment for Investment
Japan, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao,           Japan-ASEAN Regional Cooperation Meeting (JARCOM) - Innovative triangular
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore,      cooperation with ASEAN countries
Thailand, Vietnam, Timor Leste
Korea and partners in Asia and Africa      Korean Development Institute Knowledge Sharing Program
Mexico and Chile                           Acuerdo de Asociación Estratégica entre los Estados Unidos Mexicanos y la
                                           República de Chile – El caso del Fondo Conjunto de Cooperación México-Chile
Nigeria, Ethiopia; Sierra Leone; Uganda;   Nigeria Technical Assistance Corps (NAC)
Jamaica, and Belize
Latin American and Caribbean countries     Pan American Health Organization Strategy to support Technical Cooperation
                                           among Countries (PAHO TCC): Analysis of its evolution and main results




5
    The following academic partners conducting TT-SSC case studies have made contributions to chapter 2 of this
             report: Pang Xiaopeng (Renmin University, China), Sebastian Longhurst (Antioquia University, Colombia),
             Marcela Wolff, Mario Vargas, & Verónica Vásquez (EAFIT University, Colombia), Maria Clara Sanín
             (Enlaza, Colombia), Ida Ruwaida & Bagus Aryo (University of Indonesia), Ifar Subagiyo & Bambang Ali
             Nugroho (Brawijaya University, Indonesia), Basil Burke & Carl Browne (University of the West Indies,
             Jamaica), Gabriela Sánchez & Céline Sauteron (Instituto Mora, Mexico), Juan Pablo Prado (Puebla
             University, Mexico), Adele Jinadu & Dele Ashiru (University of Lagos, Nigeria), Steven Grudz (SAIIA,
             South Africa), Pimprapai Intaravitak & Watana Patanapongse (Governance Innovation For Sustainability
             Institute, Thailand), and Delia M. Sánchez (Universidad de la República, Uruguay).
6
    http://www.southsouth.info ; http://www.southsouthcases.info

                    _____________
                    Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
                    A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                                                                21
Annex 3 – Pillar 9 of the G-20 Multi-Year Action Plan




                            Seoul Multi-Year Action Plan on Development

                                      Pillar 9 (Knowledge Sharing)

Co-facilitator countries: Mexico, Korea

Coordinating international organisations: UNDP and TT-SSC

Considering their specific engagement towards knowledge sharing and south-south/triangular
cooperation, the UNDP and the Task Team on South-South Cooperation (TT-SCC) will have a leading
role in coordinating the work to be undertaken with other IOs (OECD, World Bank…). The UNDP and
the TT-SSC will be responsible to present, in due time, at the latest by 10th June 2011, a joint report that
will reflect the contributions of all involved IOs.

Contribution of other international organisations

UNDP and the TT-SSC will work with other IOs, in particular with the OECD and the World Bank.

Objectives

The joint report should contribute to build a common assessment and a common working method among
IOs on ways to enhance the effectiveness and reach of knowledge sharing. The joint report should help
G20 members to build a consensus on the importance of sharing development experiences and fostering
aid effectiveness, including through (but not limited to) North-South, South-South and triangular
cooperation. In its recommendations, the report should provide guidance on ways to:

- strengthen and broaden sources of knowledge on growth and development,
- improve brokering functions,
- strengthen the dissemination of best practices,
- expand funding options.


N.B.: The joint report is primarily for internal use of the G20 Development Working Group, and is not
meant to be a public document. Accordingly, any views or opinions presented in the report will not
necessarily represent the official position of the participating IOs nor will it engage them. Individual IOs


                _____________
                Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
                A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                                               22
are invited to present a joint report with recommendations based on consensus. If needed, individual IOs
could express reservations or nuances in the joint report on recommendations or opinions presented.

The Seoul mandate

The G20 DWG is in charge of the action plan and will monitor progress by reporting to the Sherpas.

The action plan identifies the UNDP and the TT-SSC, in consultation with the OECD, the WB and RDBs
that operate knowledge sharing platforms, “to strengthen and broaden sources of knowledge on growth
and development.” The action plan adds, moreover, that the UNDP and the TT -SSC will recommend
“how knowledge sharing activity, including North-South, South-South, and triangular cooperation, can be
scaled up”.

Timetable:

Each report described here below will be submitted to the co-chairs of the Development Working Group
(France, Korea, South Africa) and to co-facilitators (Korea –again- and Mexico). It will be reviewed by
the co-facilitators and sent as background paper to the Development Working Group:

    -    A preliminary report to be submitted by 5th March 2011 at the latest.
    -    The final report to be submitted by 10th June 2011 at the latest. The detailed report will integrate
         comments and observations expressed by the DWG during its first meeting.




               March                                   June              September           November
               2011                                                                            2011
                                                       2011                2011




       5 March:            21-22 March:        10 June:          End      12-13 Sept:         2-3 Nov:
  Preliminary report        G20 DWG          Final report     June:G20
    Coordinated by           meeting       Coordinated by       DWG        G20 DWG              G20
     UNDP/TT-SSC                            UNDP/TT-SSC        meeting                        Summit




                       _____________
                       Scaling Up Knowledge sharing for Development
                       A Working Paper for the G-20 Development Working Group, Pillar 9
                                                                                                                23
