                                  81658


 Natural Disasters in
the Middle East and
       North Africa:
    A Regional Overview




                                   January 2014
                  Urban, Social Development, and
                    Disaster Risk Management Unit
            Sustainable Development Department
                      Middle East and North Africa
Natural Disasters in the Middle East and North Africa: A Regional Overview
© 2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development /
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
All rights reserved
1 2 3 4 13 12 11 10
This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
/ The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they
represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundar-
ies, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorse-
ment or acceptance of such boundaries.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this
work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Recon-
struction and Development / The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally
grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.
For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete
information to the Copyright Clearance Center Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA;
telephone: 978-750-8400; fax: 978-750-4470; Internet: www.copyright.com.
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office
of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
  Natural Disasters in
     the Middle East
   and North Africa:
A Regional Overview
                         January 2014




               Urban, Social Development, and
                 Disaster Risk Management Unit
         Sustainable Development Department
                   Middle East and North Africa
ii
                                    CONTENTS
Foreword	v
Acknowledgments	                                                                     vii		
Abbreviations	                                                                        ix	
Executive Summary	                                                                    1	
I.	    Overview: Natural Disasters in the MNA Region	5	
	      Regional Profile	                              6
	      Urban Vulnerability	                          12
	      Climate-Related Hazards	                      13
II.	   Regional Progress	17
	      DRM Efforts and Remaining Challenges	         18
	      Highlights of Progress at the Regional Level	 20
	      Highlights of Progress at the National Level	 21
III.	 World Bank Disaster Risk Management Programming in the MNA Region	33
	     World Bank Programming for Recovery and Risk Reduction	           34
	     Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR)	      36
IV.	 Proposed Way Forward	43
	    Strategic Pillars	                                   44
	    Global DRM Best Practices Relevant to MNA Countries	 50
Annex 1. Country Risk Management Profiles	           57
Annex 2. Summary of the Jeddah Consultative Workshop	91
Annex 3. Bibliography	99
List of Figures
1. 	 Disaster Trend in the MNA Region	                                                7
2. 	 MNA Region: Number of Disasters, by Disaster Type, 1980–2006	                    8
3. 	 Average Number of Hazards in the MNA Region by Time, 1951–2005	                 10
4. 	 Economic Damage and Total Number of People Affected by Disasters
      in MNA Region, 1981–2010	                                                      11
5.	 Comparison of Total Number and Type of Natural Hazards in MNA, 1980–2010	        14
6. 	 MNA Population Density Estimates, 2011	                                         15
7. 	 Hyogo Framework for Action Pillars	                                             23
8. 	 Spatial Distribution of Monthly Stations with at Least 10 Years of Data	        29
9. 	 Sea-Level Rise Projections	                                                     38
10.	 A Disaster Risk Management Framework	                                           49
List of Tables
1. Core Activities for the Next Three Years, by Pillar	                              44
List of Boxes
1. 	 Natural Disasters, Conflict, and Migration	                                     19
2.	 Integrated Risk Management in Morocco	                                           22
3. 	 Reducing and Avoiding Risk: Municipal Development and Flood Protection in the
     Republic of Yemen	                                                              26
4.	 Djibouti Drought Post-Disaster Needs Assessment	                                 31
5.	 World Bank Recovery and Risk Reduction Initiatives	                              35
6. 	 Yemen Floods Post-Disaster Needs Assessment	                                    35
7. 	 Algeria and Lebanon Integrate DRM in Their High-Level Agendas	                  39
8.	 Integrating DRM into Urban Planning in Tripoli, Lebanon	                         40
9.	 Examples of World Bank Support for Urban Resilience	                             52



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                             iii
                                                               		
	




iv
                                Foreword
Managing disasters is one of the most complex development issues. Floods, earthquakes,
droughts, and other hazards are critical challenges hindering growth and stability in
World Bank member countries. Over the past 30 years, disasters have affected more
than 40 million people in the Middle East and North Africa (MNA) Region and have cost
their economies about US$20 billion. During the last 5 years alone, more than 120 disas-
ters have caused an average of US$1 billion per year in damages and losses. In the MNA
Region, the synergy of natural disasters, rapid urbanization, water scarcity, and climate
change has emerged as a serious challenge for policy and planning.
This report, prepared in close partnership with the United Nations Development Pro-
gramme (UNDP) and the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR), fo-
cuses on these challenges, presenting a synthesis of the status of disaster risk in the MNA
Region, including gaps and areas for remedial or enhanced actions. It highlights the
progress already made and opportunities to learn from best practices, and provides criti-
cal feedback to governments and partners on efforts and processes required to make
the region disaster resilient. Lastly, this report proposes a strategic framework to help MNA
countries shift from disaster response to proactive risk management.
This report is the culmination of several years of interaction and partnership building fa-
cilitated by the World Bank and the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
(GFDRR) that included working with governments, regional organizations, and nongov-
ernmental organizations to make disaster risk management a core component of devel-
opment programs.




                                                                           Inger Andersen
                                                                            Vice President
                                                              Middle East and North Africa
                                                                           The World Bank




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                            v
                                                              		
vi
                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The overall strategic direction for the report was provided by Franck Bousquet, Sector
Manager of the Urban, Social Development, and Disaster Risk Management Unit, Sustain-
able Development Department, Middle East and North Africa. The Task Team Leaders
for the report were Deepali Tewari and Andrea Zanon, Lead Urban Specialist and Senior
Disaster Risk Management Specialist. The main authors of the report are Rakhi Bhavnani,
Aditi Banerjee, Catherine Burtonboy, Osama Hamad, Alejandra Linares Rivas, and Sahar
Safaie. The team is particularly grateful for the support of Junaid Kamal Ahmad, Director
of Sustainable Development Department of the MNA Region.
The report benefitted from a regional consultation workshop that was held on November
17–18, 2013, in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, under the leadership of the Presidency of Meteo-
rology and Environment (PME). Almost 50 representatives of 14 countries from the Middle
East and North Africa (MNA) region attended the workshop, aiming to update the draft
report, share regional and international disaster risk management (DRM) practices, and
coordinate closely to tackle disaster risk in the region. Special acknowledgment is ex-
tended to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) for their partnership and contributions through-
out the production of the report.
The team would also like to thank Amjad Abbashar, Luna Abu-Swaireh, Lars Bernd, Sa-
matar Abdi Osman, Abdulmalek Al-Jolahy, Edward Charles Anderson, Axel E. N. Baeum-
ler, Henrike Brecht, Iride Ceccacci, Garry Charlier, Manuela Chiapparino, Bekele Debele
Negewo, Alejandro Deeb, Katalin Demeter, Sateh Chafic El-Arnaout, Isabelle Forge, Marc
Forni, Neil Simon Gray, Fadi Hamdan, Lucy M. Hancock, Niels B. Holm-Nielsen, Rajeev Is-
sar, Kristina Katich, Olivier Lavinal, Ziad Nakat, Olivier Mahul, Sergio Mora, Zubair Murshed,
Ziad Nakat, Alexandra Ortiz, Balakrishna Menon Parameswaran, Robert Reid, Pierre Ron-
dot, Abdel Sanad, Hartwig Schafer, Banu Setlur, Lia Sieghart, Mariam Sherman, Shaffiq
Somani, Asmita Tiwari, Vladimir Tsirkunov, Marcus Wijnen, Dorte Verner, Berna Yekeler,
Jolanta Kryspin-Watson, and Doekle Wielinga for their inputs and review. Mapping and
creative production services were provided by Sawsan Gad and Christina Irene.
The main editors of the report were Caroline Vagneron, Alicia Hetzner, and Gina
Wiatrowski.
Special thanks goes to the Arab Organization for Administrative Development (ARADO),
which enabled the World Bank to present the draft MNA DRM Regional Overview and
obtain comments during the Eighth Environmental Management Conference, “Public
Leadership in Times of Disasters,” which took place in February 2013.
Finally and most importantly, the team gratefully acknowledges the financial support of
the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), under the leadership of
its Manager, Francis Ghesquiere, without which this report would not have been possible.


A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                             vii
                                                               		
viii
                          ABBREVIATIONS
AASTMT	    Arab Academy for Science, Technol-        LAS	       League of Arab States
           ogy and Maritime Transport                MNA	       Middle East and North Africa
ARADO	     Arab Organization for                     MoU	       Memorandum of understanding
           Administrative Development                NDMA	      National Disaster Management Act
ASEAN	     Association of South East Asian Nations              (Pakistan)
CAMRE	     Council of Arab Ministers Responsible     NDRMF	     National Disaster Risk Management
           for the Environment                                  Framework (Pakistan)
CARAD	     Natural Disaster Risk Assessment and      OFDA	      Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance
           Monitory System                                      (USAID)
CAS	       Country Assistance Strategy               OIC	       Organization of Islamic Cooperation
CAT DDO	   Catastrophe deferred drawdown op-         PDNA	      Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
           tion                                      PME	       Presidency of Meteorology and
CCA	       Climate change adaptation                            Environment (Saudi Arabia)
CERD	      Djibouti Center for Research Studies      PPCR	      Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
CPS	       Country Partnership Strategy              PRSP	      Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
CRED	      Centre for Research on the Epidemiol-     RCDRR	     Regional Center for Disaster Risk
           ogy of Disasters                                     Reduction
CRW	       Crisis Response Window (World Bank)       SDC	       Swiss Agency for Development and
DDO	       Deferred drawdown option                             Cooperation
DLNA	      Damage, loss, and needs assessment        SECO	      Swiss State Secretariat for Economic
DRFI	      Disaster risk financing and insurance	               Affairs
DRM	       Disaster risk management                  SEGRC	     Executive Secretariat for Risk and Disas-
DRR	       Disaster risk reduction                              ter Management (Djibouti)
EMDAT	     OFDA/CRED International Disaster          SESRIC	    Statistical, Economic and Social
           Database                                             Research and Training Center for
EU	        European Union                                       Islamic Countries
FAO	       Food and Agriculture Organization of      SPCR	      Strategic Program for Climate Resil-
           the United Nations                                   ience
GCC	       Gulf Cooperation Council                  TFESSD	    Trust Fund for Environmentally and
GDP	       Gross domestic product                               Socially Sustainable Development
                                                                (World Bank)
GFDRR	     Global Facility for Disaster Reduction
           and Recovery                              UNDAF	     United Nations Development Assistance
                                                                Framework
GIZ	       German Agency for International
           Cooperation                               UNDP	      United Nations Development Pro-
                                                                gramme
HFA	       Hyogo Framework for Action
                                                     UNISDR 	   United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
IPCC	      Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
                                                                Reduction
           Change
IRM	       Integrated risk management                USAID	     United States Agency for International
ISDRRM	    Islamic Strategy for Disaster Risk                   Development
           Reduction Management                      USGS	      United States Geological Survey
ISESCO	    Islamic Educational, Scientific and       WRI	       World Resource Institute
           Cultural Organization
KACST	     King’s Abdulaziz City for Science and
           Technology




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                   ix
                                                                     		
x
                     Executive Summary
Disasters are increasing worldwide, with more devastating effects than ever before. The
year 2011 saw the highest economic losses yet due to natural disasters, estimated at
US$370 billion worldwide. This is an increase from 2010, which saw US$226 billion in eco-
nomic losses, already 3 times the total of 2009. Disasters in 2010 also claimed significantly
more lives, with nearly 304,000 killed—the highest number since 1976.1 A cumulative 3.3
million people have died around the world from the impacts of disasters in only 40 years
(1970–2010).
While the absolute number of disasters around the world has almost doubled since
the 1980s, the average number of natural disasters in MNA has almost tripled over the
same period.2 In the Middle East and North Africa (MNA),3 the synergy of natural disas-
ters, rapid urbanization, water scarcity, and climate change has emerged as a seri-
ous challenge for policy and planning. This synergy has reconfigured risk landscapes
by making the region’s natural resource base fragile and extremely susceptible to a
variety of internal and external factors. The 2011 Global Assessment Report on Disaster
Risk Reduction4 finds that, although global flood mortality risk has been on the de-
crease since 2000, in MNA and some other regions, it is still increasing. The percentage
of gross domestic product (GDP) exposed to floods, the most recurrent hazard in the
region, has tripled from 1970–79 to 2000–2009.5 The 2008 floods in the governorates of
Hadramout and Al-Mahara alone cost US$1.6 billion, the equivalent of 6 percent of
the Republic of Yemen’s GDP.6 Earthquakes are the second most prevalent disaster in
the region, with serious impacts on lives and livelihoods. Droughts recurrently hit the re-
gion, bringing significant water shortages, economic losses, and adverse social conse-
quences. Between 2008 and 2011, drought in Djibouti caused a yearly economic con-
traction of approximately 3.9 percent of GDP.7 Among a series of floods that occurred
in Jeddah during 2009–11, the 2009 floods had catastrophic consequences with losses
that amounted to about US$1.36 billion.8 Despite the different levels of development,
between 1980–2010, 81 percent of disaster events in MNA were concentrated in just
6 countries: Algeria, Djibouti, the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Morocco, and the Republic of Yemen.
MNA’s rapid urbanization is increasing the exposure of people and economic assets
to disaster events. The urban population already accounts for 62 percent of total
population and is expected to double in the next 3 decades.9 Additionally, 3 percent

1	   Swiss Re, “Natural Catastrophes and Man-Made Disasters in 2010.”
2	   EM-DAT, OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, www.emdat.net.
3	   The Middle East and North Africa (MNA) Region, as defined by the World Bank Group, includes Algeria, Bahrain,
     Djibouti, the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malta,
     Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, West Bank and
     Gaza, and the Republic of Yemen.
4	   United Nations, 2011 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, 28.
5	   Ibid, 32.
6	   GFDRR, “Yemen Floods Post Disaster Needs Assessment.”
7	   GFDRR, “Djibouti Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA).”
8	   Nail M. Momani and Ayman S. Fadil, “Changing Public Policy Due to Saudi City of Jeddah Flood Disaster,” 424–28.
9	UN-HABITAT, The State of Arab Cities 2012: Challenges of Urban Transition, 2012, www.unhabitat.org.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                                	1
of the region’s surface area is home to 92 percent of the total population.10 Citizens
in urban areas must deal with floods on a regular basis, with limited structural protec-
tion, inadequate citywide drainage systems, and weak nonstructural flood mitigation
measures.
The impact of urbanization is especially important in the region’s coastal areas, where
the largest cities and economies are located. Today, approximately 60 million people
(about 17 percent of MNA’s total population) live in the region’s coastal areas. Rapid
growth of informal settlements is resulting in greater exposure to floods. If urban develop-
ment continues unregulated, this will lead to the creation of new disaster risk.
The future of the roughly 100 million poor people who are the least resilient to disasters
is most concerning.11 According to the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC),12 sea-level rise would cause millions to be displaced in the region. In Egypt alone,
a 1-meter rise in sea level is estimated to put 12 percent of the country’s agricultural land
at risk. The same event would directly affect 3.2 percent of the population in the region,
compared to a global figure of 1.3 percent.13
Projections by climatologists and United Nations specialists suggest that MNA econo-
mies and livelihoods will be the second most affected by climate change.14 In 2050, the
region will likely face a 50 percent renewable water supply gap. Thus, water will need
to be imported or desalinated, costing the driest MNA economies at least a 1 percent
reduction in GDP.15
Governments across the region are increasingly seeking comprehensive disaster risk
management (DRM) services. Increasing awareness of DRM issues has brought about
progressive policy shifts, as seen in the creation of a number of DRM-specific institutions
and investments in programs around the region. These programs, include early warning
systems and national and city-level risk assessments. In 2010, for instance, the Islamic
Conference of Environment Ministers adopted the Islamic Strategy for Disaster Risk Re-
duction and Management, which aims to establish comprehensive DRM structures and
policies across Islamic countries.
Thanks to the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), since 2007,
a range of country-level programs has been launched in Djibouti, Morocco, and the
Republic of Yemen to increase their disaster resilience. These programs include activi-
ties aimed at improving information availability on disaster risks, developing the policy
environment for risk reduction, building capacities in DRM through training at the na-
tional and local levels, and creating state-led, post-disaster recovery and reconstruc-
tion programs. In Algeria, Djibouti, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, and the
Republic of Yemen, donor-funded hazard risk assessments have been completed or are
ongoing; flood-recovery projects have been launched in Djibouti and the Republic of
Yemen; and inter-ministerial steering committees on DRM have been established under

10	 World Bank, Poor Places, Thriving People.
11	 World Bank, Adaptation to a Changing Climate in the Arab Countries: A Case for Adaptation Governance and
    Leadership in Building Climate Resilience.
12	Ibid.
13	 Mostafa K. Tolba and Najib W. Saab, 2009 Report of the Arab Forum for Environment and Development, VIII.
14	 World Bank, Adaptation to a Changing Climate in the Arab Countries.
15	Ibid.



2	                                                 NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
the prime ministers’ offices in Djibouti, Lebanon, Morocco, and the Republic of Yemen,
and under the Ministry of Interior in Algeria.
While a certain level of momentum has been building on DRM in MNA, it has not yet been
matched with the integrated approaches required to manage disaster risks effectively.
In 2012, the region launched a 10-year Arab Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction, includ-
ing the reduction of climate change impacts and disaster losses through the identifica-
tion of strategic priorities; the enhancement of coordination mechanisms; and monitor-
ing at the national, regional, and local levels. Nevertheless, given the region’s growing
exposure to natural hazards, risk reduction challenges continue to grow. However, sys-
tematically building awareness, institutional capacity at the national, regional and local
levels, and a solid resource base can help minimize risks. Building these capacities entails
taking immediate steps, and taking them collaboratively. Good development planning,
informed by risk analysis, will contribute significantly to the path of development while
simultaneously enhancing people’s lives and their livelihoods.
Decentralization of the DRM agenda has moved slowly, although some countries are
making a progressive shift. Most DRM activities continue to be conducted at the na-
tional level. However, in Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, and the Republic of Yemen, a slow but
progressive shift toward decentralization has begun. In Morocco, community-level DRM
activities are being developed, including community maps, training on construction
standards, and community early warning systems. The early warning systems are particu-
larly important to empower communities to manage their own risks. The 2012 Sendai Re-
port16 shows that an effective DRM strategy requires a decentralized approach and an
appropriate division of resources (human and financial) in all tiers of government. At the
local level, city managers are not only the ones with key roles to play. Civil society orga-
nizations can also contribute significantly to building local resilience. MNA countries are
still among the most centralized in the world, with some of the lowest total local govern-
ment expenditures (ranging from 3 percent in Jordan to 18 percent in Egypt, compared
to the world average of about 22 percent). However, several countries in the region,
including Morocco, Tunisia, and the Republic of Yemen, are gradually moving toward
greater devolution of powers to lower tiers of government.17 This shift represents an op-
portunity to strengthen cities, making them more resilient and increasing their capacity
to manage development, and thus support the DRM agenda.
This Regional DRM Overview is directed at all DRM stakeholders, but particularly at the
MNA Regions’ governments, institutions, and partners. This report aims to broaden the
dialogue for a more proactive and collaborative management of risks through taking
stock of progress in DRM in MNA and identifying gaps for future interventions.
This report builds on the strategic vision, principles, and goals of the MNA Region coun-
tries; the Islamic Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (ISDRRM); the
MNA Strategic Framework for Climate Action; and the World Bank’s Strategy Update
for MNA. Ongoing and proposed activities aim to scale up existing good practices and
continue building DRM capacities in MNA’s disaster-prone countries; and increase their
medium-term predictability of programming for DRM, while strengthening the delivery of
and accountability for results.

16	 World Bank and GFDRR, Sendai Report.
17	UN-HABITAT, The State of Arab Cities.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	3
Furthermore, this report aims to establish a more strategic and collaborative framework
between the World Bank and its international partners, particularly the United Nations
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) and the United Nations Development Pro-
gramme (UNDP), to assist MNA countries’ efforts to shift from disaster response to pro-
active risk management. Approaches used to develop the framework may include
implementation of probabilistic modeling; risk assessment (using completed studies in
Djibouti, Morocco, Lebanon, and the Republic of Yemen) to sensitize authorities and
guide vulnerability reduction strategies; financial disaster risk transfer instruments; and
leveraging best practices from around the world and within the region (some of these
are presented in this report).
A regional consultation workshop on the draft version of this report, Natural Disasters in
the Middle East and North Africa: A Regional Overview, was held on November 17–18,
2013, in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, under the leadership of the Presidency of Meteorology
and Environment (PME).18 The representatives of 14 countries from the MNA Region at-
tended the workshop, aiming to update this report, share regional and international
DRM practices, and coordinate closely to tackle disaster risk in the region. The workshop
was organized by the World Bank and was attended by 50 participants, including inter-
national and regional partners such as the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
and the Islamic Development Bank (IDB).




18	 For more information on the Jeddah workshop, see annex 2.



4	                                                NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                          I. Overview:
                     Natural Disasters
               in the Middle East and
                   North Africa Region




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW         	5
Regional Profile
Managing disaster risks is one of the most complex development challenges in MNA.
Floods, earthquakes, and droughts represent serious challenges to growth and stability
in the region. While around the world, the number of disasters has almost doubled since
the 1980s, in MNA, the average number of natural disasters has almost tripled over the
same period.19 Approximately 40 million people have been affected by over 350 natural
disasters between 1981 and 2010, according to EM-DAT.20
The most frequent disasters in the region are floods, earthquakes, storms, and droughts.
Over the last 30 years (1981–2011), floods have been the most recurrent disasters re-
corded in EM-DAT, with at least 300 events (53 percent of the total number of disasters),
indicating a strong need for early warning systems. Earthquakes account for 24 percent
of the total,21 and storms and droughts both account for approximately 10 percent. The
low percentage for drought, however, is due to limited data availability.
This increase in disasters is mainly due to an increase in exposure and vulnerability
across the region. The 2011 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction finds
that, although global flood mortality risk has been on the decrease since 2000, in MNA,
it is still increasing (figure 1). The percentage of GDP exposed to floods has tripled in the
region from 1970–79 to 2000–2009.22 In the Republic of Yemen, cumulative loss in real
income over the 5-year period following the 2008 floods in Hadramout was estimated at
180 percent of preflood regional agricultural value added.23 This large increase can be
attributed to a growing concentration of assets at risk, particularly in urban areas, and
insufficient structural and nonstructural mitigation measures.
Flash flooding is also increasing in cities across the region. The number of flash floods
and people affected or killed has doubled during the last 10 years. These increases are
largely due to the construction of new concrete surfaces that cannot absorb water, in-
adequate city drainage systems, and increased settlement in low-lying areas.24 Recent


19	 www.emdat.be/database. In EM-DAT, events missing data are indicated with zeros for both number affected and
    number killed. Dates can also be a source of ambiguity (such as inaccuracies in the case of slow onset disasters
    such as droughts).
20	 www.cred.be. While Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) statistics are some of the most
    widely cited in disaster-related research, there are a number of known limitations. The quality of the disaster data is
    largely dependent on reporting systems, the existence of generally accepted standards, collection methodologies,
    and definitions. The criteria used by CRED to classify an event as a disaster includes: (i) more than 10 people killed;
    (ii) 100 or more people affected, injured, or made homeless; (iii) significant damage incurred; and (iv) declaration
    of a state of emergency and/or an appeal for international assistance. Due to very limited data availability, this
    report uses EM-DAT as the main database.
21	 Given the 30-year period (1981–2011) taken into account for this report, the data do not include other previous
    significant hazards, such as the Agadir (Morocco) earthquake that killed 12,000 people in 1960, or the West Bank
    earthquake in 1927, with an estimated 300 victims.
22	UNISDR, Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, 31.
23	 Government statistics.
24	 World Bank, Adaptation to a Changing Climate in Arab Countries.



6	                                                     NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Figure 1. Disaster Trend in MNA Region
     30




     25




     20




     15




     10




      5




      0
          1980


                  1982


                          1984


                                  1986


                                         1988


                                                 1990


                                                        1992


                                                                1994


                                                                        1996


                                                                                1998


                                                                                       2000


                                                                                                2002


                                                                                                       2004


                                                                                                               2006
Source: WRI.




striking examples are the flash floods of Bab-El-Oued in the Algerian capital, which left
more than 900 casualties in 2001; or the flash floods that hit Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, in
2009, 2010, and 2011, which were registered as the worst floods in 30 years.25 Flash floods
often follow extensive droughts, such as the devastating Djibouti floods in 2004 after a
multiyear water stress. This pattern further demonstrates the need for comprehensive ap-
proaches to urban development and water resource management.
Droughts also have considerable long-term impacts in the MNA Region. The number of
people affected by drought in MNA from 1970–2009 totals approximately 38 million.26 In
Djibouti, the 2008–11 drought, with its fourth consecutive year of rainfall deficit, affected
at least 120,000 people27—50 percent of the rural population. From 2008 to 2011, drought
caused economic losses equivalent to 3.9 percent of Djibouti’s GDP per annum. In Syria,
in 2010, following a third consecutive year of drought, 1.3 million people were affected,
and 800,000 people lost almost all sources of livelihood and are now facing extreme
hardship.


25	EM-DAT.
26	 L. Abu Swaireh, “Disaster Risk Reduction Global and Regional Context.”
27	 This is the official figure of the affected people, even though the government believes that as many as 245,000
    could have been affected nationally. There is no hard evidence to back up this figure.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                             	7
 FIGURE 2. MNA REGION: NUMBER OF DISASTERS, BY DISASTER TYPE, 1980–2006
 a. Stacked disasters: See figures 2b,c,d, and e for more details on specific natural hazards’ frequency
 and number of affected people.




                                                                                       Syria
                                                                             Lebanon
                                                  Malta
                                        Tunisia                        West Bank   Jordan
                                                                                                Iraq
                   Morocco                                                                                               Iran

                                                                                                          Kuwait
                              Algeria
                                                                                                                   Bahrain
                                                      Libya          Egypt                                          Qatar
                                                                                                                         UAE
                                                                                                Saudi Arabia
                                                                                                                                Oman


                                                                                                                           Aggregate Records in
                                                                                                    Yemen                  EM-DAT (1900 - 2011)
                                                                                                                                         Storm
                                                                                               Djibouti
                                                                                                                                         Earthquake

                                                                                                                                         Drought

                                                                                                                                         Flood

                                                                                                                          Guide to Size
                                                                                                                          (Number of Events)
                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                5




     b. Flood hotspots: Floods are the most frequent disaster occurring in MNA countries. From 1900 to 2011,
     213 floods have hit 15 MNA countries, killing almost 19,000 people while affecting 8.6 million others.




8	                                                            NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
 c. Drought hotspots: From 1900 to 2011, 28 drought events have been recorded across nine MNA coun-
 tries, affecting 44 million people. Drought hazard data are limited given the slow onset nature, lack of a
 solid definition, and insufficient systems in place for measurement.




 d. Storm hotspots: Between 1900–2011, more than 20 severe storms have affected the MNA region. The
 countries most affected have been Iran, Oman, Egypt, and Algeria. According to EM-DAT, more than
 six storms affected Iran and Oman, and three to six affected Algeria and Egypt.




                                                                         figure 2 continued on next page


A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                      	9
FIGURE 2. CONTINUED
e. Earthquake hotspots: From 1900 to 2011, Algeria, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran, Morocco, and the Republic of Ye-
men have been affected by over 100 earthquakes that have killed almost 170,000 people and affected 4.5
million others.




Source: EM-DAT (www.emdat.be), 1900–2011.


FIGURE 3.	 AVERAGE NUMBER OF DISASTERS IN THE MNA REGION BY TIME, 1951–2005
                            45

                            40              Drought

                                            Earthquakes
                            35
                                            Floods
                            30              Storms
         Number of events




                            25

                            20

                            15

                            10

                             5

                             0
                                 1951–60   1961–70    1970–80       1981–90     1991–2000   2001–13


 Source: EM-DAT, 1951–2005.




10	                                                       NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
FIGURE 4. 	ECONOMIC DAMAGE AND TOTAL NUMBER OF PEOPLE AFFECTED BY DISASTERS
           IN THE MNA REGION, 1981–2010




Source: EM-DAT, 2012.




MNA’s hazard risk is high. Between 1981 and 2010, more than 80 percent of the region’s
disaster events occurred in 6 countries: Algeria, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran, Morocco, and the
Republic of Yemen. Djibouti is highly vulnerable to floods, droughts, desertification, and
earthquakes, with approximately 33 percent of its population living in high-risk areas, and
35 percent of the economy vulnerable to natural disasters.28 Egypt has faced 23 large
disaster events in the last 20 years—floods, earthquakes, and landslides—causing over
US$1.3 billion in damages.29 Iran and Algeria are the most vulnerable to seismic hazards.
Earthquakes are responsible for 95 percent of total mortality during disasters in Iran.30
Ninety percent of Algeria’s infrastructure and population are located in areas highly
exposed to seismic risk. The Republic of Yemen and Morocco face recurrent floods, land-
slides, and earthquakes. Figure 4 shows the total number of people affected by disasters
in the region from 1981–2010.
An increase in the frequency of disasters in less-hazard-prone countries has helped bring
the DRM agenda to the forefront of development in the MNA Region. For example, since
2009, Saudi Arabia has suffered flash floods resulting in heavy economic and human loss;
in 2007, Oman was impacted by cyclone Gonu; Bahrain has become one of the most


28	 World Bank, “Natural Disaster Hotspots: A Global Risk Analysis.”
29	 PreventionWeb: Egypt—Disaster Statistics.
30	 EM-DAT, 2011.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                    	11
vulnerable countries in terms of climate change and frequent sand and dust storms; and
Jordan has developed perennial drought conditions (annex 1).



Urban Vulnerability
The high concentration of both the region’s population and its economic assets in urban
areas is making disasters even more devastating, particularly in coastal areas. Given
the MNA Region’s arid, mountainous terrain, rural populations have historically concen-
trated in coastal strips, mountain valleys, and along rivers. As a consequence, 3 per-
cent of MNA’s surface is home to 92 percent of its population (approximately 352 million
people).31
With an average annual population growth rate of about 2.1 percent, MNA has one of
the world’s most rapidly expanding populations. The region is approximately 62 percent
urbanized, and its urban population is expected to double over the next 3 decades. By
2030, the region will have experienced a 45 percent increase in its urban population,
corresponding to over 106 million additional urban inhabitants.32 This rapid urbanization
requires the progressive integration of DRM into urban development to limit the creation
of new risks.
Urbanization and the youth population will continue to increase the demand for housing
and urban services, putting pressure on local authorities to expand access to urban land
and provide infrastructure. Affordable housing programs and progress made to date will
not be sufficient to prevent the proliferation of informal settlements. The high concentra-
tion of youth33 in urban areas is also causing informal settlements to expand.
In MNA, coastal clustering is exacerbating the effects of natural disasters. Twenty-five to
50 percent of the total populations of Alexandria, Casablanca, Djibouti-Ville, and Tripoli
reside in informal settlements. Rapid urbanization, the absence of an integrated urban
development strategy, and the lack of local financial and technical resources caused
infrastructure backlogs and the inability to meet the growing demand for low-income
housing, particularly in the poorer settlements on the outskirts of sprawling cities, mostly
due to lack of connections to adequate primary systems. Under these conditions, par-
ticularly in North Africa, coastal flooding from increased climate change impacts will
continue to threaten the lives of millions of urban residents.
Flooding is also a major risk for urban areas. It is often caused by buildings, infrastructure,
and paved areas that prevent infiltration and is exacerbated by overwhelmed drain-
age systems. The flood that hit Sana’a, Republic of Yemen, in May 2010, is an example.
Flooding occurred in low-lying residential areas with inadequate drainage systems, af-
fecting hundreds of homes and killing 8 people. Floods have regularly disrupted liveli-
hoods and society in MNA cities, mainly because of the limited structural protection,
insufficient citywide drainage systems, and informal urbanization of catchment areas.
Across the region, nonstructural flood mitigation measures are mostly inadequate; early


31	UN-HABITAT, The State of Arab Cities.
32	Ibid.
33	 The MNA population aged 15 to 29 totals almost 130 million, approximately a quarter of the total population.



12	                                                  NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
warning systems are either only partially functional or have yet to be developed; and
emergency plans are not fully operational.34



Climate-Related Hazards
Within the region, the synergy of natural hazards, climate change, water scarcity, and
food insecurity has emerged as a serious challenge for policy and planning for all coun-
tries. Over the past 30 years, climate-related disasters have affected 50 million people in
MNA, with a reported cost of US$11.5 billion.35 This figure captures only partial damages,
lacks a systematic assessment, and unfortunately does not capture the suffering and
recovery costs that follow the loss of lives and livelihoods.36
The effects of climate change are already being felt throughout the region. The year
2010 was the hottest in the region since the 1800s, and 19 countries set new national
temperature highs.37 Recent trends in the region show that, in most areas, temperatures
have been rising by 0.2–0.3°C per decade. Additionally, climate models, even at the
low end of the range, suggest that sea-level rise, as well as the frequency and intensity
of natural hazards, will likely increase in MNA. While these trends have affected or will
soon affect most of MNA’s population, of major concern are the 100 million poor who
have limited resources to adapt. According to the climate projections of the Fourth As-
sessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,38 temperatures
in MNA will rise by 3–4°C by the end of the century—a significant 1.5 percent faster
than the global average.
Water scarcity makes the region even more vulnerable. MNA is the most water-
scarce region in the world, and its water stress is likely to worsen. In 1950, per capita
renewable water resources were 4,000 cubic meters (m3) per year. This figure is cur-
rently at 1,100 m3 per year. Projections indicate that per capita renewable water will
drop by half, reaching 550 m3 in 2050. These figures are very alarming compared to
the global average of 8,900 m3 per person per year today, and about 6,000 m3 per
person per year in 2050, when the world’s population will reach more than 9 billion.39
This trend will have serious consequences for the region’s already stressed aquifers
and natural hydrological systems.
While the socioeconomic impact of climate change is less clear, recent estimates are
concerning. Studies show that the long-term implications of climate change in Tunisia,
and the Republic of Yemen are likely to lead to a cumulative decrease in household
incomes of, respectively, US$1.8 billion (6.8 percent of GDP) and US$5.7 billion (23.9 per-
cent of GDP) over the next 30 to 40 years.40


34	 This is particularly true in MNA’s low-income countries. For instance, the Gulf Cooperation Countries have more
    advanced nonstructural systems.
35	 EM-DAT, 2010.
36	 World Bank, Adaptation to a Changing Climate in Arab Countries.
37	Ibid.
38	IPCC, Climate Change 2007.
39	 FAO AQUASTAT (http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm).
40	 World Bank, Adaptation to a Changing Climate in Arab Countries.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                             	13
FIGURE 5.	 COMPARISON OF TOTAL NUMBER AND TYPE OF NATURAL HAZARDS IN MNA,
           1980–2010

                         160


                         140


                         120
      Number of events




                         100                                                        Storm
                                                                                    Flood
                          80
                                                                                    Earthquake
                                                                                    Drought
                          60


                          40


                          20


                           0
                                               of




                                                                                                                                         f
                               ia


                                          ti




                                                     of


                                                           q

                                                                 an




                                                                                                                                p.
                                                                          t

                                                                               n




                                                                                            co


                                                                                                 an


                                                                                                           e


                                                                                                                 a

                                                                                                                      sia
                                                                                     ya




                                                                                                                                         .o
                                                                      ai
                                     ou




                                                                               no




                                                                                                          in
                                                          Ira




                                                                                                                bi
                               er




                                                                                                                              Re
                                                                                    Lib
                                                                      w
                                               p.


                                                     p.




                                                                                                                     ni
                                                                rd




                                                                                                 m
                                                                                          oc




                                                                                                      st




                                                                                                                                    ep
                                                                                                               ra
                                    jib
                           lg




                                                                          ba
                                                                     Ku




                                                                                                                     Tu
                                                                                                      le
                                           Re


                                                    Re




                                                                                               O
                                                                Jo




                                                                                                                            b
                                                                                                            iA
                                                                                          or
                          A




                                                                                                                                    ,R
                                    D




                                                                                                     Pa




                                                                                                                           ra
                                                                          Le




                                                                                      M
                                          b

                                                ic




                                                                                                           ud




                                                                                                                                en
                                                                                                                          A
                                        ra

                                               am




                                                                                                       Sa




                                                                                                                      n

                                                                                                                                m
                                     A




                                                                                                                     ria
                                             Isl




                                                                                                                            Ye
                                    t,




                                                                                                                    Sy
                                yp


                                          n,
                                        Ira
                                Eg




Source: EMDAT, 2011.




Climate change could make natural disasters more intense and more frequent. Accord-
ing to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),41 North Africa is the
world’s second most vulnerable region to emerging climate-related risks. Higher seas
would compound storm surges, increasing the risks of marine inundation and coastal
erosion. During 2010–30, Alexandria, Casablanca, and Tunis individually will face poten-
tial cumulative economic losses of US$1 billion from floods, earthquakes, coastal erosion,
ground instability, marine inundation, tsunamis, and water scarcity.42 The increased fre-
quency of flooding and drought events could expose up to 25 million urban dwellers to
floods and droughts. These same climate change effects could lead to a 30–50 percent
drop in water availability, exacerbating the existing severe water scarcity.
Climate events could also lead to increased internal migration and displacement. Par-
ticularly in rural areas, climate shocks and variability often result in losses in income and
assets, such as crops and livestock. Poor households’ inability to adjust and recover rap-

41	IPCC, Climate Change 2007.
42	 World Bank, Climate Change Adaptation.



14	                                                                       NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Figure 6. MNA Population Density Estimates, 2011




Source: World Bank DECRG.




idly results in temporary and sometimes permanent migration, mostly to urban centers.
Climatic factors could justify 10–20 percent of rural–urban migration in MNA. Although
most migrants’ remittances do not actually reach climate-stricken areas, when they do,
such remittances can play an important adaptation role.43
Sea-level rise induced by climate change exacerbates risk to MNA’s coastal cities. Al-
though the World Resource Institute’s (WRI) 21st century climate projections carry uncer-
tainty, even the most conservative scenario indicates that sea-level rise will exacerbate
existing hazard risks for the North African cities.
Turn down the Heat: Why a 4°C Warmer World Must Be Avoided,44 is a recent report com-
missioned by the World Bank that summarizes a range of the direct and indirect climatic
consequences under the current global path for greenhouse gas emissions. The report
shows that extreme heat waves, which without global warming would be expected to
occur once every several hundred years, will be experienced during almost all summer
months in many regions. However, the effects would not be evenly distributed. The larg-
est increases in temperature  would be expected to occur over land and range from
4–10°C. Increases of 6°C or more in average monthly summer temperatures would be
expected in the Mediterranean, North Africa, Middle East, and parts of the United States.




43	 World Bank, Climate Change Adaptation.
44	 World Bank, Turn down the Heat.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                        	15
II. Regional Progress
DRM Efforts and Remaining Challenges
The devastation caused by disasters in MNA has provided opportunities for assessing
how risks can be managed. The findings of these assessments have led many MNA gov-
ernments to take action to build capacities and institutions to manage risks. The 2011
drought in Djibouti, for example, led the government to undertake a Post-Disaster Needs
Assessment (PDNA) to understand the impact of the drought and to develop a recov-
ery framework to build long-term resilience. This framework included creating an emer-
gency fund to respond effectively to the drought while establishing cooperation with
neighboring drought-affected countries such as Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia.
In this rapidly changing environment, the risk management dialogue has deepened,
resulting in the strengthening of DRM institutions and the development of policies, action
plans, and programs. Disaster risk assessments, early warning systems, risk management
laboratories, and knowledge centers have been established. Furthermore, Algeria, Dji-
bouti, Egypt, Lebanon, Morocco, and the Republic of Yemen have established DRM
units. However, these units often lack technical and financial capacity and/or a man-
date to influence policy decisions.
Significant efforts have also been made to design and enforce new DRM policies, plans,
and legislation. Algeria, Djibouti, Egypt, Lebanon, Morocco, and the Republic of Ye-
men are a few of the countries that have designed policies and established DRM units
to strengthen coordination. Such achievements should not be underestimated, even
though policies and plans have only rarely been based on reliable information from
comprehensive multihazard risk assessments. Policies and plans are also not supported
by adequate budgets, and implementation is often dependent on donor support. Ad-
ditionally, local governments, which play a critical role in DRM, are often not aware of
DRM policy changes and lack the know-how to contribute effectively to disaster re-
sponse and/or mitigation.
Despite the encouraging progress, more needs to be done at regional, national, and lo-
cal levels. To date there has been limited cooperation among neighboring MNA coun-
tries, notwithstanding their common risks, which often transcend borders. However, both
the Islamic and Arab regions have developed DRM/disaster risk reduction (DRR) strate-
gies and implementation plans. Within this context, several regional institutions are lead-
ing disaster coordination. For example, the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC),45
the League of Arab States (LAS),46 and the Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (ISESCO) are working to enable countries facing similar disaster risks or af-
fected by transboundary disasters to cooperate effectively.
Solid systems that would guarantee dialogue, information exchange, and strategic and
operational coordination among different administrative levels and across key sectors


45	www.oic-oci.org.
46	www.lasportal.org.



18	                                     NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
BOX 1.	 NATURAL DISASTERS, CONFLICT, AND MIGRATION
Natural disasters and conflict are two of the major reasons why some countries remain trapped in
poverty. Natural hazards and conflict can undermine social cohesion, create high levels of inse-
curity, and hinder residents’ ability to provide for themselves and progress. When a natural hazard
strikes a community that is affected by conflict, it tends to exacerbate the pre-existing inequalities
and tensions, impacting vulnerable parts of the population in a disproportionate manner.
To date, the strategies developed for DRR have largely overlooked the interplay between conflict
and natural disasters, even though multiple recent examples have shown higher devastation in
areas where these two issues intersect. For instance, extensive literature reported that the 2011 So-
mali famine was the product of drought and extended social and political conflict. At the same
time, the Horn of Africa region was also food insecure, but only in Somalia was famine declared.
Even within the Somali boundaries, the regions most affected by conflict accounted for the larg-
est number of deaths and refugees.
Natural hazards can, therefore, lead to a disaster situation when combined with pre-existing con-
flict. But they can also be the source of the conflict in and of themselves. A natural hazard that
hits suddenly, such as flash floods and earthquakes, has a more noticeable impact on people’s
lives than a slow advancing drought. Nevertheless, transboundary water scarcity, which is a ma-
jor problem in MNA, is increasingly becoming a cause of conflict, leading communities to fight
over water-irrigated pastures and forcing people to leave their homes looking for safe access to
water. In Darfur, drought was the trigger of a latent dissension—a threat multiplier that led to the
displacement of 2 million people, with spillover effects in the neighboring countries taking in the
refugees.
DRM strategies of the future need to look at the challenging interaction between conflict, natural
hazards, and migration. For all the three issues, the underlying solution is reducing the people’s
vulnerability.
Source: World Bank.




have yet to emerge. The effectiveness of public awareness campaigns and formal edu-
cation programs has suffered from a lack of clear, long-term strategies and harmoniza-
tion of the various objectives pursued across the region. More targeted, hazard- and
sector-specific inputs are needed for curricula and training modules and for the identi-
fication and activation of local knowledge. In several countries, these targeted inputs
include, for example, addressing training needs in safe building techniques. With the
exception of some efforts in Dhamar, Republic of Yemen, following the 1982 earthquake,
Bam, Iran, following the earthquake in 2003, and Boumerdès, Algeria, after the 2003
earthquake, learning about and applying risk reduction measures too often are pursued
in isolation.
Disaster risk financing and insurance (DRFI) instruments are not used in MNA countries.
However, the World Bank, the IDB, the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO),
and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) are collaborating in the development
of a feasibility study to assess penetration potential of risk financing instruments in MNA
countries.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                 	19
Few DRM systems have utilized land-use planning and management and influenced
investment policies to encourage effective integrated risk management. Instead, differ-
ent public and private institutions transform the landscape of metropolitan areas; they
push different agendas and operate outside the overall coherent risk management
framework.



Highlights of Progress at the Regional Level
Some progress has been made in DRM at the regional level. For many years, the focus
of governments and regional entities has been disaster response, but lately govern-
ments are focusing their efforts on preventive risk management. This shift has been
driven by both the rise in human and economic losses from natural disasters and the
growing understanding that effective DRM could lead to more resilient economies and
livelihoods. The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) has contin-
ued to promote the campaign, “Making Cities Resilient,” to support cities in managing
disaster events. Almost 300 municipalities in the region have joined the campaign—20
percent of the global participation.47 Furthermore, disaster loss databases48 have been
established in eight MNA countries, enabling them to collect and analyze disaster data
to better assess disaster trends and impacts.
Regional DRM is facilitated mainly by intergovernmental organizations such as the OIC,
League of Arab States (LAS), and their specialized technical agencies, namely ISESCO;
the Arab Organization for Agricultural Development; the Arab Academy for Science,
Technology and Maritime Transport (AASTMT); the Arab Center for the Study of Arid
Zones and Dry Lands; and the Statistical, Economic and Social Research and Training
Center for Islamic Countries (SESRIC).
A number of regional initiatives have emerged over the last few years, indicating the
rise in importance of DRM in the region. The first is the Arab Cooperation Agreement,
which called for the organization of relief operations, approved by the LAS in 1987 and
updated in 2009. In 2007, the Arab Ministerial Declaration on Climate Change, draft-
ed by the Council of Arab Ministers Responsible for the Environment (CAMRE), called
for the integration of DRR into environmental management and climate change ad-
aptation policies. Furthermore, in 2008, a draft Arab Protocol on Cooperation was
developed to enable immediate response within Arab countries49 and to transfer
equipment and expertise in cases of disasters and emergencies. Thereafter, the Re-
gional Centre for Risk Reduction (RCDRR) was established as a joint initiative among
the AASTMT, UNISDR, and the chair of both Arab and Islamic Bureau of Environment
Ministers. In 2010, an Arab Strategy for DRR 2020 was endorsed by the CAMRE, and
the Fourth Islamic Conference of Environment Ministers adopted the Islamic Strategy
for Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (ISDRRM). Subsequently, in 2012, the
Fifth Islamic Conference of Environment Ministers adopted an executive work plan to
implement the strategy. Also in 2012, the first Arab Conference for Disaster Risk Reduc-

47	www.unisdr.org/campaign/resilientcities.
48	 DesInventar is a joint effort of UNISDR, GFDRR, UNDP, UN-ESCWA, and SDC. It has been established in Djibouti, Egypt,
    Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia, and the Republic of Yemen (www.desinventar.net).
49	 “Arab countries” refers to the members of the League of Arab States.



20	                                                  NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
tion, organized by UNISDR, UNDP, the Swiss Agency for Development and Coopera-
tion (SDC), and LAS in Jordan, led to the Aqaba Declaration on DRR in Arab Cities. The
declaration sets goals and indicators for reducing disaster risks in the region by 2017.
Furthermore, UNISDR leads the MNA DRR Network, which aims to continue improving
regional coordination.
Starting in 2012, the ISDRRM and its associated executive work plan put in place a two-
phase, eight-year approach for building regional resilience to disasters. The first phase
will focus on:
(i)	 Strengthening DRR capacity in Islamic countries50
(ii)	 Improving understanding of risks and data access
(iii)	Advancing regional initiatives for DRR
(iv)	Promoting disaster risk financing and insurance strategies
    Helping countries prepare for disasters and strengthen post-disaster response and
(v) 	
    reconstruction capacity
(vi)	Laying the foundation for the second phase, which will focus on implementing com-
     prehensive DRM programs.
The ISDRRM aims to provide a harmonizing guideline for building regional resilience to
disasters.
International institutions are increasingly working together to build disaster and cli-
mate resilience in MNA. Since the beginning of the GFDRR-funded DRM program in
MNA in 2007, cooperation among the World Bank, the UNDP, UNISDR, the European
Union, the Islamic Development Bank, and others has improved considerably. Im-
provement is in part demonstrated by the effective completion of the flood PDNA in
the Republic of Yemen in 2009, and the drought PDNA in Djibouti in 2011. However,
these international actors should build on these encouraging results and continue
cooperating with other stakeholders to ensure continued improvement in aid effec-
tiveness and coherence.



Highlights of Progress at the National Level
The following priorities for action are based on the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA),
which is the internationally agreed framework for DRR offering a practical guide and
principles for building disaster resilience (figure 7). These HFA priorities aim to reduce
disaster losses at national and community levels. Overall, since the establishment of
the HFA in 2005, most MNA countries have obtained institutional commitment with-


50	 “Islamic countries” refers to: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Brunei-Darus-
    salam, Cameroon, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Gabon, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, In-
    donesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyz Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Maurita-
    nia, Morocco, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
    Somalia, Sudan, Suriname, Syria, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, the Comoros, the United
    Arab Emirates, Upper Volta, Uzbekistan, and the Republic of Yemen.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                             	21
BOX 2. INTEGRATED RISK MANAGEMENT IN MOROCCO
In 2008, Morocco requested assistance from the World Bank to manage its exposure to risks that
have the potential to significantly impact its budget and severely affect local communities, liveli-
hoods, and social stability. These risks were prioritized by the government as: (i) commodity price
volatility, (ii) natural disaster risk, and (iii) risk in the agricultural sector.
This initiative, National Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Strategy in Morocco, looks at sever-
al types of risks simultaneously to provide a comprehensive analysis of risk management for a
middle-income country, such as Mo-
rocco. Hence, a large number of part-
ners came together in a truly “integrat-
ed” approach to provide nonlending
technical assistance amounting to ap-
proximately US$2 million—including the
World Bank and a government team
with different specialties, with funding
and technical assistance from GFDRR,
the Swiss Cooperation, the First Initiative,
and the Trust Fund for Environmentally
                                                 Destruction during Al-Hoceima earthquake, 2004
and Socially Sustainable Development
(TFESSD). Other partners include the
German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ), the Morocco Red Crescent Society, and
UN agencies.
The project has three components:
(i) 	 Commodity price volatility—Review of existing financial mechanisms that contribute to man-
      aging commodity price volatility in Morocco and the ability of the government to engage in
      a call option strategy to reduce Morocco’s exposure to oil price volatility.
(ii) 	Natural disaster risk—
          National probabilistic risk assessment—Provide a national probabilistic risk assessment
      (a) 	
          (tsunami, earthquake, flood, landslide, and drought) that will lay the foundation for the
          preparation of a comprehensive national disaster risk prevention and management strat-
          egy and related investment to reduce Morocco’s exposure to these hazard risks.
          Community-based DRR—The team is working with the Ministry of Interior to design com-
      (b) 	
          munity-level resilience plans based on field surveys of risk perception to be integrated into
          the Community Development Plans of 2015.
          Assessment of catastrophic risk insurance—The World Bank is working with the Depart-
      (c) 	
          ment of Insurance and Social Protection of the Ministry of Finance, which has produced
          a draft law on catastrophic risk prepared by the Ministry of Finance and the Moroccan
          insurance sector.
(iii) 	Risk in the agricultural sector—The Ministry of Agriculture and Marine Fishery initiated a study
       to assess the potential risks affecting the agricultural sector to identify those that could be
       transferred to the insurance sector. Currently, one multirisk insurance product is available,
       and other insurance products to cover livestock and perennial crops are being developed.
Some important pieces of quantitative analysis were conducted over this period that reveal, for
example, that Morocco is one of the countries most vulnerable to natural hazards in the MNA
region. The national probabilistic risk assessment shows that over 30 percent of the Moroccan
population and 33 percent of its GDP are at risk from two or more natural hazards, and the coun-
try suffers an average annual loss of over US$650 million from natural hazards.
                                                                                  continued on next page


22	                                            NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
BOX 2. CONTINUED
Given the magnitude of risks faced by Morocco, the government is now engaging in a long-term
integrated risk management project with the World Bank. The program aims to increase aware-
ness of risks at all levels and apply integrated solutions to risk management, while embedding
the concept in the policy-making apparatus of the government, with a focus on prevention and
building resilience.
Source: Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management Program in Morocco, GFDRR.




Figure 7. Hyogo Framework for Action Pillars

                                                 Regional Level

      I. Institutional
         Capacity
          Building,
     Education, and
       Knowledge
          Sharing
        Institutional
       strengthening
         & capacity
          building            II. Risk
                           Identification

                            Hazard & risk           III. Risk              IV. Risk      V. Response,
         Education
                            assessments            Reduction           Financing and    Recovery, and
                                                                          Transfer      Reconstruction
                                                   Structural &
                                                  nonstructural                           Response,
        Knowledge
                          Decision systems          mitigation         Risk financing   recovery, and
          sharing
                                                    measures                            reconstruction


                                             National & Local Levels

Source: GFDRR and HFA.




out major achievements.51 However, there have been five main progress drivers: (i)
governments are increasingly taking a multihazard approach to DRR; (ii) gender is
becoming recognized as a decisive factor; (iii) capacity development is recognized
as a central element in reducing disaster risk; (iv) the socially and economically vul-
nerable are the most exposed; and (v) effective DRR requires strong community en-
gagement.
The following pillars were chosen based on the MNA countries’ HFA focus, given that
most governments have been reporting on their DRM progress in achieving the HFA
objectives. Nevertheless, the World Bank is also taking into account the principles high-
lighted by the GFDRR Pillars (figure 10) in the Sendai Report in 2012, which focus more on
the DRM tools available rather than the outcomes.

51	 Implementation of the HFA—Summary of Reports (2007–13), www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/32916.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                          	23
Pillar I. Institutional Capacity Building, Education, and Knowledge Sharing
Political commitment: Leaders have demonstrated political commitment to DRM in
several ways, including the approval of regional and national strategies. Following the
devastating urban floods of 2009 and 2010, Saudi Arabia, in partnership with the World
Bank, has been developing a comprehensive national risk assessment to reduce future
impacts of natural hazards. In Morocco, similarly to Tunisia, the government is working
to develop and employ state-of-the-art tools to better measure, manage, and finance
several of its key risks. These range from commodity price volatility to natural disaster risks
and risks in the agricultural sector (box 2). Some government commitment has improved
at the local level as well. For example, in 2013, nine Arab cities reported for the first time
on their progress and challenges in reducing disaster risk, using UNISDR’s new Local Gov-
ernment Self-Assessment Tool.52 However, while DRM is beginning to receive attention
from decision makers, these encouraging initiatives remain isolated.
Frameworks: Given the region’s high exposure to natural hazards, there is increasing
agreement that hazard risks need to be addressed more strategically and systematical-
ly. The growing attention to DRM is also the result of the increasing alignment of national
policy to the HFA, which brings together international stakeholders around a common
coordinated system to take action and track progress in reducing the loss of lives and
social, economic, and environmental assets by 2015.53 Nevertheless, no MNA country yet
has established a comprehensive national DRM framework.
Institutional arrangements: Many MNA countries have established national focal bodies
for coordinating DRM activities in line with ministries or departments. Most of the time,
these bodies are anchored in ministries of interior and environment, with the latter being
responsible for sustainable development issues.
Coordination mechanisms: National coordination mechanisms exist in the form of na-
tional committees in multiple countries including Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq,
Morocco, and the Republic of Yemen.54 The purpose of these bodies is to establish
nationally owned and led multistakeholder forums on DRR and to serve as an advisory
group on key priority areas requiring concerted action.
Policies: A number of DRM policies have been put in place in the region. In Algeria,
Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Morocco and the Republic of Yemen, DRM
policies either have been developed or are being updated and/or developed. Other
countries, including Jordan and Saudi Arabia, have begun the process, with technical
support from GFDRR and other donors.
Integration of DRM into development plans: Although there are a few examples in the
region, DRM has yet to be successfully integrated into country development planning
processes. However, since 2010 in Djibouti, DRM has been integrated into the National
Initiative for Social Solidarity, which is the country’s main development plan. The docu-
ment identifies key DRM and climate change adaptation (CCA) interventions, including


52	 The cities were Aqaba (Jordan), Byblos (Lebanon), Choueifat (Lebanon), Dubai (United Arab Emirates), Tevragh
    Zeina (Mauritania), Petra (Jordan), Saida (Lebanon), Tyre Union Municipalities (Lebanon), and Tripoli (Lebanon).
53	 The HFA is a 10-year plan to make the world safer from natural hazards. It was adopted by 168 member states of
    the United Nations in 2005 at the World Disaster Reduction Conference.
54	 In Djibouti and the Republic of Yemen, these committees are not fully operational.



24	                                                  NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
water management, climate monitoring, and community preparedness as key develop-
ment priorities. Morocco is also integrating DRM into its community development plans.
DRM mainstreaming in educational modules: The AASTMT, through its Regional Center
for DRR, has developed a DRM e-learning laboratory through which it has been provid-
ing DRM distance learning to MNA countries since 2010. Additionally, in early 2012, the
University of Djibouti started providing quarterly DRM e-learning nationwide (through its
distance education center). DRM modules also have been integrated into university cur-
ricula in both Djibouti and Lebanon. In Jordan, more than 2,000 officials have received
training in DRR.
South–South knowledge exchange: To share DRM best practices, 3 South–South ex-
changes were organized in 2012–13. One consisted of a study tour of a Djibouti techni-
cal delegation to experience firsthand how Kenya and Mozambique have streamlined
drought and flood management at the community level, with a strong focus on resilient
agriculture. The second exchange involved Algiers (Algeria) and Jakarta (Indonesia)
city-level officials, who exchanged views on mainstreaming DRM considerations in urban
development planning. The discussion revolved around key challenges and opportuni-
ties identified, and the lessons learned to better manage DRM at the city level with large
urban populations at risk. The third cooperation enabled the Moroccan and Vietnamese
authorities to exchange their experiences in flood management at the community level.
Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs): Djibouti and the Republic of Yemen are good
examples of progressive integration of DRM into their development strategies. In Djibouti,
since 2010, the government has recognized55 the need to address disaster response and
mitigation. Through GFDRR grants, Djibouti has completed and expanded its national
DRM action plans, early warning system, drought early warning system, hydro-meteo-
rological stations network, and risk assessment and communication platform. In the Re-
public of Yemen, the government is prioritizing the shift from disaster response to more
proactive multisectoral disaster mitigation by implementing the recommendations of the
3 comprehensive hazard risk assessments completed in 2010. Key activities will include:
establishment of a national DRM fund and decision-support system (decree for its es-
tablishment was approved by the government in June 2012) for disaster preparedness,
response, and reconstruction; bringing online of the five civil defense operational rooms;
and establishment of a flood early warning system to enable effective disaster response.
Country Assistance Strategies (CASs) and Country Partnership Strategies (CPSs): The
second pillar of Algeria’s CAS is dedicated to DRM and environmental sustainability.
Other CPSs, for example, Morocco’s, acknowledge the impact of disasters and climate
change while recognizing that vulnerability to climate change and natural disaster risks
can pose a threat to the country’s high-value assets in critical sectors in urban areas.
Although no concrete mitigation and adaptation activities have been initiated, the gov-
ernment of Morocco is trying to raise awareness of climate change while strengthening
coordination within DRM and CCA departments and agencies.
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF): The latest UNDAFs for nine
of the MNA countries make explicit references to DRM and disaster prevention,56 as well


55	 Since 2009, the Djibouti government has replaced the PRSP with the National Initiative for Social Development.
56	 Algeria, Djibouti, Iraq, Jordan, Libya, Morocco, Palestine, Saudi Arabia, and Tunisia.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                               	25
BOX 3.	 REDUCING AND AVOIDING RISK: MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT AND FLOOD
        PROTECTION IN THE REPUBLIC OF YEMEN
The city of Taiz and its surroundings have suffered severe flash flooding over the last two decades.
Through the World Bank–financed Municipal Development and Flood Protection Project, major
parts of Taiz, including downtown, were transformed into habitable and flash flood–secure neigh-
borhoods. The project’s impact on the lives and livelihoods of the people in Taiz is substantial. The
structures built under the successive phases include 10 km of open channel, 21 km of covered
channel, 85 km of stone and asphalt paved roads, 54 km of sewer line, 21 sedimentation traps,
and 3.2 km of above-street-level retaining walls. Among many other benefits, the project contrib-
uted to lowering the number of deaths from flooding from an average of six people a year over
the last decade to zero since project implementation.
Source: World Bank and GFDRR, Sendai Report.




as to CCA. UNISDR supported UN country teams to ensure mainstreaming of DRR into
the planning documents. Most of the proposed activities focus on improving capacities
and raising awareness among the population. Algeria, Iraq, and Morocco emphasize
fighting drought and desertification, while in Djibouti, the resulting food insecurity is also
a major concern. Jordan’s and Morocco’s UNDAFs advocate for green growth, and the
Republic of Yemen’s promotes building resilience to natural hazards at the community
level.
Awareness and capacity building: Overall, the World Bank has provided programmatic
capacity-building support resulting in considerable progress in raising DRM awareness
among all stakeholders. In Djibouti and the Republic of Yemen, for instance, since 2008,
periodic DRM, DRR, and CCA trainings have been organized collaboratively with UNDP,
ministries responsible for DRM, and international partners. The same agencies have all
participated in periodic international training and have shared their experiences with
other regional DRM actors. Additionally, online DRM platforms and courses were trans-
ferred from the World Bank to the RCDRR in 2010 and to the University of Djibouti in 2012,
enabling both institutions to successfully offer periodic DRM e-learning in English and
French across the region, training at least 300 technical staff from MNA. The University
of Djibouti also has a program to mainstream DRM modules in university courses such as
engineering and geography.
Institutional development: To build stronger institutions for DRM, new types of training,
including international seminars, South–South exchanges, and e-learning courses have
been provided to policy makers, practitioners, and academics. However, no assessment
has been conducted to determine what types of capacities need to be strengthened
and how to translate these trainings into policy change. In particular, institutional capac-
ity needs to be developed while remembering that:
•	 Different skills needed for different aspects of DRM. In MNA, in many ways, DRM is
   still equated with emergency management. The identification of capacity devel-
   opment for preparedness, response, reconstruction, and long-term planning by the-
   matic area and sub-specialization needs has yet to take place.




26	                                            NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
•	 No assessment of skills offered. The most common risk reduction activity in MNA is
   training offered within and outside the region. However, assessment of training qual-
   ity, including assessment of skills obtained, used, and retained, particularly to deter-
   mine the gaps, needs to be carried out more systematically.
•	 Insufficient dedicated resources and systems for capacity building. Dedicated bud-
   gets and systematic national and local initiatives to build DRM capacity are limited.
   Countries require long-term skills development rather than one-off, project-driven in-
   terventions that may restrict the type of skills development to those based on project
   objectives.
•	 Capacity retention and skills updating. Processes for the retention of capacity and
   skills updating need to be strengthened. In disaster reconstruction, for example,
   stakeholders develop technical capacities that most often are not well retained after
   project completion. Government staff involved in reconstruction are either absorbed
   into parent agencies or transitioned to other government jobs.
•	 Stronger DRM coordination. An effective centralized coordinating office or agency
   for DRM can ensure that action is taken throughout line ministries and the govern-
   ment. Such coordination is often very effective if linked directly to the office of the
   prime minister.
DRM agenda not sufficiently decentralized: Most DRM activities continue to be conduct-
ed at the national level. However, in Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia and the Republic of
Yemen, a slow but progressive decentralization has begun. In Morocco, community DRM
activities (community maps, training on construction standards, and community early
warning systems) are being developed at the local level. Community DRM is particu-
larly important because disasters often significantly impact communities, which there-
fore need to be empowered to manage risk. The 2012 Sendai Report57 shows that an
effective DRM strategy requires a decentralized approach and an appropriate division
of resources (human and financial) at all tiers of government. At the local level, not only
do city managers have a key role to play, but also civil society organizations can sig-
nificantly contribute to building local resilience. As noted earlier, MNA countries are still
among the most centralized in the world, with some of the lowest total local government
expenditures (ranging from 3 percent in Jordan, 8 percent in Iran, and 18 percent in Egypt
compared to the world average of about 22 percent). Nevertheless, several countries in
the region are progressively moving toward greater devolution of powers to lower tiers of
government. This shift represents an opportunity to strengthen cities and their capacity
to manage development, and thus support the DRM agenda. City managers can imple-
ment a combination of structural and nonstructural measures to address urban flood risks
in an integrated manner, not only tackling today’s risks, but longer-term issues due to
climate change, as was done in Sana’a, Yemen, and Tripoli, Lebanon (boxes 3 and 8).


Pillar II. Risk Identification
Risk information: The provision of risk information is the first crucial step of any DRM
program and a precondition for effective identification of risk accompanied by the


57	 World Bank and GFDRR, Sendai Report.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                           	27
appropriate interventions. The level of understanding of risks based on risk assess-
ments in the MNA Region is generally low and needs to be strengthened. Follow-
ing requests from national and local governments in MNA, the World Bank assisted
in conducting hazard and risk assessments in Djibouti, Lebanon (Tripoli58), Morocco,
and the Republic of Yemen, with upcoming assessments in Saudi Arabia. There are
also some international initiatives such as the Global Earthquake Model, which de-
velops earthquake risk models for countries including Algeria and Egypt, although
significant data gaps exist in risk information. Basic components of risk assessments
include historical events, hazard maps, and information on infrastructure character-
istics, administrative boundaries, and census data, which are often difficult to obtain.
Hydro-meteorological and geological data are very limited throughout the region.
Additionally, a geospatial map of residential and public assets is seldom available or
comprehensive.
Integration of DRM with the climate change agenda: Although the climate change and
DRM agendas are highly intertwined, they have not often been dealt with in a mutually
reinforcing manner. However, encouraging efforts for their integration have been under-
taken in North Africa (Egypt, Morocco, and Tunisia) through the GFDRR-funded Climate
Change Adaptation and Natural Disasters Preparedness in the Coastal Cities of North Af-
rica study (completed in 2011).59 This report has enabled identification and prioritization
of city-level CCA and DRM investments while building local awareness of climate and
hazard risk. Other examples in which CCA and DRM have come together are in Egypt,
through its CCA strategy (launched in 2012), and in the Republic of Yemen, through its
Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR). PPCR aims to expand the national climate
data system to help operationalize weather forecasting, data management, and early
warning systems.
Furthermore, to better integrate the climate adaptation debate into DRM, in 2012 the re-
gion launched a 10-year Arab Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction. This strategy included
the reduction of climate change impacts and disaster losses through identification of
strategic priorities; enhancement of coordination mechanisms; and monitoring at the
national, regional, and local levels.
Hazard and climate data: Meteorological stations’ coverage is not uniform across MNA
countries, thus potentially hindering their ability to effectively predict and communicate
hydro-meteorological events (figure 8). Numerous meteorological stations exist along
the Nile and the coast of the Mediterranean Sea. However, in the less inhabited areas,
coverage is very limited. Sparse data are available for countries and economies, includ-
ing Djibouti, Libya, Saudi Arabia, West Bank and Gaza, and the Republic of Yemen. For
other countries, including Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt and Iraq, data are probably available
but not readily accessible. Moving forward, the establishment and/or replacement of
observation sites and automatic weather station monitoring will be necessary to build
more rigorous weather forecasting and modeling systems.60




58	 The risk assessment performed in Tripoli, Lebanon, was not a comprehensive hazard risk assessment, but rather a
    rapid hazard risk assessment, including a hazard inventory compiling all the relevant data and studies performed.
59	 World Bank, Climate Change Adaptation and Natural Disasters Preparedness in the Coastal Cities of North Africa.
60	 World Bank, Adaptation to a Changing Climate in Arab Countries.



28	                                                  NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
FIGURE 8. SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF MONTHLY STATIONS WITH AT LEAST 10 YEARS OF DATA




Source: World Bank, Adaptation to a Changing Climate in Arab Countries.




Pillar III. Risk Reduction
From disaster response to risk reduction: Several MNA countries have progressed in this
area, shifting focus from disaster response to risk reduction. This shift can be attributed
to their commitment to HFA objectives. This policy shift varies from country to country,
depending on each country’s governance capacity and socioeconomic parameters.
Djibouti, Egypt, Morocco, and the Republic of Yemen have made significant progress in
shifting from post-disaster relief to disaster preparedness, mitigation, and risk reduction.
For example, in Morocco, the government is considering investing in risk reduction infra-
structure such as constructing dams in flood-prone areas and retrofitting schools and key
public assets in seismic areas based on identified risk zones. In the city of Taiz, Republic
of Yemen, through successive International Development Association (IDA) financing
of US$16 million, US$45 million, and US$20 million, flood-control structures were built that
have significantly reduced residents vulnerability, improved their health, and increased
land values (box 3).
Building codes: Several MNA countries, including the most earthquake prone—Algeria,
Iran and the Republic of Yemen—have incorporated standards and codes for construc-
tion practices relating to structural safety from natural hazards, in addition to zoning
guidelines such as buffer zones in coastal belts. However, the biggest difficulty for MNA
countries concerns the enforcement of codes and regulations arising from complex land
tenure conditions and the lack of clearly designated authority and ability to impose
sanctions. Furthermore, there is a general perception that adding disaster resilient fea-
tures into structural design may be costly and ineffective. Another challenge lies in moni-
toring construction quality and in ensuring compliance with the prescribed norms. The


A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                       	29
latter is aggravated by the unavailability of comprehensive and specific checklists for
disaster impact assessment.


Pillar IV. Risk Financing and Transfer
Budgets: Although some contingency funds exist for emergency response in Djibouti,
Morocco, and the Republic of Yemen, most countries do not systematically allocate
budgets for DRM or relief operations. These funding mechanisms are established in the
aftermath of a disaster, and tend to dissipate as memory of the disaster fades.
Given the multisectoral nature of hazard risks, an innovative concept of combining fi-
nancing solutions for risks was developed in early 2010, when the Yemeni government
decided to establish a single mechanism for risk management under the Prime Minister’s
Office. This mechanism is expected to function as a “one-stop shop” for the execution of
government- and donor-funded risk management, whether these risks arise from natural
hazards, climate change, food security, or water scarcity.
Risk financing:61 The penetration of risk financing in the region has been relatively
weak. However, many countries are finding it increasingly difficult to finance disas-
ter recovery and reconstruction from government budgets. While appropriations are
sometimes made for emergencies, actual budgetary outlays on such events often
end up being well in excess of budgeted amounts and result in reallocations or in-
creasing country deficits through borrowing. In Morocco, for example, the govern-
ment is contemplating a law to add a compulsory guarantee against catastrophe
risk to property insurance policies. This law would use risk-based pricing to increase
coverage of private assets against disasters, thus indirectly reducing GoM’s contin-
gent liability. This law would follow international best practices in which governments
are working to reduce their contingent liabilities for natural disasters. In Indonesia, the
government is drafting a disaster-risk-financing strategy to ensure that funds can be
immediately accessed after a disaster. Numerous other regions such as the members
of Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), southeastern Europe and the Cau-
casus, and the Caribbean Islands are increasing their economic integration by lever-
aging regional solidarity for risk pooling and by creating new investment opportunities
for investor states through disaster risk financing and insurance.


Pillar V. Response, Recovery, and Reconstruction
Institutional arrangements: Institutional planning for DRM is still focused on emergen-
cy response. Most MNA countries manage DRM through a stand-alone coordinating
agency that is responsible for coordinating risk profiling and mapping, supporting the
development of policy and legislative documents, and leading preparedness and
response planning. These agencies normally lack the know-how to perform all these
tasks effectively, and do not have the political authority to influence policy decisions.
Countries with effective DRM programs, such as Colombia, generally have special-
ized agencies with considerable political influence, often within the ministries of plan-
ning or finance.

61	 For more information on disaster risk financing and insurance, see GFDRR: www.gfdrr.org/node/272.



30	                                                 NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
World Bank instruments to assist MNA countries in emergency response: The Crisis Re-
sponse Window (CRW) is a specific IDA funding window for concessional assistance for
post-disaster recovery and reconstruction. This funding is in addition to IDA’s country
allocations. Piloted in 2009, the CRW was first triggered in response to the Horn of Africa
Drought in 2011, which included Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia. In Djibouti, the
CRW enabled the mobilization of US$13.2 million (box 4) for productive safety nets, water
mobilization, and energy security.




BOX 4. DJIBOUTI DROUGHT POST-DISASTER NEEDS ASSESSMENT
•	 In 2011, the World Bank, the European Union, and the United Nations supported Djibouti in
   developing a Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) as a response to the unprecedented
   period of drought. The assessment concluded that, during 2008–11, the drought in Djibouti
   negatively affected more than 120,000 malnourished, food-insecure, and already vulnerable
   rural poor. The number of refugees entering Djibouti, particularly from Somalia, increased
   considerably, from 395 per month in May 2011 to 875 in August. Half of the refugees inter-
   viewed explained that the drought was the main reason for their migration.
•	 The estimated economic losses from the drought totaled approximately 3.9 percent of GDP
   annually between 2008 and 2011. The largest damage and losses were in the agriculture,
   livestock, water and sanitation sectors, amounting to a cumulative US$96 million. Agricultural
   production and livestock losses due to the drought led to severe food insecurity in rural areas,
   causing a 25 percent reduction in food consumption and 50 percent decrease in the con-
   sumption of goods and services (education, health, and kerosene).
•	 Because of 80 percent less rainfall since 2007, the aquifers, the only source of water for Dji-
   bouti-ville, suffered a reduction in recharge equivalent to four years of water supply. The
   result was an overall drawdown of the water table and a severe increase in its salinity—by 40
   percent. During the four years of drought, 100 percent of the traditional wells and 80 percent
   of the community wells in Djibouti were temporarily or permanently out of order due to water
   shortage or poor water quality, resulting in increased salinity in aquifers and other types of
   contaminations.
•	 The total identified need for drought and other hazard mitigation interventions for the next
   five years totals US$318 million.
•	 The process of integrating the findings of the PDNA is currently underway, however, an initial
   mobilization of US$13.2 million from the World Bank’s Crisis Response Window (CRW) has been
   completed and it seeks to: (i) scale up safety nets in the country (US$5 million); (ii) expand
   the Rural Community Development and Water Mobilization Project to strengthen community
   resilience (US$3 million); and (iii) expand the Power Access and Diversification Project by en-
   hancing water pumping and access to energy fuels (US$5.3 million).
Source: GFDRR, Djibouti PDNA, 2011.




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                               	31
III. World Bank Disaster
       Risk Management
     Programming in the
             MNA Region
World Bank Programming for Recovery and
Risk Reduction
Since its inception, the World Bank has been involved in financing post-disaster recon-
struction projects. Between 1984 and 2011, the World Bank approved more than US$36
billion in activities to build disaster resilience in 118 countries around the world. In the last
10 years alone (2002–11), the Bank approved almost US$18 billion in activities toward
these types of activities to help protect the lives and livelihoods of people in 92 countries
(boxes 5 and 6).
In the MNA Region, the World Bank financed several post-disaster recovery and recon-
struction projects, including:
•	 Djibouti Flood Emergency Rehabilitation Project (US$6.5 million, 2004);
•	 Yemen Flood Protection and Emergency Reconstruction Project (US$41 million, 2008);
•	 Bam, Iran Earthquake Emergency Reconstruction Project (US$220 million, 2003);
•	 Djibouti Employment and Human Capital Safety Net Project (US$5 million, 2012);
•	 Djibouti Rural Community Development and Water Mobilization (US$3 million, 2012);
   and
•	 Djibouti Power Access and Diversification (US$5.2 million, 2012).
World Bank disaster reconstruction experiences in MNA have aimed to increase com-
munity resilience to future disasters. This work has included providing communities with
safety nets, access to information, resources, and the opportunities and capacity to not
only rebuild their lives at a moment when they are most vulnerable, but also increase
their resilience to future risks. Many such interventions have helped safeguard commu-
nities and protect them from adopting adverse coping mechanisms that could have
resulted in greater risk exposure. In the Republic of Yemen, the Taiz Municipal Develop-
ment and Flood Protection Project launched in 2001 protected residents, economic ac-
tivity, and infrastructure from the destructive effects of seasonal flooding, while restoring
access to critical road infrastructure damaged by the disaster.
For the World Bank, recovery projects have been an opportunity to integrate DRR prin-
ciples into the entire recovery process to reduce exposure to future hazard threats that
communities may face.
Disaster mitigation initiatives include activities conducted before disaster events oc-
cur to reduce the potential impacts of hazards. These activities include preparedness
and predisaster recovery planning; and structural and nonstructural interventions such
as structural design, building codes, land-use planning, early warning systems, evacua-
tion plans, public education, and emergency response. In this context, the World Bank
is working with Algeria, Djibouti, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, and the Republic of Yemen to



34	                                        NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
BOX 5. WORLD BANK RECOVERY & RISK REDUCTION INITIATIVES
Yemen flood protection: Successive projects in the Republic of Yemen have built flood resilience
across the country (1990, Taiz Municipal Development and Flood Protection Project, US$20 mil-
lion; 1990 and 1997, Emergency Flood Rehabilitation Projects, US$10 million and US$30 million;
2008, Flood Protection and Emergency Reconstruction Project, US$41 million). These projects have
helped repair and retrofit damaged infrastructure and restore the country’s economic infrastruc-
ture and domestic food production capability. Additionally, they have facilitated access to pro-
duction centers, markets, and social services while serving as a catalyst for donor financing and
coordination of the reconstruction effort, including the creation of the Hadramout Reconstruction
and Recovery Fund, which leveraged over US$200 million from national, regional, and interna-
tional donors.
Bam Earthquake Reconstruction, Iran: In 2003, a US$220 million Bam Earthquake Emergency Re-
construction Project helped restore the living conditions of communities affected by the earth-
quake and improved emergency preparedness in the province of Kerman and the city of Bam.
The World Bank later financed a US$180 million Earthquake Emergency Recovery Project to re-
lieve socioeconomic hardships caused by the earthquake.
Flood Emergency Rehabilitation Project, Djibouti: The World Bank, the U.S. Agency for Internation-
al Development (USAID), and the European Union responded to the April 2004 floods in Djibouti
with a US$6.5 million Emergency Assistance Program focused on the immediate rehabilitation and
reconstruction of damaged economic and social infrastructure, as well as the establishment of a
preliminary siren system in the Ambouli dyke.

Source: World Bank database, 2011.




BOX 6. YEMEN FLOODS POST-DISASTER NEEDS ASSESSMENT
In response to torrential floods in the governorates of Hadramout and Al-Mahara, Yemen, in 2008,
the World Bank conducted a Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) in partnership with the UNDP
and the European Union, under the leadership of Yemen’s Ministry of International Cooperation
and Development and Ministry of Public Works and Highways. The PDNA formed the basis for
the development of the Yemen Flood Protection and Emergency Reconstruction Project (US$41
million), which was instrumental in supporting rehabilitation and rebuilding of critical damaged
infrastructure. The PDNA catalyzed multisectoral national debate on DRM, resulting in the launch
of national, governorate, and city-level probabilistic risk assessments and water management
studies (US$1.4 million, funded by GFDRR). These studies provided the basis for the design of com-
prehensive DRM planning and mitigation measures in the country.
Source: GFDRR, Yemen PDNA, 2009.




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                              	35
identify priority actions for disaster mitigation through the completion and implementa-
tion of a comprehensive probabilistic risk assessment. These assessments are to be fol-
lowed by development and implementation of national DRM programs.



Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
Since 2007, GFDRR62 has provided financial and technical support to the MNA Region to
launch DRM activities in Djibouti, Lebanon, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, and the Republic of
Yemen. GFDRR piloted hazard risk management plans in the city development strategy
process and promoted manageable emergency response strategies at the city level in
Sana’a (Republic of Yemen) and Tripoli (Lebanon). GFDRR supported the development
of risk mapping and DRM institutional assessments in Djibouti, and the development of
a national disaster risk management strategy for agriculture and an integrated drought
management strategy in Morocco. Over the years, this engagement has spread to 26
projects in 13 countries with a strong emphasis on DRM institutional capacity building, risk
assessment, and risk communication.
GFDRR has also sought to increase the impact of its operations by deepening engage-
ment in two priority countries (chosen by GFDRR donors) in the region: Djibouti and the
Republic of Yemen, both highly prone to disasters and likely impacts of climate change.
Efforts in these countries have been focused on developing a comprehensive program
for DRM and CCA.


The Republic of Yemen
In the Republic of Yemen, GFDRR’s ongoing activities include disaster risk assessment
studies, capacity-building programs, and PDNAs. GFDRR recently conducted an assess-
ment of Yemen’s Fund for Disaster Reconstruction in Hadramout and Al-Mahara, and
dialogue is underway for the establishment of a permanent financing mechanism to
address disaster risks in the country. The DRM Country Program outlines a five-year work
plan with two objectives: (i): to strengthen Yemen’s institutional capacity for planning,
coordinating, implementing, and monitoring disaster risk assessment and risk reduction
activities, including the establishment of early warning systems at national, governorate,
and community levels; and (ii) to jump start the implementation of a national civil works
program for reducing flood risks. In 2008, a PDNA was launched after the floods in Al-
Mahara and Hadramout governorates, with technical support from GFDRR (box 6).
In terms of CCA programming, the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) is be-
ing implemented in the Republic of Yemen. A major component of the PPCR is the
modernization of Yemen’s climate data system, which includes increasing the number
and improving the operation of hydro-meteorological stations; improving hydrological,
weather, and climate information management systems; and improving delivery of such
information and services. The Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR) has also
been endorsed. Its expected outcomes by 2015 include:


62	www.gfdrr.org.



36	                                      NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(i)	 Building climatic resilience and adaptation capacity into the water and agricultural
     sectors as well as in coastal zones;
(ii)	Improving food security by improving resilience of both the water and agriculture
     sectors;
(iii)	Augmenting current agricultural production planning that does not account for fu-
      ture climate change; and
(iv)	Improving sustainability of irrigated agriculture by resolving the groundwater regula-
     tion problem.
To ensure effective implementation of the DRM and PPCR programs, and thanks to fi-
nancial support from GFDRR, in December 2013, the World Bank hired a local disaster risk
management specialist.


Djibouti
Since 2007, GFDRR has assisted Djibouti in assessing and documenting its disaster vulner-
abilities, while improving the country’s capacity. Since then, a comprehensive risk as-
sessment and communication platform has been established that has brought together
seven national agencies. GFDRR support has catalyzed greater national attention to di-
saster risk management as a tool for development, paving the way for the development
of the comprehensive DRM program, Natural Disaster Risk Assessment and Monitoring
System (CARAD). The CARAD is a US$2.4 million program that integrates risk and vulner-
ability information to facilitate decision making. The Low Regret Climate Adaptation and
Disaster Risk Reduction Options in the Republic of Djibouti program was also implement-
ed to strengthen national capacities for analysis and communication of hazard risk and
climate change information among vulnerable communities. As part of this technical
assistance, a South–South cooperation among Djibouti, Kenya, and Mozambique was
completed in December 2012 to enable these countries to exchange best practices on
drought-resilient agriculture, flood management, and CCA.
The creation of the Djibouti Center for Research Studies (CERD) Laboratory for Risk Man-
agement also stemmed from the GFDRR Djibouti country program. Funded by the gov-
ernment of Djibouti, the establishment of this laboratory demonstrates strong commit-
ment to providing an integrated scientific and technical approach to risk management.


Other countries
In 2008, Morocco requested assistance from the World Bank to manage its exposure to
risks. The government prioritized them as: (i) commodity price volatility, (ii) natural disas-
ter risk, and (iii) agricultural sector risks. The project that resulted from this request is one
of the most innovative global projects today, and looks at risks in an “integrated” frame-
work (box 2).
In Egypt, GFDRR has supported capacity building in PDNA and risk assessment training
and has conducted an institutional assessment of all DRM stakeholders at the national
level.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                             	37
Figure 9. Sea-Level Rise Projections




Source: WRI.




In Saudi Arabia, the National Hazard Risk Assessment is expected to start in early 2014 and
provide a qualitative and quantitative overview of the main hazard risks in the country,
an urban vulnerability study, and a comprehensive institutional analysis. The Saudi Presi-
dency of Meteorology and Environment will lead the risk assessment in partnership with
the King’s Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST) and other DRM-related
national institutions.
In Tripoli, Lebanon, a qualitative urban risk profile was completed in early 2012 by the
Municipality of Tripoli, in partnership with the Lebanon DRM Center (box 7). The study is
forming the foundation from which to start integrating DRM into urban development.
In Algeria, an urban risk and vulnerability assessment was launched in Algiers in 2012,
led by the Marseille Center for Mediterranean Integration (CMI), jointly financed by the
World Bank and France’s Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations (CDC). The study identified
climate variability, coastal erosion, river flooding, landslides, and earthquakes as the ma-
jor hazard risks for the city, combined with the vulnerability posed by informal housing.
The assessment does not claim to be exhaustive, but provides the local authorities with
technical and economic recommendations to include in city planning (box 7).



38	                                      NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
BOX 7. ALGERIA AND LEBANON INTEGRATE DRM INTO THEIR HIGH-LEVEL AGENDAS
While each country has a unique DRR context, Algeria’s and Lebanon’s drivers of national
progress in DRR serve as a useful reminder of the universal importance of certain preconditions
to succeed in reducing risks. In both countries, two critical factors explain their improvements in
DRR: political will and institutional capacities, and international partnerships. In Algeria, political
commitment began in the aftermath of the 1980 El Asnam earthquake to develop a research
program around seismic risk and improve the Civil Protection’s ability to prevent, respond to,
and prepare for disasters. In Lebanon, sustained interest in DRM by the Prime Minister’s Of-
fice began in 2003 and culminated in 2009 with the formulation of the Strengthening DRM Ca-
pacities project, supported by UNDP, to establish a DRM unit, develop and implement a DRR
strategy, and raise awareness. For both countries, the partnership with international institutions,
such as UNDP and UNISDR, has facilitated regional alliances, enabled exposure to global good
practices and lessons learned, and ensured participation in the Global Platforms for Disaster
Risk Reduction.
Nevertheless, there is a third distinctive key factor in Algeria and Lebanon that created momen-
tum for their DRM agendas: Algeria’s early engagement in DRR, having experienced in the past
that “prevention pays,” and Lebanon’s local collaboration. Given the governance and public
services challenges in Lebanon’s history, local collaboration among and within municipalities has
helped promote DRR initiatives. In fact, the municipality is the only level of decentralized gover-
nance that is helping to achieve visible DRR results in the absence of a strong national institutional
coordinating agency or mechanism.
Source: UNISDR, Good Practice Country Briefs.




The World Bank has deepened its dialogue with North African governments (Egypt, Mo-
rocco, and Tunisia) through the Climate Change Adaptation and Natural Disasters Pre-
paredness in the Coastal Cities of North Africa Project. Completed in 2011, this project
supported (i) assessment of natural hazard and climate vulnerability in Alexandria, the
Bouregreg Valley, Casablanca, and Tunis; (ii) development of DRM preparedness plans
for MNA coastal cities; and (iii) identification of coastal cities’ climate adaptation priori-
ties. The study strongly prioritized addressing vulnerabilities along the coastline, particu-
larly around a stretch of about 40 km that is already vulnerable to erosion and sea surg-
es. Climate-resilient urban planning will be crucial for Tunis, Casablanca, and Alexandria
to manage their increasing risks. In low-lying areas of these cities subject to flooding,
upgraded drainage systems will be necessary, and illegal housing development at the
periphery will need to be contained. For all urban sites examined by the study, mitigat-
ing these risks requires actions in three overlapping spheres: urban planning, institutional
reforms including reinforcing capacity, and strengthening infrastructure.
The study also provided costing tools that will assist cities in identifying potential losses
under different scenarios. The study has enabled the governments of Egypt, Morocco,
and Tunisia to set priorities and begin mobilizing the necessary investments so that the
countries can move forward and implement the recommendations.




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                 	39
BOX 8.	 INTEGRATING DRM INTO URBAN PLANNING IN TRIPOLI, LEBANON
Lebanon’s northern hub, Tripoli, is challenged by multiple natural hazards, coupled with internal
and international conflict that threaten the operation of critical infrastructure such as water and
sanitation; electric energy and oil refineries; transportation; telecommunication; schools; and hos-
pitals. To tackle these threats, the World Bank financed a study by the Disaster Risk Management
Centre (DRMC) of Beirut to quantify the vulnerability of Tripoli to natural hazards and identify the
challenges posed by the Lebanese political context and the degree of centralization and super-
vision exerted on local authorities. As a result, several challenges were identified, including the
lack of implementation decrees for various codes, the lack of independent verification mecha-
nisms for infrastructure projects, and the limited enforcement of building codes.
As the second largest city the country, Tripoli plays a central role in the country’s economic activ-
ity and is the main model for the cities of Mina and Baddawi. Together, the three cities constitute
the Union of Municipalities of Al-Fayhaa (UoMoAF). The study revealed that it is fundamental for
the UoMoAF to jointly take action to reduce vulnerability to external shocks and mainstream
DRM into their urban management by decentralizing their decision-making system. Furthermore,
implementation of capacity building at the federation and grassroots level as recommended
by the study has proven to be effective. With the arrival of the 800,000 Syrian refugees, resource
allocation, waste collection, and other city planning processes have become more difficult, but
have not hampered the functioning of Tripoli.
Source: Hamdan and Rajab, “Integrating Disaster Risk Management into Urban Planning and Management.”




Regional collaboration
A key focus of GFDRR programming has been supporting regional DRM collaboration.
This programming is closely tied to the Arab World Initiative, in which greater regional
cooperation is being forged to take advantage of common development opportunities
and scale economies.
Organization of Islamic Cooperation: As noted earlier, the Fourth Islamic Conference of
Environment Ministers, which took place in Hammamet, Tunisia, October 5–6, 2010, ad-
opted the ISDRRM. The same Conference of Ministers adopted a resolution requesting
that GFDRR, in cooperation with the Islamic Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Orga-
nization (ISESCO), develop an executive work plan to implement the ISDRRM. The work
plan seeks to build regional resilience to disasters by focusing on:
(i)	 Strengthening DRR capacity in Islamic countries;
(ii)	 Improving understanding of risks and access to data;
(iii)	Advancing regional initiatives for DRR;
(iv)	Promoting disaster risk financing and insurance strategies;
(v)	Helping countries prepare for disasters and strengthen post-disaster response and
    reconstruction capacity; and
    Laying the foundation for the second phase of implementing comprehensive DRM
(vi)	
    programs at the national level.



40	                                              NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
The Fifth Islamic Conference of Environment Ministers (Astana, Kazakhstan, May 17–18,
2012) adopted the executive work plan. The Conference requested that ISESCO and
GFDRR design a roadmap that could strengthen the coordination mechanisms for col-
lecting the funds needed for implementation of the executive work plan.
The Arab Academy for Science, Technology, and Maritime Transport: Collaboration with
the AASTMT has been based on the delivery of DRM education. This collaboration has
led to training on PDNA methodology for a core group of Arab Academy experts who,
in the future, could lead PDNA in affected countries in MNA.
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Secretariat: Dialogue with the GCC Secretariat is un-
derway to support Gulf countries in building their capacities and to conduct hazard and
risk assessments through a cooperation framework to be developed jointly with GFDRR.
The Arab Administrative Development Organization (ARADO): The collaboration with
ARADO is based on the delivery of online DRM courses (launched in 2013), with a plan
to scale up this program by offering the courses in Arabic and French to ensure wider
coverage in the MNA Region.
The Statistical, Economic, and Social Research and Training Center for Islamic Countries
(SESRIC): Cooperation with SESRIC is expected to include implementation of the Islamic
work plan for disaster risk reduction and management.




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                       	41
IV. Proposed
Way Forward
World Bank support to MNA countries encompasses capacity building on DRM issues at
national and community levels, catalyzing an interministerial dialogue on disaster risk
management within countries, and creating an enabling environment to support the
development of the region’s national strategies for DRM.



Strategic Pillars
Aligned with the HFA, World Bank priorities for action in the region are organized around
five pillars:
Pillar I. 	   Institutional Capacity Building, Education, and Knowledge Sharing: To man-
              age risks, policy and legislative development, training, and knowledge sharing
Pillar II.	   Risk Identification: Hazard and risk assessments to identify the intensity, fre-
              quency, and other characteristics of disaster risk, and the development of
              decision systems
Pillar III.	 Risk Reduction: Design and implementation of structural and nonstructural
             DRM measures
Pillar IV.	 Risk Financing and Transfer: Through risk transfer instruments, a catastrophe
            deferred drawdown option (CAT DDO), and reinsurance instruments
Pillar V.	    Response, Recovery, and Reconstruction: Disaster impacts and losses can be
              substantially reduced if authorities, individuals, and communities in hazard-
              prone areas are well prepared, ready to act, and equipped with the knowl-
              edge and capacities for effective disaster management


TABLE 1. CORE ACTIVITIES FOR THE NEXT THREE YEARS, BY PILLAR

 Pillar I. Institutional Capacity Building, Education, and Knowledge Sharing

 Institutional Strengthening & Capacity Building

 Priorities

 •	 Support the development of a regional “Center of Excellence” to build disaster resilience
 •	 Promote awareness, institutionalization, and ownership of DRM to line ministries
 •	 Promote development/use of tools for mainstreaming DRM into development
    planning	
 •	 Promote the development, application, enforcement, and monitoring of policies, stan-
    dards, norms for DRM, land use, and natural resource management	
 •	 Promote synergies between land-use planning, CCA, and DRM and its institutionalization
 •	 Strengthen regional and national institutions involved in risk assessment


44	                                         NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
 Current Activities

 •	 Support the establishment of a national strategy for DRM in Djibouti, Morocco, and the Re-
    public of Yemen
 •	 Republic of Yemen: Build the capacity of local and national governments, including as-
    sistance in establishing the national strategy for DRM and CCA training on disaster needs
    assessment
 •	 Republic of Yemen: Modernize the climate data system and improve hydrological, weath-
    er, and climate information management systems
 •	 Algeria: Support the establishment of a national-level interministerial committee on DRM
    and CCA
 •	 Morocco: Build capacity at the community level, including response and rescue plans, and
    increase capacity of government officials by providing training on DRM
 •	 Morocco: National-level interministerial committee on DRM further expanded to integrated
    risk management (IRM)
 •	 Djibouti: Assist the DRM National Secretariat in updating and operationalizing its DRM Action
    Plan

 Future Activities

 •	 Djibouti: Enhance capacity of DRM unit to support the operationalization of CARAD
 •	 Djibouti: Organization of an Understanding Risk, Horn of Africa Forum, focusing on port se-
    curity and cyber attacks
 •	 Djibouti and Lebanon: Host women’s competition for the identification of risks and the pro-
    posal of solutions through business plans
 •	 United Arab Emirates (with ARADO): Complete establishment of national e-learning
    laboratory
 •	 Morocco: Train provincial and local Ministry of Interior officers on DRM
 •	 Morocco: Create a Bureau of Coordination to make policy-level decisions on IRM
 •	 Develop knowledge exchange program between Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation Project
    (ISMEP) and the governments of Djibouti and the Republic of Yemen
 •	 Organize a city risk management forum to build resilience across MNA countries (May 2014)
 •	 Organize Understanding Risk for Commercial Hubs in the Middle East and North Africa (Oc-
    tober 2014)

 Education

 Priorities

 •	 Establish a national and regional institutional mechanism and identify organizations to im-
    plement DRM educational programs
 •	 Through trainings, education and advocacy campaigns, support MNA government main-
    streaming of DRM
 •	 Promote regional capacity assessments for development of long-term, agency-specific,
    educational capacity programs


                                                                       Table 1 continued on next page




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                              	45
TABLE 1. CORE ACTIVITIES FOR THE NEXT THREE YEARS, BY PILLAR, CONTINUED

 Future Activities

 •	 Incorporate DRM modules into university curricula and develop a DRM master’s degree
 •	 Republic of Yemen: Curriculum to be developed for a DRM master’s degree program at the
    University of Sana’a
 •	 Republic of Yemen: Create a DRM national laboratory at the University of Sana’a by trans-
    ferring the World Bank e-learning platform
 •	 Djibouti: Organization of a multistakeholder risk and climate data–management training

 Knowledge Sharing

 Priorities

 •	 Support the development of a regional knowledge networking portal to facilitate the col-
    lection, standardization, and sharing of disaster-related information
 •	 Promote the allocation of dedicated resources in the region to maintain and manage
    equipment and knowledge systems

 Current Activities

 •	 Organization of South–South cooperation between Djibouti, Kenya, and Mozambique on
    hazard and climate data management, community preparedness, and green growth
 •	 Organization of South–South cooperation between Morocco and Vietnam to share their
    experiences in flood management at the community level

 Future Activities

 •	 Organize an exchange between the Mediterranean countries on issues of sea-level rise,
    flood management, and seismic retrofitting

 Pillar II. Risk Identification

 Hazard & Risk Assessment

 Priorities

 •	 Set up dedicated systems and resources for the development of hazard and risk assess-
    ments and dissemination of risk information
 •	 Conduct risk assessments of critical urban areas

 Current Activities

 •	 Djibouti, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, and the Republic of Yemen: National level multihazard risk
    assessments are helping prioritize investment decisions on risk mitigation for development
 •	 City-level hazard risk assessments in Tripoli, Sana’a, Tunis, Alexandria, and Algiers are feed-
    ing into city planning and management

 Future Activities

 •	 Djibouti, Morocco, and the Republic of Yemen: Help governments implement the recom-
    mendations of probabilistic risk assessment, including water-harvesting structures and retro-
    fitting of critical infrastructure
 •	 GCC countries: Risk assessments in Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, and Saudi Arabia



46	                                         NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
 Decision Systems

 Priorities

 •	 Support the expansion of early warning and forecasting
 •	 Promote the allocation of resources—financial and personnel—to manage the dissemina-
    tion of risk information through country processes

 Current Activities

 •	 Djibouti: Establish a risk assessment and communication platform, including a web-based
    platform for sharing among various sectors
 •	 Djibouti: Upgrade the existing alarm system into a full-fledged early warning system
 •	 Morocco: Set up a national information system to store and manage risk data

 Future Activities

 •	 Through various forums, provide advisory services and capacity for hazard and risk assess-
    ments as a critical tool in decision making for DRM investments

 Pillar III. Risk Reduction

 Priorities

 •	 Promote the development of well-designed water management systems across the region
 •	 Promote capacity development for the implementation of disaster risk mitigation pro-
    grams in the region
 •	 Promote the development of cost-benefit analysis for structural mitigation investments for
    critical infrastructure
 •	 Promote the standardization of disaster risk calculations in public investment
 •	 Promote the development of cost-effective flood protection measures
 •	 Promote the participation of women in risk reduction activities

 Current Activities

 •	 Republic of Yemen: Establish small-scale flood risk management and water-harvesting
    systems in vulnerable communities of Hadramout and Al-Mahara

 Future Activities

 •	 Republic of Yemen: Establishment of small-scale, rural, water-harvesting structures as part
    of the flood hazard risk mitigation study completed in 2010
 •	 Republic of Yemen: Assist government in implementing storm drainage and flood protec-
    tion in some cities (IBB and other flood-prone settlements)
 •	 Morocco: Establish cost-benefit scenarios for mitigation options and investment in infra-
    structure, including early warning system
 •	 Djibouti: Assist the government (with the UNDP and European Union ) in constructing urban
    flood and water-retention infrastructure
 •	 Djibouti: Assist the government in establishing early warning system
 •	 Djibouti: Implementation of risk prevention plans

                                                                       Table 1 continued on next page

A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                              	47
TABLE 1. CORE ACTIVITIES FOR THE NEXT THREE YEARS, BY PILLAR, CONTINUED

 Pillar IV. Risk Financing and Transfer

 Priorities

 •	 Increase the financial response capacity of governments toward natural disasters while
    maintaining their fiscal balance
 •	 Promote the inclusion of natural disaster risks within the broader financial risk management
    strategy
 •	 Explore market-based catastrophe risk insurance solutions through a feasibility study; re-
    member lessons learned from international experience (CCRIF, SECRIF)
 •	 Promote regional cooperation on disaster risk financing and insurance (DRFI)

 Current Activities

 •	 Morocco: Assist the government in the design and implementation of the catastrophe risk
    insurance law

 Future Activities

 •	 Morocco: Establish a new catastrophe risk insurance market for firms and residents and a
    solidarity fund to address affordability issues
 •	 Develop DRFI economic and fiscal profiles across the region—enabling countries to benefit
    from other DRFI experiences and to increase cost-effectiveness of disaster risk assessment

 Pillar V. Response, Recovery, and Reconstruction

 Priorities

 •	 Develop comprehensive review of emergency response in MNA
 •	 Develop capacities at the regional level for rapid PDNAs
 •	 Promote mainstreaming of DRM into reconstruction through case study best practices
 •	 Continue building PDNA capacity and develop a disaster damage assessment structure
    and methodology and a recovery planning framework
 •	 Support capacity building for communities—the first responders in times of disaster

 Current Activities

 •	 Djibouti: Support the Executive Secretariat in developing disaster response contingency
    plans and communication protocols and strategy
 •	 Djibouti: Assess drought loss, damage, and needs through the drought PDNA completed
    in October 2011
 •	 Jordan: Support community preparedness and resilience to seismic risk in the Dead Sea
    Valley
 •	 Develop Rapid Damage Loss Assessment for Winter Storm Alexa, to be completed in
    March 2014




48	                                        NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
 Future Activities

 •	 Djibouti: Develop a disaster damage assessment structure and methodology and a recov-
    ery planning framework
 •	 Morocco: Develop response plans for communities
 •	 Morocco: Strengthen building codes and enforcement
 •	 Republic of Yemen: Strengthen capacity of local authorities and communities in Hadram-
    out and Al-Mahara governorates for preparedness and response to any future disasters


Additionally, the following GFDRR framework outlines cost-effective steps governments
and other DRM stakeholders can take jointly to protect residents and economic assets.
Collectively, these steps contribute to disaster risk management. This framework was
used recently in the Sendai Report (figure 10).




                FIGURE 10. A DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK




                Source: World Bank and GFDRR, Sendai Report.




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                            	49
Global DRM Best Practices Relevant to
MNA Countries
As the region moves forward on the priorities for action under each strategic pillar, World
Bank support to the MNA Region to increase disaster resilience is expected to build on
the wealth of global experience already available and leverage best practices, such as
the ones detailed below.


Pillar I. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
Pakistani efforts for institutional coordination and capacity building

The 2005 earthquake and the 2011, 2012, and 2013 floods in Pakistan have left US$25 bil-
lion in damages, making development unsustainable and hindering the achievement of
poverty reduction goals. In the past, there was a DRM system in place, stemming from
the Calamities Act of 1958, but it provided only legal mechanisms for relief. DRM was
regarded in isolation from mainstream development.
Given the dramatic increase in large-scale disasters in recent years, Pakistan has shifted
its approach to development and disaster management. The National Disaster Man-
agement Act (NDMA) of 2010 created DRM authorities at the national, provincial and
district levels, with the mandate to help concerned ministries and provincial leaders plan
for disasters. However, the new vision and mission of the NDMA was not sufficiently un-
derstood by its implementers and did not raise sufficient community awareness, and
investment in DRM remained negligible. To provide guidelines to overcome such chal-
lenges, and to promote measures to reduce vulnerability, the government approved the
National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy in 2013. The policy’s priority areas are hazard and
vulnerability assessments, awareness raising, early warning systems, and capacity de-
velopment for post-disaster recovery. These institutions and policy are part of a broader
National Disaster Risk Management Framework (NDRMF), which has made outstanding
progress by enhancing capacity, kick-starting the risk assessments, and promoting DRM
planning and community preparedness.


Pillar III. Risk Reduction
Alleviating the growing water scarcity in China

The North China Plain is one of the most densely populated regions in the world, encom-
passing the capital, Beijing, and is China’s main agricultural region. Its soil is fertile, but
water scarcity is a growing problem. The World Bank’s North China Plain Water Conser-
vation Project aimed to enhance beneficial use of water resources, agriculture produc-
tion capacity, and farmer incomes by increasing the value of agriculture production per
unit of water consumed. The project intended to increase yields, reduce nonbeneficial
water losses, and establish mechanisms for sustainable use and management of wa-
ter resources in irrigated areas. The project supported integrated improvements to over
100,000 hectares of irrigated land and benefitted 360,000 households. Agricultural pro-



50	                                          NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
duction tripled, and farmer per-capita incomes increased 10–554 percent. Furthermore,
groundwater depletion was reduced to negligible levels, or eliminated, and 500 water-
use associations were established to more sustainably manage water in rural areas. For
the first time on this scale in China, these associations assumed responsibility for both
financing and operating irrigation systems.


Pillar IV. Risk Financing and Transfer
Reducing and managing fiscal risk from disasters: Colombia’s approach to sovereign disaster
risk financing

Natural disasters represent an important challenge to the stability and sustainability of
Colombia’s fiscal accounts, because the country experiences the highest rate of natural
disasters in Latin America. Since 2004, the government has been working to reduce its
contingent liability from disasters and to manage fiscal risk from these events. The gov-
ernment took a major step forward in 2010 when it conducted a comprehensive review
using state-of-the-art catastrophe risk modeling techniques. At the time, the government
estimated that, on average, natural disasters represent a yearly contingent liability of
0.13 percent of GDP. However, a 1-in-250 year earthquake could generate additional
public expenditures in excess of 2.7 percent of GDP—making natural disasters the sec-
ond largest source of fiscal risk. In 2011, the Ministry of Finance began to work with the
World Bank to deepen Colombia’s efforts in disaster risk financing and insurance (DRFI).
Taking a programmatic approach to improving its financial resilience, the government
published a review on the financial and fiscal impacts of disasters and its DRFI strategy.
The DRFI strategy focuses on (i) improving disaster risk information; (ii) enhancing insur-
ance of public assets; and (iii) improving budget management of disaster events. Under
the latter, the government recently secured a US$250 million contingent credit line from
the World Bank (the catastrophe deferred drawdown option, CAT-DDO) and is analyz-
ing the implementation of risk transfer products.63


Microinsurance in Malawi

Malawi has piloted an innovative drought insurance program for local groundnut farm-
ers that will help them mitigate the risks associated with periodic droughts. The insurance
will help farmers obtain financing to purchase certified seeds that produce increased
yields and revenues and have greater resistance to disease. The pilot program currently
includes nearly 900 farmers in four areas and, if successful, can be scaled up to other
crops and other areas of Malawi and, subsequently, to Africa. The National Smallholder
Farmers’ Association of Malawi, in conjunction with the Insurance Association of Ma-
lawi, received technical assistance from the World Bank and Opportunity International
Network financed by the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs. Using this support,
the two Malawian associations designed the index-based weather insurance contract,
which pays out when there is insufficient rainfall for groundnut production. If a drought
triggers a payout from the insurance contract, funds will be paid directly to the bank to
pay off the farmers’ loans. In the absence of drought, farmers will benefit from selling


63	 World Bank and GFDRR, Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program, https://www.gfdrr.org/node/337.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                         	51
BOX 9. EXAMPLES OF WORLD BANK SUPPORT FOR URBAN RESILIENCE
A new project in Sri Lanka, the Metro Colombo Urban Development Project, will look at issues
including government administration, transport and solid waste management, but will focus on
flood protection through the installation and upgrading of drainage infrastructure.
Since 2006, the second phase of the Colombia Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project has sup-
ported infrastructure retrofitting and institutional strengthening in the city of Bogotá. The project
financed the retrofitting of more than 200 schools and six hospitals, as well as the resettlement of
more than 5,000 families living in risky areas.
The World Bank has a history of supporting the sustainable development of urban areas in Turkey,
working on financing, risk reduction, and preparedness. The post-Marmara earthquake project
helped establish both the Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool (TCIP) as well as the forerunner of
the Disaster and Emergency Management Presidency. The TCIP is a legal public entity that pro-
vides compulsory property earthquake insurance for owners of private dwellings built legally on
registered land. Premium rates are actuarially sound, not subsidized, and vary with construction
type and property location. Covered risks include earthquakes and fire. The TCIP was established
to limit the financial burden earthquakes place on the Turkish government’s budget, focus gov-
ernment relief funds on low-income residents, and access international reinsurance capacity in a
cost-effective manner.
Several projects have targeted Istanbul, supporting the development of multihazard risk assess-
ments, the retrofitting of key infrastructure, flood risk reduction, emergency planning and re-
sponse, and public awareness.
In three cities in Vietnam, Dong Hoi, Can Tho and Hanoi, local governments have extended the
work of risk assessment to a second phase in resilience planning, completing a Local Resilience
Action Plan. This includes not only a vulnerability assessment and spatial planning, but also an
inventory of planned capital investments and policy changes to address high-risk areas, analyze
gaps, and a multistakeholder priority setting based on a comparison of alternatives in light of lim-
ited budgets and fundraising prospects.
Source: World Bank and GFDRR, Sendai Report.




the higher value product in the marketplace. This private pilot program is very much in
line with the government’s initiative to explore innovative ways to manage weather and
price risk in Malawi while contributing to the food security needs of the country. It is the
first time in Africa that such index-based weather insurance policies have been sold to
smallholder farmers. A similar pilot in India in 2003 has expanded from its initial 230 farmers
and now provides more than 250,000 farmers with access to weather insurance.64


Contingent emergency response components

Several disaster-prone countries are including contingent emergency response compo-
nents (CERCs) in their World Bank–funded projects, allowing them to be better prepared
in case of a disaster. The first CERC was introduced in the Colombia Disaster Vulnerability
Reduction Project in 2007. This US$150 million component was subsequently replaced by

64	 World Bank, “The Emergency Drought Recovery Project.”



52	                                              NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
a CAT-DDO when the instrument was introduced in 2008. The Laos Roads Sector Project
(2010, US$27.8 million) triggered a contingent component of US$1 million and realloca-
tion of another US$3 million from other project components to repair roads damaged
by Typhoon Haima. In Indonesia, contingent components have been added under the
Third National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas (2010, US$150 mil-
lion) and the Western Indonesia Roads Improvement Project (2011, US$250 million). In
Pakistan, CERCs were recently introduced in the Baluchistan Disaster Management Proj-
ect and in the Punjab Cities Governance Improvement Project. Once triggered, the
contingent funds can be mobilized by following procedures based on the World Bank’s
Operational Policy 8.0, “Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies,” which minimizes
upfront processing steps and fiduciary and safeguard requirements.65


Disaster risk financing and insurance in Indonesia

Indonesia is situated in one of the world’s most active disaster hot spots, where several
types of disasters frequently occur. The potential cost of a major disaster in Indonesia
could exceed 3 percent of its GDP. While the annual economic impact of natural di-
sasters is estimated at 0.3 percent of GDP over the last decade, simulations show that
a major earthquake (occurring once every 250 years) could cause losses in excess of
US$30 billion, that is, 3 percent of Indonesia’s GDP.66 The Rehabilitation and Reconstruc-
tion Fund is the main budget instrument for the government to finance public post-disas-
ter expenditures, but the fund is undercapitalized. Post-disaster reconstruction is largely
funded through the reserve of the State’s General Treasury, which requires parliamen-
tary approval. The annual allocation of about IDR 4 trillion (US$450 million) may still be
insufficient to deal with a major catastrophe or a series of moderate to severe disasters in
a given fiscal year. More importantly, a budget reappropriation is required after almost
every disaster.
To release the country from the immediate financial response against a natural disaster
and better protect its fiscal balance, in 2013, the government approved Flexibility of
Budget shifts among disaster phases (prevention, emergency response, recovery) and
across different fiscal years. The government also included catastrophe risk insurance in
the new Budget Execution Regulation. Several local governments have used insurance
to protect public assets against disasters and, in collaboration with insurance companies,
the country is developing index-based earthquake insurance to strengthen the resiliency
of the financial sector that serves lower-income households and small and medium-sized
enterprises.67 This gradual progress has made Indonesia a DRFI role model in Asia.


Pillar V. Response, Recovery, and Reconstruction
Community-based DRM: Experience from the Philippines

Buklod Tao is an environmental organization formed by residents of Dona Pepeng sub-
division and informal settlers of North and South Libis Barangay in the Philippines, an

65	 World Bank and GFDRR, Sendai Report.
66	 World Bank and GFDRR, Indonesia: Advancing a National Disaster Risk Financing Strategy.
67	OECD, Disaster Risk Financing in APEC Economies.



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                                          	53
area highly prone to flooding and typhoons. After a one-day Disaster Management and
Preparedness Seminar in June 1997, Buklod Tao formed a Disaster Response Commit-
tee (DRC), composed of 33 members, and formulated a Counter Disaster Plan. Three
disaster management teams were organized, and emergency rescue and evacuation
plans were detailed. These included the construction of three fiberglass boats, using
local expertise and labor to practice rescue maneuvers. Two months after the disaster
preparedness seminar, a typhoon hit the community again. Although several houses
were swept away by the waters, no one was killed, and many people were able to save
their belongings. Since then, when typhoons hit the area, flood-level monitoring, early
warning, evacuation, rescue operations, and relief assistance activities of the DRC and
Buklod Tao—all community-led initiatives—ensure people’s safety. Neighboring villages,
vulnerable to similar hazards, have now started developing their own DRCs, making this
region in the Philippines one of the most resilient to flood risk.68


Safer Homes, Stronger Communities: A Handbook for Reconstruction after Disasters

This handbook was developed by the World Bank69 to assist policy makers and project
managers involved in large-scale post-disaster reconstruction programs who are faced
with having to make immediate decisions that will have long-term impacts on the lives of
the disaster’s victims. From establishing the policy framework for an entire reconstruction
process to setting reconstruction policy in only one sector, the handbook emphasizes
the importance of establishing a policy to guide reconstruction. Effective reconstruction
is set in motion only after the policy maker has evaluated all alternatives, conferred with
stakeholders, and established the framework and the rules for reconstruction. As inter-
national experience demonstrates, reconstruction policy improves both the efficiency
and the effectiveness of the reconstruction process. In addition to providing advice on
policy content, the handbook describes mechanisms for managing communications
with stakeholders about the policy, for improving the consistency of the policy, and for
monitoring policy implementation and outcomes.


Cities and Flooding: A Guide to Integrated Urban Flood Risk Management for the 21st Century

Urban flooding has become an increasing development challenge for policy makers
and citizens around the world. It causes widespread devastation, economic damages,
and loss of human life, and is a recurring issue. Urban areas vulnerable to flooding have
been hit especially hard in the past two decades, with a global increase of reported
flood events. The rapid population growth in urban settlements has made urban flooding
more deadly, more costly, and more difficult to manage.
To help overcome these challenges, the World Bank developed Cities and Flooding: A
Guide to Integrated Urban Flood Risk Management for the 21st Century.70 This handbook
explains the causes and risk of urban floods and provides operational guidance on how
to manage the risk of ﬂood in an integrated manner, in the context of a rapidly growing

68	 Heijmans and Victoria (2001).
69	 Abhas K. Jha, Jennifer Duyne Barenstein, Priscilla M. Phelps, and others, Safer Homes, Stronger Communities.
70	 Abhas K. Jha, Robin Bloch, and Jessica Lamond, Cities and Flooding: A Guide to Integrated Urban Flood Risk Man-
    agement for the 21st Century.



54	                                                  NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
urban environment and a variable climate. This guide contains over 50 case studies from
around the world to illustrate its policy recommendations.
The handbook proposes a combination of structural and nonstructural measures, rang-
ing from hard-engineered infrastructures such as flood defenses and drainage channels
to building the capacity of people to cope with flooding in their environment. Integrated
flood risk management therefore requires greater coordination among policy makers,
technical specialists, civil society, NGOs, and the private sector. This guide provides a
clear picture of the options, methods, and tools to assist them in making the right choices.




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	55
     ANNEX 1.
     COUNTRY
RISK MANAGEMENT
     PROFILES
                                        Algeria

National Policy and Legislation
•	 In 2004, a law was issued regarding the pre-
   vention of major risks and disaster manage-
   ment in the context of sustainable devel-
   opment as a comprehensive and coherent
   framework for planning, programming, and
   implementing a national policy on DRM
•	 Ordinance 03-12 concerns compulsory
   insurance against the effects of national
   disasters
•	 Reducing disaster risks is included in plans
   and development strategies, particularly          Algeria statistics
   management and regional plans
                                                     Geographic area                          2,382
Disaster Risk Management Institutions                (in thousands of km2)
•	 Ministry of Interior                              GDP per capita, PPP (in US$)            $8,715
•	 National Earthquake Engineering Center of         Population (in millions)                 35.9
   Algeria
                                                     Population density                        15
•	 Centre de Recherche en Astronomie                 (person/per km2)
•	 Astrophysique et Geophysique
                                                     Urban population                          67
•	 Algerian Red Crescent                             (% of total population)

Country Partnership Strategy                         HDI country rank (out of 187)             96

•	 Algeria’s CPS includes a strategic objective
   to reduce vulnerabilities to natural disasters
                                                      Algeria: Number of hazards       Drought
Reported Challenges/Gaps                                       1980 – 2010             Earthquake
                                                                                       Extreme
•	 Need for DRM mechanisms for intersectoral                    4   2   4              Temperature
                                                                                       Flood
   coordination that can facilitate compre-
   hensive planning, information sharing, and                               15
   implementation
•	 Lack of ownership toward reducing disas-
   ter risk at the local level                                                     1
                                                           36
•	 Need to develop databases on various
   hazards
•	 Need to inform and educate people on
   hazards
•	 Insufficient exchange of information and data between national stakeholders—lack
   of knowledge sharing

Risk Assessment
No assessment available

58	                                      NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                                      Bahrain

Disaster/Hazard Profile
•	 Climate change: One of the countries most
   vulnerable to climate change
•	 Drought: Desertification of arable land
•	 Storms: Sand and dust storms put pressure
   on economy, health, and transportation
•	 Other: 161 km coastline degrading rapidly
   because of oil spills and other discharges

National Policy and Legislation
•	 A new law for DRM has been drafted—the
                                                   Bahrain statistics
   legislation and supporting regulations are
   in place to prevent or mitigate potential       Geographic area                  800
   risks and also to provide for contingencies     (in thousands of km2)
                                                   GDP per capita, PPP             23,690
Disaster Risk Management Institutions
                                                   (in US$, 2011)
•	 Ministry of Interior                            Population (in millions)         1.3
•	 Civil Defense Council
                                                   Population density              1,660
•	 National Committee for Disaster                 (person/per km2)
   Management
                                                   Urban population                 88.6
Key DRM Projects                                   (% of total population)
                                                   HDI country rank (out of 187)    42
UNDP

•	 Focus on human sustainability in economic
   management, environmental conservation, and human resource development
•	 Technical cooperation every five years through country program plan

Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 Lack of coordination between stakeholders
•	 Lack of funding for emergency response training
•	 Need for a central formal emergency fund
•	 Lack of systematic (budgeted) funding for DRM
•	 Need for data to inform local action to reduce risks
•	 Lack of central monitoring stations for various hazards
•	 Insufficient procedures for warning public of impending hazards




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	59
                                       Djibouti

Disaster/Hazard Profile
•	 Drought of 2008–12 incurred damages and
   losses in agriculture, livestock, water, and
   sanitation sectors of a cumulative US$96
   million
•	 2004 flood caused damages of US$11.1 mil-
   lion and affected 100,000 people

National Policy and Legislation
2006 DRM strategy:
•	 Increase national leadership and commit-        Djibouti statistics
   ment through the implementation of the
                                                   Geographic area                     23,200
   Hyogo Framework for Action
                                                   (in km2)
•	 Enhance collaboration and coordination
                                                   GDP per capita, PPP                 $2,290
   among stakeholders
                                                   (in US$, 2009)
•	 Increase national commitment to protect
   vulnerable households                           Population (in millions)              0.9

•	 Serve as a focal point for UNISDR and           Population density                     38
   strengthen links with Secretariat               (person/per km2)
National committee responsibilities:               Urban population                      88.1
•	 Policies and strategies framework               (% of total population)

•	 International aid mobilization                  HDI country rank                      165
                                                   (out of 187)
•	 Integrate DRM into poverty reduction
Executive Secretary for DRM (SEGRC)
responsibilities:
                                                      Djibouti: Number of hazards   Drought
•	 Coordinating prevention, mitigation, and                    1980–2010            Extreme
                                                                                    Temperature
   response activities                                                              Flood
                                                                2
•	 Promoting and coordinating the prepara-                                          Storm

   tion of sectoral and regional plans
                                                       5
Disaster Risk Management Institutions
                                                                            12
•	 National Committee
                                                           1
•	 SEGRC
•	 CERD
•	 MHUEAT
•	 National Agency of Meteorology
•	 University of Djibouti




60	                                    NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Key DRM Projects
•	 Climate change adaptation paper (US$200,000)
•	 Flood emergency repair (US$6.5 million)
GFDRM Projects
•	 Disaster Management Information System at CERD
•	 Create the Natural Disaster Risk Assessment and Monitoring System Program
•	 Country disaster risk assessments

CAS
•	 CAS 2010–13 objective: Engage in activities to prepare for and cope with floods and
   droughts




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                      	61
                          Arab Republic of Egypt

Disaster Profile
2010 flood: 3,500 people affected

National Policy and Legislation
The responsibilities of the National Committee
for Crisis/Disaster Management and Disaster
Risk Reduction include:
•	 Assisting and participating in crisis and di-
   saster management at the national level by
   coordinating with various concerned agen-
   cies and organizations
                                                     Egypt statistics
•	 Studying different disasters to clearly define
                                                     Geographic area                 1,001
   the institutional arrangements required
                                                     (in thousands of km2)
•	 Exchanging experience and knowledge in
   disaster management to review and up-             GDP per capita, PPP (in US$)    $6,324
   grade the procedures needed to deal with          Population (in millions)         82.5
   different crises
                                                     Population density                81
•	 National Strategy for Crisis/Disaster Man-        (person/per km2)
   agement and Disaster Risk Reduction de-
   veloped to improve the national system of         Urban population                  43
   crisis/disaster management and DRR                (% of total population)
                                                     HDI country rank (out of 187)    113
Disaster Risk Management Institutions
•	 Information and Decision Support Center
•	 National Committee for Crisis/Disaster Management and Disaster Risk Reduction
•	 Higher Council for Civil Defense
•	 Civil Defense
•	 Ministry of Environment

Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 Inadequate dedicated resources to implement DRM plans and activities
•	 Lack of integrated early warning system
•	 Need to strengthen social safety networks
•	 Lack of capacity to implement DRM

Risk Assessment
The development of multihazard maps is underway




62	                                     NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                           Islamic Republic of Iran

Disaster Profile
•	 Droughts: From 1999–2001, 37 million peo-
   ple were affected by drought with US$3.3
   billion in damages
•	 Earthquakes: In the 2003 Bam earthquake,
   approximately 27,000 people were killed,
   270,000 million affected, with more than
   US$500 million in damages and losses; in
   1990, the Manjil-Rudbar earthquake killed
   40,000 people, affected 710,000, and
   caused US$8 billion in losses.
•	 Floods: 1.4 million people were affected           Iran statistics
   between 2001 and 2002, causing more
   than 400 deaths                                    Geographic area (in km2)          1,648,000
                                                      GDP per capita, PPP                $11,467
National Policy and Legislation                       (in US$, 2009)
•	 As provided in the 1998 National Plan on           Population (in millions)            74.8
   Natural Disasters Prevention, the Ministry of
                                                      Population density                      45
   Interior has been legally assigned to func-
                                                      (person/per km2)
   tion as the coordinator of all activities re-
   lated to the protection and prevention of          Urban population                        70
   life and property losses—the plan has three        (% of total population)
   main components: (i) monitoring and early          HDI country rank                        88
   warning, (ii) risk assessment, and (iii) mitiga-   (out of 187)
   tion and response
•	 National Committee for Natural Disaster Re-
   duction (NCNDR) was formed in 1991, with               Iran: Number of hazards
   nine specialized subcommittees presided                       1980–2010
                                                                                    Drought
   over by the deputy ministers                                         1   3       Earthquake
•	 Provincial committees presided over by the                      9
                                                                                    Flood
   General Governors, coordination commit-                                          Storm
                                                                                    Wildfire
   tee presided over by the Minister of the In-
   terior
                                                            62
•	 Annual budget for DRR amounting to 2.5
   percent of the total annual budget of the
   country, 1.5 percent of which is allocated
   for advocacy, damage reduction, and
   emergency management; in addition, dur-
   ing serious catastrophes, a special part of
   the budget is used for reconstruction
•	 In 2003, the government approved the National Integrated Rescue and Relief Plan
   (NIRRP) as a replacement for NCNDR, based on Law No. 44


A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                              	63
Disaster Risk Management Institutions
•	 Ministry of Interior
•	 National Committee for Mitigation of Natural Disaster Effects
•	 National Committee for Natural Disaster Reduction (NCNDR)
•	 Bureau for Research and Coordination of Safety and Reconstruction Affairs (BRCRA)
•	 National Disaster Task Force (NDTF)
•	 Tehran Disaster Mitigation and Management Center (TDMMC)
•	 International Institute of Earthquake Engineering and Seismology, Tehran
•	 Geological Survey of Iran
•	 Earthquake Risk Management Research Center, established in 2004
•	 Ministry of Urban and Housing, Earthquake and Landslide Expert Group
•	 Ministry of Energy, responsible for the management of rivers and dams and also di-
   rectly involved in studying and applying mitigation measures against the rise of the
   Caspian Sea
•	 Ministry of Jihad Construction is mandated to supervise watersheds, forests, and
   rangelands
•	 Ministry of Health
•	 Ministry of Roads and Transportation
•	 Ministry of Agriculture Management and Planning Organization
•	 Iranian Red Crescent Society
•	 Islamic Republic of Iran Meteorological Organization
•	 National Climate Change Office, established in the Environmental Research Center
   of the Department of Environment

CAS
No CASs have been cited since 2005; in the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework 2012–16, DRM and management were declared as two of five priority areas

Key DRM Projects
•	 DesInventar disaster information management system
•	 Public education and awareness campaigns
•	 Disaster management plans
•	 Capacity building for earthquake risk management
•	 Institutional arrangements for enforcement of building codes
•	 Tehran Master Plan on emergency management, 2004
•	 National Disaster Early Warning System

Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 Coordination has been a long-standing challenge in disaster management



64	                                      NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
•	 DRR should be increasingly emphasized, while ensuring the highest response capac-
   ity with well-executed plans
•	 Need reliable and timely hazard warnings, which are crucial for ensuring the health
   system is ready for effective service delivery during emergencies
•	 Closer collaboration with relevant organizations such as the meteorology organization
•	 Public awareness should be included as part of a cost-effective approach to build a
   culture of prevention in the community; the DRM system should consider the quality
   of competency-based training
•	 Effective management of international assistance, especially during national
   catastrophes
•	 More practice on intensive risk scenarios, like the Bam earthquake
•	 Relocation of the National Disaster Management Organization: currently located in a
   line ministry, it would be more effective and representative if moved to a higher level
   office of management and supervision
•	 Absence of stiff rules in the building code and of planning for responses and drills
•	 Lack of access to databases, such as those containing spatial and geographic in-
   formation, and lack of communication and information exchange among organi-
   zations, which could cause major problems for disaster managers before and after
   disasters




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                         	65
                                           Iraq

Disaster Profile
•	 Droughts have the largest human impact
   (2.4 percent of the population affected),
   followed by earthquakes and floods
•	 Highest damage recorded was for floods,
   of US$1.3 million

National Policy and Legislation
•	 August 2009, Strategic Framework for Natu-
   ral Disaster and Risk Reduction in Iraq
•	 August 2009, Action Plan for Implementing
   Disaster Risk Reduction in Iraq                    Iraq statistics

•	 United Nations Framework Convention on             Geographic area (in km2)      438,300
   Climate Change was ratified in July 2009           GDP per capita, PPP           $3,890
•	 The federal budget allocates funding each          (in US$)
   fiscal year for an Emergency Fund, which is
                                                      Population (in millions)       32.9
   under the control of the prime minister, but
   so far it is mainly used for counterterrorism      Population density              74
   and unrests                                        (person/per km2)
                                                      Urban population                66
Disaster Risk Management Institutions                 (% of total population)
•	 The National Operations Center’s (NOC)             HDI country rank                132
   main task is to respond to terrorism and civil     (out of 187)
   unrest incidents, but it is now seeking to in-
   clude natural disasters in its mandate
•	 The Crisis Action Cell, established in November 2006, is composed of the National Se-
   curity Advisor, Ministers of Defense and Interior, and the Prime Minister’s Chief of Staff
•	 The Interministerial Committee on Disaster Management, formed in 2007, comprised
   10 ministries including Defense, Interior, Environment, Planning and Development Co-
   operation, Communications, Health, Water Resources, Foreign Affairs, Science and
   Technology, State Ministry of National Security, and the Secretariat General of the
   Council of Ministers

CAS
•	 No CAS was available for Iraq, however, there is a Country Water Resources Assis-
   tance Strategy (called the “Water-CAS”)
•	 The United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) states: “The United
   Nations Country Team…will support the development of a national disaster manage-
   ment institution, strengthened disaster preparedness, response and mitigation at na-
   tional and sub-national levels, and development of a National Disaster Plan linked to
   the NDP”


66	                                      NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Key DRM Projects
There are no known DRM projects in Iraq, with the exception of the DRM strategy studies
carried out by UN/OCHA

Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 Inadequate fiscal resources and manpower are the primary constraints impeding
   disaster response capacity
•	 Limited individual organizational capacity
•	 Limited access to professional equipment and training
•	 Absence of a central authority entrusted to create a strategic plan among all stake-
   holders, including nongovernmental organizations and civil society




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                        	67
                                     Jordan

Disaster/Hazard Profile

Drought

•	 Jordan experienced eight consecutive
   years of drought leading up to 2001
•	 In 1999, rainfall decreased by 70 percent,
   affecting 200,000 people

Earthquakes

•	 Dead Sea fault passes though Jordan
•	 Jordan’s three largest cities (Amman, Zar-     Jordan statistics
   qa, Irbid) are located within 30 km of the
   fault line and house more than 80 percent      Geographic area (in km2)          89,340
   of Jordan’s population                         GDP per capita, PPP               $6,007
•	 Three areas located directly on the fault      (in US$)
   are thought be especially at risk: City of     Population (in millions)           6.2
   Aqaba, industrial zone at the south end of
   the Dead Sea basin, and the hotel zone at      Population density                  68
   the northeast end of the Dead Sea              (person/per km2)
                                                  Urban population                    79
National Policy and Legislation                   (% of total population)
Disaster Risk Management Master Plan Frame-       HDI country rank                    95
work of Amman (2008):                             (out of 187)
•	 Includes analysis on emergency manage-
   ment system; building code adoption, im-
   plementation, and enforcement; land use;         Jordan: Number of Hazards
                                                            1980–2010
   and environmental management
•	 Provides goals, policies, and advice on
                                                                      2
   DRM to cities and national institutions              3
                                                                                Drought
•	 Conforms to international standards                                          Extreme
                                                                                Temperature
•	 Evaluates legal and institutional framework
                                                                          2     Flood
   regarding governance, operations, and                                        Storm
   maintenance
                                                            3
•	 Higher Council of Civil Defense (HCCD) is
   the Coordinating Agency for Emergency
   Management (Civil Defense Law 18, 1999);
   it established three committees on media,
   relief, and earthquakes




68	                                   NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Disaster Risk Management Institutions
•	 HCCD, in the Ministry of Interior
•	 Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation
•	 National Center for Security
•	 DRM National Building Council
•	 Natural Resources Authority of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan

CAS
DRM and climate change are not cited in CAS

Key DRM Projects
Establishment of a disaster information management system, DesInventar

GFDRM Projects
•	 Country disaster risk profiling and assessment
•	 National DRM system, including necessary legal and institutional frameworks for inter-
   ministerial coordination
•	 Increase institutional capacity

UNDP Projects
•	 Building National Capacity for Earthquake Risk Reduction in Amman
•	 Building National Capacity for Earthquake Risk Reduction in Aqaba Special Econom-
   ic Zone
•	 Strengthening of key civil defense buildings in relation to seismic and flash flood risks
   in the governorates of Amman, Zarqa, and Salt
•	 Inclusion of provisions for seismic structural assessment and retrofitting design in the
   Jordan Building Code
•	 Early warning system for floods and droughts in Petra (under development)

Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 Lack of financial support for institutions
•	 DRM laws do not support local ownership
•	 Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation has not integrated DRM strategy
   into Executive Program

Risk Assessment
•	 Seismic Risk Assessment in Greater Amman, late 2008, sponsored by UNDP
•	 Seismic Hazard Assessment for Building Codes, 2000–2007, sponsored by USAID and
   USGS
•	 Seismic Risk Assessment for Aqaba, 2011, sponsored by UNDP and the SDC
•	 A joint assessment report for Jordan; a seismic hazard map was produced for the
   region to benefit practitioners and policy makers concerned with seismic design

A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	69
                                         Kuwait

Disaster Risk Reduction Institutions
•	 Kuwait Civil Defense in Ministry of Interior
•	 Fire Service Department
•	 Emergency Medical Services
•	 Al-Ahmadi Governorate Security
   Directorate
•	 Coastguards
•	 Kuwait Red Crescent Society

Key DRM Project
Development of expert rapid response team                     Kuwait statistics
under centralized command to assist field             Geographic area                     17, 820
teams                                                 (in km2)
                                                      GDP per capita, PPP                $54,654
Reported Challenges/Gaps                              (in US$)
•	 Rapid urbanization is affecting key                Population (in millions)              2.8
   resources
                                                      Population density                    154
•	 Limited institutional capacity and resources       (person/per km2)
   to link DRM to urban planning, economics,
   and sustainable development policies               Urban population                          98
                                                      (% of total population)
Risk Assessment                                       HDI country rank                          63
No assessment available                               (out of 187)



                                                            Kuwait: Number of hazards
                                                                   1980–2010


                                                                                        Flood




                                                                       1




70	                                       NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                                      Lebanon

National Policy and Legislation
The 2004 Construction Law and Appendices
Law 646 were superseded by the 2005 Public
Safety Law 14293, which details the:
•	 Establishment of a building code for design
   and analysis of buildings greater than 10 m
   (three stories) in regard to earthquakes
Safety Law 14293 provides additional mea-
   sures, including:
•	 Fire hazard and protection for buildings,
   industries, and factories that have not ob-      Lebanon statistics
   tained a planning permit
                                                    Geographic area                     10,450
•	 Buildings under construction require a cer-      (in km2)
   tificate of compliance from a reputable Bu-
   reau of Verifiers                                GDP per capita, PPP                $14,709
                                                    (in US$)
Through the Environment Protection Law 444
of 2002, the National Environmental Council is      Population (in millions)              4.3
responsible for:
                                                    Population density                    413
•	 Identifying national environmental objec-        (person/per km2)
   tives and action plans                           Urban population                      87
•	 Chapter 9, article 50 states national hazard     (% of total population)
   mitigation action plans are a priority for the
                                                    HDI country rank                      71
   country and should be developed soon             (out of 187)
   to provide adequate DRM tools in case of
   natural hazard or war
                                                          Lebanon: Number of hazards
CAS                                                               1980–2010
•	 No mention of DRM in CAS (2006–9)                                                   Flood
                                                                                       Storm
•	 DRM was accounted for in the Forest Fire
   Strategy approved by the Council of Minis-
   ters in 2009
                                                           2                     2
Key DRM Projects
•	 UNDP and Italian Civil Protection: Build na-
   tional and municipal DRM capacity. Since
   2009, under the supervision of the Prime
   Minister’s office, UNDP is developing the Di-
   saster Reduction and Management in Leb-
   anon project, until 2014. This has led to the establishment of a National Response
   Framework and the upgrading of civil defense capacities. Further, a Flood Risk Man-
   agement, Water Harvesting, and Soil Conservation project was completed in 2011.


A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                            	71
•	 World Bank and GFDRR Project: In cooperation with UNISDR, develop partnerships for
   DRM exchange and best practices.
•	 Al-Fayhaa Sustainable Development Strategy (AFSDS): In 2011, begin integrating and
   assessing DRM risk into urban planning and municipal management.

Risk Assessment
•	 Map of flood-prone areas produced in 2008
•	 According to HFA report, a National Risk Assessment Profile was planned for April 2011
•	 Map of landslide areas has been produced
•	 Tripoli risk profile




72	                                    NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                                          Libya

Disaster/Hazard Profile
•	 Flood (1995): Damages totaling US$42.2
   million
•	 Food security: In 1990s, Libya imported 60
   percent of its food; deserts in Libya are sub-
   ject to drought
•	 Climate change: Increasing vulnerability of
   livestock because of lack of water resourc-
   es and loss of grazing sites; increasing salin-
   ity in the northern area

Risk Assessment
                                                     Libya statistics
No assessment available
                                                     Geographic area                      1,760
                                                     (in km2)
                                                     GDP per capita, PPP               $16,855
                                                     (in US$, 2009)
                                                     Population (in millions)             0.64
                                                     Population density                    4
                                                     (person/per km2)
                                                     Urban population                      78
                                                     (% of total population)
                                                     HDI country rank                      64
                                                     (out of 187)


                                                            Libya: Number of hazards
                                                                    1980–2010




                                                                                  Flood

                                                                        1




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	73
                                         Malta

Disaster/Hazard Profile
Malta has not reported a disaster between
1980–2010

Water supply
•	 During tourist seasons, the population tri-
   ples, which puts a strain on groundwater
   resources

Climate change
•	 Sea-level rise will have a significant impact
   on drinking water
                                                     Malta statistics
•	 Interface between freshwater and seawa-
   ter will decrease by 1 m, so high salinity will   Geographic area                 316
   be close to extraction                            (in km2)
•	 50 percent chance that there is a 3 degree        GDP per capita, PPP           $27,294
   increase in mean temperature by 2100              (in US$)
•	 50 percent chance that there is a 17 per-         Population (in millions)        0.419
   cent decrease in precipitation by 2100
                                                     Population density              1,300
Key DRM Projects                                     (person/per km2)
                                                     Urban population                94.7
•	 Construction of desalination plants
                                                     (% of total population)
UN Framework Convention on Climate                   HDI country rank                 36
Change (UNFCCC) First National                       (out of 187)
Communications:
•	 Compilation of annual greenhouse gas in-
   ventory from 1990–2000
•	 Performing greenhouse gas abatement analysis
•	 Creating public awareness through workshop, publications, Web site, TV, news, and
   others




74	                                      NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                                    Morocco

Disaster/Hazard Profile
Hotspots
•	 World Bank 2004 study ranked the country
   58 among top 85 countries at risk, estimat-
   ing 30.4 percent of the population and 33.4
   percent of GDP are at risk from two or more
   hazards
•	 Safi-Casablanca axis is the main hazard
   hotspot

National Policy and Legislation
Water and Environment Department, UNDP,            Morocco statistics
and national strategy for DRM in 2007:             Geographic area (in km2)           446,600
•	 Enhance governance and institutional            GDP per capita, PPP                 $4,986
   effectiveness                                   (in US$)
•	 Reinforce monitoring mechanisms         and     Population (in millions)             32.3
   emergency response capacity
                                                   Population density                    72
•	 Foster a culture of prevention and security
                                                   (person/per km2)
•	 Reduce latent risks
                                                   Urban population                      57
•	 Improve catastrophe forecasting                 (% of total population)
•	 The Ministry of Economic and General Af-
                                                   HDI country rank                      130
   fairs created a technical DRM committee
                                                   (out of 187)
   in 2009 in cooperation with the Ministry of
   Finance and Ministry of Interior

Disaster Risk Management Institutions                Morocco: Number of hazards
                                                             1980–2010
•	 Water and Environment Department of the                                        Drought
                                                               2   5
   State Secretariat for the Energy, Mines, Wa-                          1        Earthquake
   ter, and Environment Ministry (WED)                                    1
                                                                                  Extreme
                                                                                  Temperature
•	 Ministry of Economics and General Affairs                                      Flood
                                                                                  Storm
•	 Ministry of Finance                                       19

•	 Ministry of Interior

Key DRM Projects
•	 Control against the effects of drought (US$338 million)
•	 Drought Emergency Program (US$650 million)
•	 Risk Perception of Communities and Communal Development Plan (US$200,000)
•	 Rainfed Agriculture Development Project



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	75
GFDRM Projects
•	 Country disaster risk assessments

Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 No credible insurance mechanism for DRM




76	                                    NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                                        Oman

Disaster/Hazard Profile
Storms
•	 Gonu in 2007 and Phet in 2010 caused 24 fa-
   talities and severely damaged infrastructure
•	 Storms have killed 155 people since 1980,
   with damages reaching US$3.95 billion
Droughts and flood
•	 Are periodic
•	 Approximately 5 percent of population ex-
   posed to drought
National Policy and Legislation                     Oman statistics
•	 Hyogo Framework                                  Geographic area                   309,500
•	 Civil defense coordinates all activities         (in km2)
•	 In 2010, began reformulation of national         GDP per capita, PPP               $28,880
   plan for crisis management                       (in US$)
Disaster Risk Management Institutions               Population (in millions)             2.8
•	 National Committee for Civil Defence             Population density                   9
                                                    (person/per km2)
Key DRM Projects
•	 Established permanent centers to manage          Urban population                     72
   disasters                                        (% of total population)

•	 Established quick response teams to man-         HDI country rank                     89
   age catastrophic events                          (out of 187)

Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 Disaster data are scarce                                 Oman: Number of hazards
•	 Lack of coordination among government                           1980–2010
   agencies working in emergency response
•	 The national-level committee responsible
                                                                                 Storm
   for emergency situations needs to meet pe-
   riodically to plan for upcoming disasters                           5
•	 Lack of proactive measures to face disasters
•	 Lack of proper preparation for storms de-
   spite their regular recurrence
•	 Insufficient warnings to people in remote villages and cities
•	 Vital lifeline structures were built in susceptible areas and were cut off from access
   during recent cyclones
Risk Assessment
No assessment available

A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	77
                                           Qatar

Disaster/Hazard Profile
•	 No reported disasters from 1980–2010
•	 Climate change could have an adverse
   effect in terms of sea level; according to
   the Arab Environment report, a 1 meter rise
   in sea level could reduce land area by 2.6
   percent

National Policy and Legislation
Civil Defense is the lead agency for disaster risk
management
                                                       Qatar statistics
Disaster Risk Management Institutions
                                                       Geographic area (in km2)       11,440
•	 Civil Defense in Ministry of Interior
                                                       GDP per capita, PPP            $88,919
•	 Ministry of Environment                             (in US$)
•	 Qatari Red Crescent
                                                       Population (in millions)        1.87
Key DRM Projects                                       Population density               152
                                                       (person/per km2)
Establishment of a regional center for disaster
risk management                                        Urban population                 96
                                                       (% of total population)
Risk Assessment                                        HDI country rank                 37
                                                       (out of 187)
No risk assessment available




78	                                        NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                                    Saudi Arabia

Disaster/Hazard Profile
Floods
•	 Floods are the most recurrent natural hazard
•	 Major floods in Jeddah in 2009 and 2011
•	 The most severe losses and/or damages
   come from low-frequency events that go
   unnoticed

Droughts
•	 Source of concern due to large-scale mi-
   gration
•	 Sandstorms affect entire country, used to          Saudi Arabia statistics
   be only eastern part
                                                      Geographic area (in km2)        2,150,000
Earthquakes                                           GDP per capita, PPP                 $24,434
•	 Risk is significant because country is located     (in US$)
   on Arabian tectonic plate                          Population (in millions)             28.1
•	 Volcanic activity may affect earthquakes
                                                      Population density                    13
National Policy and Legislation                       (person/per km2)
                                                      Urban population                      82
General Directorate of Civil Defense (GDCD) is
                                                      (% of total population)
the main agency responsible for DRM and is re-
sponsible for the following:                          HDI country rank                      56
                                                      (out of 187)
•	 Disaster risk identification, response, or miti-
   gation measures
•	 Establishment of an early warning system                   Number of Hazards
                                                                  1980–2010
•	 Ensuring critical infrastructure is operating
   after disaster                                                    1
Presidency of Meteorology and Environment                                         Flood
(PME) is the focal point for the Hyogo Frame-                                     Storm
                                                                         10
work and is responsible for the following:
•	 Coordinating DRM activities and building
   cross-sectoral ownership

Disaster Risk Management Institutions
•	   GDCD at the Ministry of Interior
•	   PME
•	   Ministry of Foreign Affairs
•	   Saudi Geological Survey
•	   King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology


A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                           	79
GFDRM Projects
•	 Country disaster risk profiling and assessment
•	 National DRM system, including necessary legal and institutional frameworks for inter-
   ministerial coordination
•	 Increasing institutional capacity

CAS
No CAS available

Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 Lack of early warning system or emergency management plan
•	 Lack of institutional capacity
•	 DRM institutions are fragmented
•	 Lack of funding to perform necessary functions and coordinate effectively
•	 Collection of data limited

Risk Assessment
•	 Seismic and volcanic risk plans developed by USGS and World Bank
•	 City of Jeddah (US$5 million) for risk assessment and mitigation plans




80	                                     NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                            Syrian Arab Republic

Disaster/Hazard Profile
•	 Droughts are most common disaster, over
   2 million people exposed in past three de-
   cades, followed by floods and storms
•	 No major earthquakes have occurred, but
   several moderate quakes were recorded
   with no casualties

National Policy and Legislation
•	 Civil Defense law
•	 Procedures against marine pollution
•	 Seismic building codes                           Syria statistics
                                                    Geographic area (in km2)                  185,200
Disaster Risk Management Institutions
                                                    GDP per capita, PPP                       $5,262
•	 Civil Defense                                    (in US$, 2010)
•	 Red Crescent                                     Population (in millions)                   20.8
Key DRM Projects                                    Population density                          111
                                                    (person/per km2)
•	 Preparation of a disaster information man-
   agement system (DesInventar) database            Urban population                            55
                                                    (% of total population)
•	 Strengthening Capacity Development for
   Disaster Risk Management (UNDP/SDC)              HDI country rank (out of                    119
   with following objectives: strengthen, at the    187)
   central and local levels, institutional frame-
   work and legislative systems for compre-
   hensive DRM; improve access to reliable                 Syria: Number of hazards

   and comprehensive information on disas-                        1980–2010

   ter risks and disaster risk management; and
                                                                     2                Drought
   develop master plan and earthquake risk
                                                                                      Flood
   management framework for the city of Da-                      1                    Storm
                                                                         5
   mascus
•	 Master of Science degree program in risk
   and disaster management (Damascus Uni-
   versity/UNDP)
•	 National Drought Early Warning System (FAO/SDC)

PRSP/CAS
Five Year Plan for Development 2011–2015 provides a chapter on disaster risk reduction




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	81
Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 Lack of safety rules in designing buildings and infrastructure
•	 Lack of public awareness on safety rules and procedures
•	 Need laws and legislation and coordination mechanisms that organize the work of
   disasters
•	 Emergency management plans are still reactive
•	 Insufficient financial resources allocated for disaster risk reduction

Risk Assessment
No assessment available




82	                                      NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                                       Tunisia

Disaster/Hazard Profile
•	 Flood of October 2007: Affected Sabalet
   Ben Ammar region
•	 Water resources depletion: Rainfall is ex-
   tremely scarce, but with high variability
•	 One-third of aquifers are overexploited,
   with many subject to saline intrusion
•	 Deteriorating water quality due to soil
   salinity

National Policy and Legislation
Water scarcity plans
•	 Invest in knowledge, monitoring, and water
   pricing to encourage farmers’ efficiency
•	 Additional investments in wastewater reuse
   and aquifer recharge

Climate change
•	 Adaptation plans on health, agriculture,
   and tourism
                                                   Tunisia statistics
•	 12th Economic Development Plan will have
   water as a priority                             Geographic area            163,600
                                                   (in thousands of km2)
Disaster Risk Management Institutions              GDP per capita, PPP        $9,415
•	 Ministry of Environment and Sustainable         (in US$)
   Development (MESD) has leading role on          Population (in millions)    10.67
   flooding, droughts, and earthquakes
                                                   Population density           68
•	 Sahara and Sahel Observatories are lead         (person/per km2)
   agencies for desertification
                                                   Urban population             67
•	 National Office for Civil Protection (NCP) is
                                                   (% of total population)
   lead agency for disaster response
                                                   HDI country rank             94
Key DRM Projects                                   (out of 187)
World Bank project on solid waste manage-
ment, urban water supply, water sector investments, and cultural heritage

Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 Lack of early warning system
•	 Governance interface issues between national and local governments



A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                         	83
Risk Assessment                                        Tunisia: Number of hazards
                                                               1980–2010
National Report on Disaster Prevention pro-
vides assessment of disaster reduction policies
                                                                     1


                                                                                    Drought

                                                                                    Flood

                                                               8




84	                                    NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                           United Arab Emirates

Disaster/Hazard Profile
•	 Dust storms are frequent hazards
•	 According to Globe of Natural Hazards,
   UAE lies in a very strong earthquake zone 2
   (MM VII)
•	 Coastal areas are vulnerable to potential
   sea-level rise

Disaster Risk Management Institutions
•	 The  National Crisis and Emergency Man-
   agement Authority (NCEMA) of the Civil
   Defense (Ministry of Interior); part of the     United Arab Emirates statistics
   Higher National Security Council
                                                   Geographic area (in km2)          83,600
•	 Tawazun Disaster Management City (TDMC,
                                                   GDP per capita, PPP               $48,222
   underway by 2015)
                                                   (in US$)
Key DRM Projects                                   Population (in millions)            7.9
•	 As part of climate adaptation measures,         Population density                  90
   several initiatives to protect the environ-     (person/per km2)
   ment and decrease carbon emissions in-
                                                   Urban population                    78
   clude the launch of “Masdar City,” the first
                                                   (% of total population)
   carbon-free city in the world, as well as the
   launch of the largest program in sustainable    HDI country rank                    30
   energy, with initial investment exceeding       (out of 187)
   US$18 billion in solar energy and the reduc-
   tion and management of carbon emissions
•	 UAE also established the “Zaid Prize of Future Energy,” with US$202 million allocated
   for innovations in sustainable energy

Reported Challenges/Gaps
There are no reported assessment studies on natural or climate-related hazards

Risk Assessment
No assessment available




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                         	85
                             West Bank and Gaza

Disaster/Hazard Profile
Earthquakes
•	 Historical earthquakes in the region range
   from 1 to 6.5 in terms of magnitude; the
   1927 quake had a death toll of at least 500
   people
•	 Existing geology will cause landslides, lique-
   faction, and amplification of seismic waves

Floods
•	 Flash flooding claimed the lives of hundreds
   of people in 2011
                                                      West Bank and Gaza statistics
•	 Heavy rains damaged many farmlands in
                                                      Geographic area (in km2)            6,020
   March 2003
                                                      Population                           3.9
Climate change                                        (in millions, 2009)
•	 Drought may increase due to severe water           Population density                  649
   shortages, which are chronic in Gaza and           (person/ per km2)
   part of the West Bank
                                                      Urban population                     72
National Policy and Legislation                       (% of total population)

Higher Council of Civil Defense (HCCD), based         GDP per capita, PPP
on Civil Defense Law No. 3 of 1998, is respon-        (in US$)
sible for DRM by providing:                           HDI country rank                    114
                                                      (out of 187)
•	 Disaster risk identification, response, and
   mitigation measures
•	 Training for civilians for early response
                                                                West Bank and Gaza:
General Directorate of Civil Defense (GDCD)                      Number of hazards
provides the following on DRM:                                        1980–2010


•	 Early warning system
•	 Coordination for disaster response                                             Flood

•	 Coordinates response between govern-                                     3
   ment organizations and NGO

Disaster Risk Management Institutions
•	 HCCD
•	 GDCD in Ministry of Interior
•	 Ministry of Local Government
•	 Ministry of Transport



86	                                       NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
•	 Ministry of Telecommunication and Information Technology
•	 Ministry of Agriculture
•	 Earth Science and Seismic Engineering Center (ESSEC) at An-Najah National University
•	 National Agency for Disaster Risk Mitigation (NADRM)
•	 Palestinian Red Crescent Society

Key DRM Projects
Disaster Risk Reduction Framework: Four Integrated Pillars, FAO

GFDRM Projects
Country disaster risk profiling and assessment

Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 Lack of land-use planning or insufficient building codes
•	 Lack of institutional capacity
•	 Legal framework for DRM is limited
•	 DRM institutions are fragmented

Risk Assessment
•	 Assessment of Disaster Risk Reduction by UNDP
•	 Vulnerability of buildings in main cities (Jerusalem, Hebron, Ramallah, Nablus, Jenin,
   Tulkarem, and Jericho) was assessed by ESSEC between 2003 and 2007 as part of the
   joint “Earthquake Hazard Assessment for Building Codes” (2000–2007) sponsored by
   USAID and USGS—it benefits practitioners and policy makers concerned with seismic
   design




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                           	87
                               Republic of Yemen

Disaster/Hazard Profile
•	 Annual average economic loss: US$200
   million
•	 October 2008 floods caused damage of
   US$1.6 billion, about 6 percent of GDP

National Policy and Legislation
•	 In 1997, Decree No. 24 on Civil Defense
   (CD) provided a mandate of CD as a lead
   agency for disaster management
•	 In 1997, Cabinet Decree No. 52 formed a
   committee to prepare for disaster man-             Yemen statistics
   agement                                            Geographic area (in km2)         523,000
•	 In 1997, MoPIC Decree No. 123 formed a
                                                      GDP per capita, PPP               $2,349
   committee to establish an institution for
                                                      (in US$)
   managing natural disasters
                                                      Population (in millions)           24.8
•	 In 1997, Executive Bylaw No. 201 for CD de-
   fined the role of the Supreme Council of           Population density                  46
   Civil Defense as providing the following:          (person/per km2)
      —	 Policy direction                             Urban population                    32
      —	 Approval for plans for disaster prepared-    (% of total population)
         ness and response                            HDI country rank                   154
•	 In 1998, Decree No. 7 on the function of CD        (out of 187)
   in the governorates and districts
•	 In 2002, Water Law No. 33 provided some
   sections on flood risk reduction                        Yemen: Number of hazards
                                                                  1980–2010
•	 In 2003, Decree No. 28 by the Minister of
                                                                    2     2
   Water and Environment established the En-
   vironmental Emergency Unit
                                                                                 Earthquake
•	 In 2006, UNDP prepared a national DRM                                         Flood
   plan that has not been approved yet by                            26
                                                                                 Storm
   the government

Key DRM Projects
UNDP
•	 Disaster Preparedness, Management, and Recovery (2003–9) with the aim of strength-
   ening the capacity of national government institutions at the central and governor-
   ate levels in disaster management
•	 Prepared a disaster information management system (DesInventar) database




88	                                       NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
•	 Early Recovery Project for the Livelihoods Sector of the Flood-Affected Areas in Hadra-
   mout and Al-Mahara Governorates

Yemen Flood Control Protection
•	 City of Taiz and surrounding area (US$81 million approximately)
•	 Hadramout, infrastructure repair (US$10 million)
•	 Al-Mahara governorate, infrastructure repair (US$35 million)

GFDRM Projects
•	 Country disaster risk assessments; national DRM system, including necessary legal and
   strategic frameworks for interministerial and intersectoral coordination
•	 Pilot activities within certain sectors and/or cross-cutting themes
•	 Damage, loss, and needs assessment (DLNA) training in 2008 and 2011

CAS
CAS 2010–13 objectives:
•	 Preventive action to deal effectively with scarcity and risk
•	 Reduce depletion of water
•	 Mitigate impacts of natural disasters and climate change adaptation
•	 Establish a mechanism for integrated risk management for disasters, climate change,
   food insecurity, and water scarcity

Reported Challenges/Gaps
•	 Lack of early warning systems
•	 Lack of institutional capacity
•	 Lack of national codes of practice
•	 No sustained financing mechanism(s) for DRM
•	 Very weak coordination between government agencies during response to disaster
   events
•	 Insufficient budgets to procure minimum equipment

Risk Assessment
•	 Three probabilistic risk assessments completed (national level, for the city of Sana’a,
   and for Hadramout and Al-Mahara governorates)
•	 DLNA conducted in Hadramout and Al-Mahara governorates after floods of 2008




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	89
                    ANNEX 2.
                    SUMMARY
                  OF THE JEDDAH
                  CONSULTATIVE
                   WORKSHOP




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW         	91
      Minutes of Drm Workshop
      November 17–18, 2013, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
A Middle East and North Africa Regional consultation workshop was held in Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia, on November 17 and 18, 2013, under the leadership of the Presidency of
Meteorology and Environment (PME) of Saudi Arabia. Fifty representatives from 14 gov-
ernments in MNA and international organizations attended the 2-day workshop to ex-
change DRM experiences and provide feedback on the current report. This annex con-
tains a compilation of the main messages and participant’s comments from the sessions.



DAY 1

MORNING SESSION—OPENING AND PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT
H.E. Chairman of the Executive Bureau of Arab and Islamic Environment Ministers and
President of the PME of Saudi Arabia, Abdul Aziz Al Jasser
Mr. Al Jasser opened the workshop by explaining the importance of having a prepared-
ness strategy and performing risk assessments to limit damages and losses from events
like floods. He described the long-term support provided by the Global Environment Fa-
cility (GEF) and the World Bank, which will help Islamic countries prepare for and man-
age emergencies. Mr. Al Jasser thanked the GFDRR for sponsoring the workshop, which
will help advance the implementation of the Islamic Work Plan.
Franck Bousquet, Sector Manager, Social and Urban Development, Disaster Risk
Management, MNA Region, World Bank
Mr. Bousquet described the world’s current natural disaster landscape and pointed out
that 2011 was the costliest year on record, with US$380 billion reported in damages and
losses. Over the past 25 years, 40 million people have been affected by 370 natural
disasters, floods being the most recurrent event. Given the impact of disasters in MNA
countries’ economies, developing systematic risk assessments, establishing early warning
systems, and improving the capacity of governments to cope with natural hazards be-
fore and after they strike have become a top priority. Mr. Bousquet noted that the World
Bank is working alongside the MNA governments to build their resilience and, hence,
the purpose of the workshop was to gather feedback from countries’ representatives
to better address their needs. Mr. Bousquet praised the ongoing efforts of international
organizations such as UNISDR, UNDP, and GFDRR in advancing this agenda.




92	                                    NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Overview of Natural Disasters in MNA: Regional/National Progress and Proposed DRM
Action—Andrea Zanon, Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist, MNA Region,
World Bank
The Task Team Leader for the report, Natural Disasters in MNA: A Regional Overview, Mr.
Zanon presented the major trends regarding natural disasters in the region. Among the
main issues that require attention are the rapid urbanization rates and informal coastal
settlements that increase those populations’ vulnerability to sea-level rise and flood risk.
Furthermore, flash floods, the most extensive natural hazard in the region, often follow
long periods of droughts. Earthquakes are the second deadliest events, accounting for
24 percent of total disasters. Mr. Zanon also outlined the main DRM initiatives, as detailed
in the report, and invited the workshop participants to comment on the findings and
proposed way forward.

FEEDBACK ON THE REPORT
The following comments were provided during the workshop by participants. To ensure
maximal information, the World Bank MNA staff followed up with all participants after the
workshop and received additional comments from several countries and partners. These
comments were duly integrated into the report.

Potential use of the report

The workshop attendees praised the report for providing compelling disaster evidence
that will guide MNA governments in their DRM decision making, progress, and strategies.
Additionally, the report provides practical best practices from other countries and intro-
duces the experience of international specialists.

Approach to DRM in MNA

As noted by one of the members from the Saudi Arabia delegation, most Arab countries
manage disaster risk on a response and recovery basis. In contrast, it is important that the
focus shifts toward a concerted effort that includes preparedness. In this sense, the World
Bank team noted that most MNA countries do have preparedness plans, but they either
are not implemented or outdated. Performing risk assessments would enable govern-
ments to quantify the stresses that natural disasters put on the balance sheet and gover-
nance of the country. This quantification then would facilitate the establishment or updat-
ing of disaster preparation plans. Additionally, as the Jordan representative pointed out,
raising awareness among residents is an essential tool to build preparedness. Even when
natural disasters are not so frequent, communities need to be ready. For that purpose, as
highlighted by the Arab League representative, developing national preparedness plans
is not enough: it also is necessary to perform drills and strengthen capacity building. He
brought up the case of New Orleans in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. The city had
appropriate DRM plans and an institutional structure, but the population had not been
trained through emergency simulations. The Egyptian delegate sought clarification on
how the World Bank prioritizes its DRM interventions in MNA countries. The World Bank
explained that its DRM team, in collaboration with GFDRR and 65 international partners




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	93
(countries and international organizations), periodically identifies low-capacity and high-
risk priority countries (20 globally) to guide DRM work decisions. The World Bank also clari-
fied that it is currently developing DRM activities in eight MNA countries and that it aims to
expand to other MNA countries, particularly those most vulnerable to disasters.

Lack of data

Risk assessments are a good starting point for solving the deficient data issue in most
countries. If there are no historical data, it is difficult to predict potential disaster damages
and losses or plan for disasters without risk assessments and vulnerability studies. UNISDR
noted that DesInventar data are available in eight countries and have been inventoried
by the countries themselves, as compared to the data provided by Em-Dat, which is a
foreign institution that may not have access to all the correct information. Nevertheless,
explained a Saudi delegate, the main issue with data is that governments do not always
share what they regard as sensitive information. This sensitivity applies especially to data
pertaining to the damage and loss assessments and risk assessments. The World Bank
team highlighted that currently the lack of quantitative data has been compensated by
qualitative studies, such as the rapid risk profiling performed in Tripoli, Lebanon, and in Dji-
bouti. These studies look at the institutional framework and urban vulnerability. The mayor
of Jeddah pointed out that there is, however, a growing understanding of the benefits
of sharing data. Sharing is the reason that a center for compilation of data is being es-
tablished in Saudi Arabia for OIC countries to access. It will be operational next year. The
Deputy Minister of Public Works and Highway for the Republic of Yemen highlighted that
the World Bank presentation did not capture all of the historical data on disasters. Mr.
Zanon from the World Bank and Mr. Zubair from UNDP explained that the data used to
develop the report’s hazard maps (which are based on the EM-DAT database) use data
provided by national governments, which in many cases do not capture small-scale di-
sasters, such as those in the Republic of Yemen and in Djibouti in 2013.

National and international coordination on the agenda and its operationalization

Several participants, in particular, the Egyptian, Jordanian, Lebanese, Saudi, and Tuni-
sian delegates, underscored that a higher degree of cooperation is necessary at both
the national and international levels. At the national level, and horizontally, different
ministries and institutions need to work together and share information. This cooperation
will help overcome some of the data deficiencies and the fragmentation of initiatives.
Often, DRM efforts are spread across different agencies and none of them have enough
authority or responsibility to lead and improve the DRM strategy. The national level, verti-
cal cooperation also is necessary, enabling communication and synchronization of work
from the national government to the provincial and local authorities, and vice versa.
At the international level, international institutions working on DRM need to coordinate
to avoid duplication of efforts and to improve results. International organizations should
also partner with national governments to help the latter program potential budget ex-
penditures on DRM measures.

Integration of conflict into preparedness policies

The mayor of Tripoli emphasized the relevance of including conflict as a variable when
considering national and urban preparedness plans. Conflicts burden budgets as well,


94	                                        NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
and some of these conflicts relate to environmental issues, such as water scarcity. How-
ever, as the UNDP delegate explained, in countries that are affected by conflict, it is even
more difficult to assess disaster vulnerabilities. The World Bank team emphasized that the
scope of this report was to assess the risks posed by natural hazards and describe how
the region is coping with them. Nevertheless, this platform of risk management could be
used to build a multisectoral risk reduction plan, because risk management is a cross-
cutting sector. The methodology being used for risk assessments on the effects of the
Syrian refugee crisis is the same as that of the natural hazard risk assessment, but this
methodology is not included in the scope of the present report.

AFTERNOON SESSION—CASE STUDIES
The DRM Pakistani Experience—Lieutenant General Nadeem Ahmed, Former Chairman,
National Disaster Management Authority in Pakistan
Mr. Ahmed provided an overview of Pakistan’s experience in DRM at the national level,
which is relevant to other countries in MNA. Pakistan faces risks from various types of
natural disasters including cyclones, flooding, landslides, and earthquakes. The severe
2005 earthquake that hit northern Pakistan highlighted the country’s high vulnerability to
disaster risks. Since then, the government has taken significant steps toward establishing
a comprehensive DRM framework. It includes an integrated DRM mechanism that links
the vital functions of preparedness/risk reduction and early disaster recovery to longer-
term reconstruction and rehabilitation.
During the comments session, it was acknowledged by the countries’ representatives
that such a system can be adapted to MNA countries. A very similar organizational clus-
ter structure already exists in some countries such as Lebanon, where the High Relief
Commission is directly linked to the prime minister. Nonetheless, the main emphasis in
this type of structure, which leads from the national level to the provinces and then to
the municipalities, is to ensure that those levels are well connected and that information
does not get lost.
Building Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change in Djibouti—Samatar Abdi
Osman, GIS Specialist, Djibouti Centre for Research Studies (CERD)
Djibouti is vulnerable to droughts, flash floods, earthquakes, and volcanism. Mr. Abdi pre-
sented Djibouti’s risk profile, noting that the country suffered a 4-year drought between
2008 and 2011 that resulted in a 3.9 percent GDP contraction per year. The large impact
of the drought led to the implementation of the first drought Post-Disaster Needs Assess-
ment (PDNA) in the world, which helped the country to globally leverage more than
US$40 million for recovery. These funds have been used to improve Djibouti’s resilience to
external shocks. Since 2007, a number of DRM efforts have been put in place, including
a risk assessment and communication platform. The latter comprises completed disaster
preparedness plans, a hydro-meteorological network, seismic and flood risk vulnerability
assessments, and operational flood and drought early warning systems.

UNDP’s Activities in MNA—Zubair Murshed, Regional Deputy Resident Representative,
Adviser for Arab States, UN Regional Centre in Cairo, UNDP
Mr. Murshed’s presentation showcased UNDP’s ongoing and planned DRM programs,
which have assisted MNA countries in reducing their risk and impacts from natural disas-


A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	95
ters while promoting a “build back better” legal and cultural framework. Priority areas
for UNDP in MNA are policy formulation; institutional strengthening; risk assessments and
early warning systems; education, training, and awareness; and urban risk reduction. Mr.
Murshed also highlighted that UNDP has identified disaster finance, capacity of officers,
and land use as regional needs for development.

DRM Country Program in the Republic of Yemen—Abdulmalek Al-Jolahy, Deputy
Minister of Public Works and Highways, Republic of Yemen
Mr. Al-Jolahy began his presentation by offering a background on the 32 natural disas-
ters that occurred in the Republic of Yemen in the past 30 years, which caused about
US$6 billion of economic losses. Flooding was the most recurrent catastrophe, followed
by landslides, earthquakes, and droughts. The October 2008 flood in Hadramout and Al-
Mahara cost more than US$1.6 billion, equivalent to 6 percent of the country’s GDP. This
devastating flood demonstrated the Republic of Yemen’s high vulnerability to disaster
risks as well as the ineffectiveness of the existing reactive DRM system, which needs a
serious shift from disaster response to proactive risk management. Since 2007, the World
Bank and GFDRR have begun strengthening the Republic of Yemen’s national system for
DRM in view of HFA priorities.
The GFDRR financed four studies on hazard risk assessments (at the national level and
for Al-Mahara and Hadramout governorates and Sana’a), as well as flood and water-
harvesting feasibility studies. Furthermore, thanks to GFDRR, the Republic of Yemen con-
ducted a PDNA following the 2008 floods, as well as DLNA capacity-building and training
programs for Yemeni officials. The DRM country program, which slowed due to political
unrest in late 2010, prioritized 5 activities for implementation in 2014: (i) development of
the National DRM System (legal and strategic frameworks) to ensure coordination from
the national to the community level; (ii) dissemination of the risk assessments; (iii) estab-
lishment of DRM curricula; (iv) operationalization of emergency operations rooms; and
(v) establishment of city-level early warning systems. After his presentation, Mr. Al-Jolahy
showed two videos on national-level DRM progress, including the urban flood mitigation
measures (Sayla project) and the drought mitigation and water-harvesting plans.



DAY 2

MORNING SESSION

DRM for Sustainable Development—Raja Rehan Arshad, Team Leader, Sustainable
Recovery, Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery, World Bank
The increased frequency and intensity of natural disasters is threatening the world’s sus-
tainable development and poverty reduction initiatives. The loss of human lives and
economic assets, and the increased cost of reconstruction have led governments to see
DRM as an effective tool for decreasing economic shocks while improving early recov-
ery. DRM policies and measures need to be implemented to build disaster-resilient soci-
eties and communities. The objectives are twofold: (i) reduce the level of risk in societies,
while (ii) ensuring that development efforts do not increase the vulnerability to hazards,


96	                                      NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
but purposely reduce such vulnerability. Mr. Rehan’s presentation was divided into three
parts: (i) a brief presentation of the GFDRR mechanism; (ii) a general description of DRM
as an effective platform for sustainable development; and (iii) an introduction of the
PDNA and early recovery mechanisms.

The Role of Disaster Risk Financing in DRM, Including the Possibility for MNA Countries—
Emily White, Disaster Risk Financing Specialist, World Bank
Ms. White, via videoconference, introduced the disaster risk financing and insurance
(DRFI) framework and explained the burden that natural disasters place on countries’
budgets. Often, governments in developing countries have limited capacity to quickly
mobilize adequate post-disaster financing. Inadequate disaster financing can exacer-
bate the adverse socioeconomic consequences of disasters. DRFI enables countries to
increase their post-disaster financial response capacities and reduce the economic and
fiscal burdens of natural disasters by developing an integrated strategy to connect with
the broader DRM agenda. GFDRR supports developing countries in incorporating DRFI
as part of their national disaster risk management strategies by providing capacity build-
ing and technical assistance for the design and implementation of affordable and cost-
effective DRFI programs. DRFI can be classified into four broad categories: sovereign
disaster risk financing, property catastrophe risk insurance, agricultural insurance, and
disaster microinsurance. Although the categories overlap, they are useful for organizing
DRFI projects by objectives and scope.

Urban Risk Assessment in Tripoli, Lebanon—Nader Ghazal, Mayor of Tripoli
Lebanon is mainstreaming DRM into urban development. This effort led to the develop-
ment of a qualitative rapid urban risk profile, which was completed in early 2012 by the
Municipality of Tripoli, in partnership with the Lebanon DRM Center and the World Bank.
The study is now considered to be the foundation to start mainstreaming DRM into urban
development. Dr. Ghazal presented the findings of the risk profile and the recommen-
dations, which revolved around the decentralization of DRM decision making. Keeping
DRM at the municipal and community level has already proven beneficial, since it has
helped the city to adapt to, among other issues, the Syrian refugees, who have flooded
Tripoli over the past two years. A risk perception survey and a pilot project for commu-
nity-based DRM are planned as next steps of the cooperation between the World Bank
and Tripoli.

AFTERNOON SESSION

Implementation of Disaster Risk Financing Programs: The Indonesian Experience—
Bintang Susmanto, Inspector General, National Agency for Disaster Management
(BNPB), Indonesia
The presentation by Mr. Susmanto underscored Indonesia’s vulnerability to natural haz-
ards and how its DRM strategy stemmed from a risk-financing approach. With a popula-
tion of 240 million, Indonesia, a country spanning across 3 time zones, is the world’s fourth
most populated country. It is exposed regularly to seismic events, since the country sits on
an active seismic belt, resulting in yearly earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and liquefac-
tion. Additionally, severe floods and tsunamis frequently hit the country. The most devas-


A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                           	97
tating recent natural disasters include the Indian Ocean Tsunami (2004), Mount Merapi
eruption (2004), the Jogyakarta earthquake (2006), and the Padang Earthquake (2009).
Among the lessons shared by Mr. Susmanto were the necessity for a clear legal frame-
work to guide disaster risk financing and the importance of the leadership provided by
the National Disaster Management Agency to strengthen coordination among different
actors. The effective policy changes and financial allocation strategy introduced during
the past decade have helped Indonesia build resilience to natural hazards.



CONCLUSION AND CLOSING REMARKS

Closing Remarks from the Presidency of the PME of Saudi Arabia
While the workshop was taking place in Jeddah, flash floods in Riyadh caused seven
deaths. The PME eloquently reported that this tragedy underscored even more the need
for countries to have a DRM strategy that includes monitoring systems and adequate
preparedness and response measures.

Franck Bousquet, Sector Manager, Social and Urban Development, Disaster Risk
Management, MNA Region, World Bank
Mr. Bousquet thanked the PME for hosting the workshop and providing the opportunity
for the 14 country representatives and international organizations to exchange their DRM
experiences. Among the workshop’s key lessons, as stressed by Mr. Bousquet, are that
DRFI and DRM decentralization are two potential next steps for the region’s governments
to take to address disaster risks and vulnerability. The World Bank stands ready to support
MNA countries in DRM, in partnership with UNDP and UNISDR, leveraging best practices
in the region and worldwide, as shown during the successful workshop.




98	                                     NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
                         ANNEX 3.
                      Bibliography




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW            	99
EM-DAT, the OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brus-
    sels, Belgium (www.emdat.net).
FAO Aquastat (www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm).
GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction and Recovery). “Post Disaster Needs Assess-
    ment of the Drought in the Republic of Djibouti” (“Evaluation de Dommages, Pertes et Be-
    soins Suite à la Sécheresse en Republique de Djibouti”). Washington, DC, October 2011.
———. “Yemen Floods Post Disaster Needs Assessment.” Washington, DC, October 2008.
Hamdan, Fadi H., and Mousbah Rajab. “Integrating Disaster Risk Management into Urban Plan-
    ning and Management—The Union of Municipalities of Tripoli.” Lebanon Disaster Risk Man-
    agement Centre, Beirut, 2012.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report;
    Contribution of Working Groups I, II, and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergov-
    ernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva, 2007.
Jha, Abhas K., Jennifer Duyne Barenstein, Priscilla M. Phelps, et al. Safer Homes, Stronger Com-
    munities: A Handbook for Reconstruction after Disasters. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2010.
Jha, Abhas K., Robin Bloch, and Jessica Lamond. Cities and Flooding: A Guide to Integrated
    Urban Flood Risk Management for the 21st Century. GFDRR, 2011
Momani, Nail M., and Ayman S. Fadil. “Changing Public Policy Due to Saudi City of Jeddah
    Flood Disaster.” Journal of Social Sciences 6 (3), 2010.
OECD (Organisation for the Economic Co-operation and Development). Disaster Risk Financing
    in APEC Economies: Practices and Challenges. OECD Secretariat, http://www.oecd.org/daf/
    fin/insurance/OECD_APEC_DisasterRiskFinancing.pdf, 2013.
Swaireh, L. Abu. “Disaster Risk Reduction Global and Regional Context.” Regional Workshop on
    Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction in the Arab Region, “Challenges and Future
    Actions,” organized by ISDR, the World Bank, GFDRR, LAS, AASTM, Cairo, Egypt, November
    21–23, 2009.
Swiss Re. “Natural Catastrophes and Man-Made Disasters in 2010: A Year of Devastating and
    Costly Events.” Sigma 1, 2011.
Tolba, Mostafa K., and Najib W. Saab. Report of the Arab Forum for Environment and Develop-
    ment: Arab Environment; Future Challenges. Arab Forum for Environment and Development,
    2008.
———. 2009 Report of the Arab Forum for Environment and Development: Arab Environment
    Climate Change—Impact of Climate Change on Arab Countries. Beirut, Lebanon: Technical
    Publications and Environment & Development, 2009.
UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). The State of Arab Cities 2012: Chal-
    lenges of Urban Transition. www.unhabitat.org, 2012.
UNISDR (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction). “Aqaba Declaration on Disaster Risk
    Reduction in Cities.” http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/32077, 2013.
———. “The Arab Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction 2020.” http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/
    publications/18903, 2011.
———. “Disaster Risk and Poverty Trends in Jordan, Syria, Yemen: Key Findings and Policy Recom-
    mendations.” http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/27853.
———. “Drought Vulnerability in the Arab Region: Case Study—Drought in Syria, Ten Years of
    Scarce Water (2000–2010).” http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/23905, 2011.
———. “Factsheet: Overview of Disaster Risk Reduction in the Arab Region.” http://www.unisdr.
    org/we/inform/publications/31693, 2013.
———. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.” Geneva, Switzerland: Information
    Press, Oxford, UK, 2011.
———. “Implementation of the HFA—Summary of Reports (2007–2013).” www.unisdr.org/we/in-
    form/publications/32916, 2013.



100	                                       NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
———. “An Overview of Environment and Disaster Risk Reduction in the Arab Region: A Commu-
   nity Perspective.” http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/23612, 2011.
———. “Making Algeria Resilient: Achieving Disaster Risk Reduction in the Arab States—Good
   Practice Country Brief.” http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/32443, 2013.
———. “Making Lebanon Resilient: Achieving Disaster Risk Reduction in the Arab States—Good
   Practice Country Brief.” http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/32374, 2012.
———. “Progress in reducing disaster risk and implementing Hyogo Framework for Action in the
   Arab Region.” http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/14463.
———. Resilient Cities Campaign. www.unisdr.org/campaign/resilientcities.
World Bank. Adaptation to a Changing Climate in the Arab Countries: A Case for Adaptation
   Governance and Leadership in Building Climate Resilience. Washington, DC, 2012.
———. Climate Change Adaptation and Natural Disaster Preparedness in the Coastal Cities of
   North Africa. Washington, DC, 2011.
———. “The Emergency Drought Recovery Project.” Washington, DC, 2005.
———. “Natural Disaster Hotspots: A Global Risk Analysis.” Washington, DC, 2005.
———. “Poor Places, Thriving People: How the Middle East and North Africa Can Rise Above
   Spatial Disparities.” Washington, DC, 2011.
———. Turn Down the Heat: Why a 4°C Warmer World Must Be Avoided. Washington, DC, 2012.
World Bank, and GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery). Sendai Report:
   Managing Disaster Risks for a Resilient Future. Washington, DC, 2012.
———. Indonesia: Advancing a National Disaster Risk Financing Strategy—Options for Consider-
   ation. Washington, DC, 2011.




A REGIONAL OVERVIEW                                          	101
