                                                                                                   84264




Romania

Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program


Component B Sector Report



Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment

January 2014

 1.     [Type a quote from the document or the summary of an interesting point.   7. 2. 3. [4. [5. [ 6. [ [ [


Advisory Service Agreement between Ministry of Environment and Climate Change
and the International Bank of Reconstruction and Development



Beneficiary: Ministry of Environment and Climate Change




                                                                               The World Bank
                                                                 Europe and Central Asia Region



  Project co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund through OPTA 2007 – 2013
                                                          CONTENTS
Abbreviations and Acronyms ...................................................................................................... i
Acknowledgements .................................................................................................................... ii
Executive Summary .................................................................................................................. iii
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 1
2. Water Resources Availability and Use in Romania ............................................................... 2
3. Institutions and Capacity for Integrated Water Resources Management ............................... 9
4. Projected Impacts of Climate Change .................................................................................. 10
5. Relevant Policies and Programs ........................................................................................... 15
6. Climate Change Adaptation Actions in Water-related Sectors ............................................ 18
7. Conclusions – Recommended Priority Actions for ESIF (2014-2020) OPs ........................ 21
8. References ............................................................................................................................ 25
                      ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS



ABA                   River Basin Water Agency
ANAR                  “Romanian Waters” National Administration
BCM                   Billion Cubic Meters
CMIP5                 Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5
EEA                   European Environment Agency
EU                    European Union
ESIF                  European Structural and Investment Funds
GHG                   Greenhouse Gas Emissions
GIS                   Geographic Information Systems
IPCC                  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
KM                    Kilometer
MW                    Megawatt
OP                    Operational Program
RBMP                  River Basin Management Plan
SOP E                 Sectorial Operational Program on Environment
TWh                   Terawatt-hours
WSS                   Water Supply and Sanitation




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                    i
                              ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This report is an output of the World Bank’s Romania Climate Change Reimbursable
Advisory Service (RAS) Program at the request of the Government of Romania (through its
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change). It was prepared by a core team comprised of
Sanjay Pahuja and Ioan Bica, with inputs from Cesar Niculescu, Gabriel Ionita, Adina
Fagarasan, Petre Stanciu, and Thierry Davy. It also includes information from colleagues
working on other sector assessments under the RAS program, namely Stephen Hammer, Mark
Redman, and Feng Liu. This sector report benefited from the comments and suggestions of
Amal Talbi, Tapas Paul, and Rikard Liden. It was reviewed and cleared by Dina Umali-
Deininger.

The work was carried out in October - November 2013, and is based upon discussions with
and information received from the officials from a number of government departments,
agencies, and industry associations, including: Vasilie Pintilie, Dragos Cazan, Sorin Randasu
(National Administration of the Romanian Waters); George Constantin (Water Resources
Management Directorate, Department of Water, Forests and Fisheries, Ministry of
Environment and Climate Change); Olimpia Negru (Risk Management and Floods
Directorate, Department of Water, Forests and Fisheries, Ministry of Environment and
Climate Change); Diana Tenea (Ministry of Regional Development and Public
Administration); Elena Mateescu, Gheorghe Stancalie (National Administration for
Meteorology); Daniela Radulescu, Elisabeta Oprisan, (National Institute for Hydrology and
Water Management); Felix Stroe (Romanian Water Association); Ciprian Ghioc, Catalin
Gheran, Valentin Simion (Sectorial Operation Program – Environment).

The World Bank would also like to express gratitude to the Romanian Government for the
excellent working relations established during this assignment and especially the assistance of
the staff and members of the Project Implementing Unit in the Ministry of Environment and
Climate Change, namely Mihaela Smarandache, Narcis Jeler, Alexandra Ulmeanu, Gabriela
Popescu, and Bianca Moldovean.

The World Bank’s Romania Climate Change program is managed by Jian Xie and Erika
Jorgensen, under the general guidance of Laszlo Lovei, Mamta Murthi, Kulsum Ahmed, Satu
Kristiina Kahkonen, and Elisabetta Capannelli from the World Bank.




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                              ii
                              EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

  Rapid Assessment Report on Climate Change Impacts on Water Resources in
                                 Romania

                            (Romania Climate Change RAS)
                                              ---

Objective

1. The purpose of this report is to assess the climate change impacts on water resources in
   Romania from an integrated, multi-sectoral perspective, and to recommend priority
   actions for addressing the identified risks and opportunities. The analysis is presented
   from an integrated water resources perspective, thereby including all pertinent water-
   related sectors, viz. municipal water supply and sanitation, industrial water supply,
   agriculture, energy generation, environment, and disaster management. More details on
   specific water-related aspects can be found in the companion rapid assessment reports for
   the energy, urban, and agricultural and rural development sectors. The recommended
   priority actions are presented in the context of consideration for possible financing under
   the Operational Programs funded by the European Structural and Investment Funds
   (ESIF) in 2014-2020 planning horizon. This analysis is based on the available
   information on the current status of water resources sector in Romania, along with the
   existing knowledge on the anticipated impacts of climate change in this sector.

Water Resources Availability and Demands

2. The total surface water potential of Romania amounts to 127 Billion Cubic Meters
   (BCM)/year, with the internal river basins contributing 40 BCM and 87 BCM available
   from the Danube basin. The groundwater potential is estimated at 10 BCM/year. The
   utilizable fraction of the total (surface and ground) water resources, as defined by the
   existing capacity to extract and use water, is 40 BCM/year. In contrast the total water
   demand stands at 8 BCM/year.

3. With a current population of 20.2 million, the average water availability in Romania
   amounts to approx. 2000 cubic meters per capita per year. While this value is above the
   threshold generally defined for water stress (1700 cubic meter per capita per year), it is
   lower than the average value for Europe (approx. 4500 cubic meters per capita per year),
   and underscores the need for good management to ensure resource conservation and
   sustainability.

4. There is a significant inter-annual variation in water resources availability. In the driest
   years the water availability has fallen to 20 BCM. There is also a significant variation


Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                           iii
   within Romania, with the basins of Jiu, Arges-Vedea, Buzua-Ialomita, Siret, Prut-Barlad,
   and Dobrogea-Littoral facing the most serious water scarcity.

5. The current water demand comprises of industry (67%), agriculture (18%), and municipal
   (15%). The water demand has steadily decreased since the 1990s, because of structural
   changes in economy, including reduction in industrial activity, shut-down of economically
   unviable irrigation schemes, introduction of metering and tariffs in domestic water supply,
   and reducing system losses. The total demand, in terms of volume of water made available
   to users, has decreased from approx. 20 BCM/year in the early 1990s to approx. 8
   BCM/year now. As a result there is currently a degree of over-capacity in the system at the
   national level. The actual water consumption in 2012 was 6.5 BCM.

6. Irrigated area in Romania has decreased from 2 million ha in the late 1908s/early 1990s to
   approx. 0.8 million ha (considered irrigable with functional infrastructure), as
   economically unviable schemes were closed down In fact, the land under irrigation has
   remained below 300,000 ha for the past 5 years. The corresponding water demand has
   reduced from about 8 BCM to 1 BCM per year. While the overall situation appears good
   because of over-capacity, there are areas of water scarcity in many basins where summer
   droughts are a significant concern.

7. About 70% of the water supply for domestic use is sourced from surface waters, compared
   to 95% dependence on surface waters for industrial supply. From a quantitative
   perspective, a majority of the basins have no serious problems in ensuring sufficient
   volume for water for meeting the domestic and industrial demands. However, the basins
   with lower endowment of water (Jiu, Arges-Vedea, Buzau-Ialomita, Siret, Prut-Barlad,
   and Dobrogea-Litoral) face supply reliability challenges during the summer months,
   especially in dry years. The Dobrogea-Litoral basin is the most severely affected in this
   regard.

8. Romania's hydropower potential is estimated at 36 TWh/year, and currently the total
   installed hydropower capacity amounts to 6,400MW. Hydropower generation accounts for
   32% of Romania's total electricity generation, and 16% of the total energy use. The
   Government intends to decommission/modernize some of the high-emission and obsolete
   thermal power plants, and therefore plans on a modest increase in hydropower generation
   capacity. While hydropower is not a consumptive user of water, operations rules for
   hydropower facilities constrain and are constrained by water uses in other sectors.
   Therefore the proposed new hydropower facilities would need to be planned taking into
   account the existing and anticipated future water uses in all sectors. In the basins where
   scarcity already arises in summers of dry years, hydropower production will be adversely
   affected for a short duration, as it was in the dry year of 1990. These constraints can be
   alleviated to a large extent by careful systems planning and operations optimization, and
   by accounting for the anticipated climate change impacts in the operations planning for
   these as well as existing facilities.

Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                          iv
9. Almost 60% of the water bodies in Romania meet the EU Framework Directive’s water
   quality designation of good ecological status/potential, which is based on multiple
   elements of quality (biological, physio-chemical, and specific pollutants).

Projected Impacts of Climate Change

10. Precipitation has decreased at a rate of about 30 mm per decade in Romania, between
    1961 and 2006. Continental-scale studies for Europe project that annual mean
    precipitation is likely to decrease by 5-20% in southern Europe and the Mediterranean in
    the period 2071-2100, compared to the period 1961-1990. In line with the precipitation
    changes, annual river flows are increasing in the north and decreasing in the south, and
    this trend is projected to increase in the future. Large changes in seasonality are also
    projected, with lower flows in summer and higher flows in winter for Romania. As a
    consequence, droughts and water stress are expected to increase, particularly in summer.
    Flood events are projected to occur more frequently in many river basins, particularly in
    winter and spring, although estimates of changes in flood frequency and magnitude
    remain uncertain. In general, the range of climate change impacts across Romania
    includes a likely increase in cold spells, heat waves, heavy floods, landslides, formation of
    ice-dams on watercourses, damaging frost, and avalanches.

11. Four river basins of Romania- Buzau, Ialomita, Arges, and Mures – have been studied
    with the objective of quantifying climate change impacts. The results for Buzau and
    Ialomita basins indicate a likely reduction of mean annual flow, of 15-20 % for the period
    2021-2050, and of 30- 40 % for the period 2070-2100. Also predicted are earlier
    occurrence of floods produced by snow-melt, and amplification of extreme phenomena.
    An analysis of changes in demands shows that the demand-supply gap will be manageable
    for the next 15-20 years, but significant measures will be needed to address vulnerability
    in the time period after that. The results for Arges and Mures basins indicate a reduction of
    mean annual flow in these basins of 10-15 % for the period 2021-2050. More frequent
    winter floods are expected, and while torrential flood events will occur more frequently,
    the frequency of floods with long duration and large volume is expected to decrease.

12. The following are some of the key vulnerabilities to climate change that are identified in
    various water-related sectors:
        a. Water supply will be adversely affected because the warmer and shorter winters
           will lead to the decrease of the seasonal snow volume and to the early and fast
           snow melting, leading to shortages in summer months.
        b. Hotter and drier summers will also cause a qualitative deterioration of the water
           resources, thereby effectively reducing the supply.
        c. Supply will also suffer from a lowering of groundwater table in summer months,
           due to reductions in the surface flow regime.
        d. Higher summer temperatures will lead to increased evapo-transpiration and
           therefore higher water demands in agriculture, during the same period when
Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                             v
            supplies will suffer a shortfall. The domestic water demands and supply will
            experience the same (but less pronounced) effect.
       e.   Wastewater treatment will be more frequently impaired by floods, due to storm-
            water infiltration in sewer systems, and also due to direct inundation of treatment
            facilities.
       f.   The flora and fauna in the aquatic ecosystems (rivers and lakes) as well as in those
            dependent on precipitation and river flows (such as wetlands) will suffer from a
            quantitative reduction in summer water flows, and from increased frequency of
            floods and droughts.
       g.   Higher summer temperatures leading to water quality degradation (through
            decreases in dissolved oxygen, eutrophication and algal blooms) will also
            adversely affect the environment.
       h.   Changes in aquifer levels will also adversely affect the water balance in wetlands,
            which are sustained by groundwater in the low flow season.
       i.   The summer generation from hydropower plants will be adversely affected in dry
            years. The hydropower facilities will also face increasing threat of intensive floods,
            and operations will also need to provide sufficient flood cushion in the storage
            reservoirs.

13. The Sectorial Operational Programme on Environment (SOP E) has been implemented by
    Romania with financing support from European Union. While SOP E has implemented a
    sizable quantum of water sector investments (especially in water supply and wastewater),
    there remain a number of priority actions which can bring significant benefits to Romania
    in terms of addressing the climate change issues in water-related sectors. This report
    presents these recommended actions in the following table, for possible financing under
    the two Operational Programs (OPs) financed by the European Structural and Investment
    Funds (ESIF) in the 2014-2020 time period. The two main OPs relevant for water sector
    investments in this context are:
        a. Large Infrastructure OP, with the key water-related areas being public utilities
            services (water and wastewater), risk prevention and climate (structural measures
            such as dams, flood control embankments, etc.), coastal areas and non-structural
            measures for risk reduction.
        b. Rural Development OP, with the key water-related areas being investments in
            agriculture and rural development (e.g. irrigation), and public infrastructure in
            rural areas.

14. The analysis presented in this report is significantly limited by the extent of the available
    information. The most significant shortcomings of this analysis pertain to the following:
        a. There is a need for developing quantitative estimates of climate change impacts on
           water-related sectors, especially since water is the one of the primary modalities
           through which the climate change effects are manifested. This analysis needs to be
           conducted on priority for the water-scarce basins, because a comprehensive list of
           actions for building climate resilience cannot be developed until the River Basin

Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                              vi
          Management Plans are updated with the quantitative estimates of climate change
          impacts on supply and demands.
       b. The actions suggested in this report have not been validated through an economic
          analysis. Since the needs are high compared to the available resources in the short-
          term, it would be important to undertake a multi-sectoral techno-economic
          assessment, preferably through modeling, in order to prioritize the recommended
          actions for investment. Nonetheless, some of the obvious “no-regret” actions have
          been presented separately, with the recommendation that these be initiated at the
          earliest, given the strong need and significant benefits. It should also be noted that
          while some of the recommended investments (such as those in rural water supply
          and flood management) do not directly seem to be related to climate change, these
          can be validly considered to be a part of the adaptation response and hence may be
          eligible for climate change-related funding

15. The tables below summarize the recommended actions for improving climate resilience in
    water-related sectors, for proposed financing and support under the ESIF (2014-2020)
    OPs. The estimated time-frame for these actions is also indicated.

                         Table 3: Recommended “No-Regret” Actions

                         Action                              Type of Action         Time frame
 1. Conducting Quantitative Assessments of Climate          Research &            Short term
    Change Impacts on Hydrology, for estimating             Analysis/ Technical
    future water availability and demands under             Assistance
    climate change scenarios. This exercise needs to
    be completed for all basins of Romania (4 are
    already covered)
 2. Establish requirements that River Basin                 Policy                Short term
    Management Plans (RBMPs) in each basin must             Training/ education
    be updated with the results of quantitative climate
    change assessments described in #1 above.
 3. Ensure that RBMPs currently being prepared for          Technical             Short term
    2015 are updated with quantitative climate change       Assistance
    assessments
 4. Conduct analysis to assess the specific levels and      Research &            Medium term
    types of irrigated agriculture that can be sustained    Analysis/ Technical
    in each of the river basins, accounting for climate     Assistance
    change impacts. This should feed into RBMP
    process.
 5. Conduct analysis of the technical options and           Research &            Medium term
    economic returns of converting pumped-irrigation        Analysis/ Technical
    to gravity-based schemes, in areas with confirmed       Assistance
    and steady demand for irrigation services
 6. Conduct quantitative assessments of water               Research &            Medium term
    demands and supply reliability for all the main         Analysis/ Technical
    WSS utilities of Romania, taking into account the       Assistance
    expected impacts of various climate change
    scenarios. This should feed into RBMP process
 7. Establish regulations to ensure that large industrial   Policy/Regulation     Short term

Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                               vii
             water users are provided through utility supplies,
             instead of private groundwater wells (The issue is
             being considered by the Ministry of Environment
             and Climate Change)
      8.     Conduct quantitative assessments for water needs      Research &            Medium term
             of various ecosystems. These environmental uses       Analysis/ Technical
             should feed into the RBMP process.                    Assistance
      9.     Update flood hazard and risk analysis by using a      Technical             Medium term
             higher resolution GIS-based approach; upgraded        Assistance
             nationally to 1% (1 in 100 years flood) level for
             inhabited area; and take into account expected
             climate change impacts.
      10.    Establish regulations to formally introduce flood     Policy/ Regulation    Medium term
             risk assessments into the regional development
             and general city planning processes.
      11.    Assess feasibility of regulation for monitoring and   Policy/ Regulation    Medium term
             managing construction activities in the high flood-
             risk areas.
      12.    Strengthen local-level planning capacity for          Capacity-building     Medium term
             episodic events such as heat waves.



        Table 4: Recommended Actions for Prioritization and Financing ESIF (2014-2020)

  Sectoral                                                               Type of         Time frame    Applicable
                                       Action
   Focus                                                                 Action                           OP
Irrigation         1. Implement pilots to test different models of    Pilot              Medium term   Rural
                      efficient irrigation systems coupled with       Investments                      Development
                      climate-smart agriculture practices.                                             OP
                   2. Establish regulations to limit the use of       Policy/            Medium term   Rural
                      groundwater for domestic water supplies,        Regulation                       Development
                      in the areas where groundwater over-                                             OP
                      abstraction is leading to serious depletion
                      of aquifers.
                   3. Wastewater reuse in irrigation should be        Policy/ Pilot      Medium term   Rural
                      encouraged, especially in water-scarce          Investments                      Development
                      basins                                                                           OP
                   4. Investments in infrastructure to ensure         Direct             Long term     Large
                      water supply and wastewater provisions for      Investment                       Infrastructure
                      263 municipalities having more than                                              OP / Rural
                      10,000 inhabitants, by 2015 ( and by 2018                                        Development
                      for 2,346 smaller townships with 2,000 -                                         OP
                      10,000 inhabitants)
                   5. Assess scope and scale of methane capture       Technical          Medium term   Large
Water Supply
                      and flaring, as well as high efficiency         Assistance/                      Infrastructure
and Sanitation
                      pumps, to reduce the GHG emissions from         Direct                           OP / Rural
                      the water and wastewater supply                 Investments                      Development
                      investments, and to hence qualify these                                          OP
                      investments as climate actions.
                   6. Support utility investments aimed at            Direct             Long term     Large
                      reducing system losses in water                 Investment                       Infrastructure
                      distribution networks (currently estimated                                       OP

     Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                                  viii
                   at approx. 50%).
                7. Wastewater reuse in industrial sectors           Policy/Pilot      Medium term   Large
                   should be encouraged.                            Investments                     Infrastructure
                                                                                                    OP
                8. Assess feasibility of using aquifers coupled     Technical         Medium term   Large
                   with artificial recharge for inter-annual        Assistance/Pilo                 Infrastructure
                   water storage should be explored in water-       t Investments                   OP
                   scarce basins.
                9. Establish requirements for protection of         Policy/           Medium term   Large
                   critical water supply sources (reservoirs or     Regulation/                     Infrastructure
                   aquifers) in water-scarce locations, through     Pilot                           OP/ Rural
                   land use zoning measures.                        Investments                     Development
                                                                                                    OP/ Regional
                                                                                                    OP
                10. Assess feasibility of desalinization for        Technical         Medium term   Large
                    provision of drinking water supplies in         Assistance                      Infrastructure
                    water-scarce coastal basins                                                     OP
                11. Afforestation and other catchment               Direct            Medium term   Rural
                    improvement activities should be                Investments                     Development
                    encouraged in flood- and erosion-prone                                          OP
                    uplands
                12. Implement pilots on suitable co-benefit         Technical         Medium term   Rural
                    models of natural resource management, in       Assistance/                     Development
                    forest catchments and in wetland fisheries,     Pilot                           OP/ Regional
                    whereby the ecosystems sustain local            Investments                     OP
                    livelihoods while providing valuable
                    environmental service
                13. Undertake construction of flood                 Direct            Long term     Large
                    management infrastructure. Since the            Investments                     Infrastructure
                    potential investments pipeline is huge                                          OP
                    (estimated at 17 billion €), investments
Disaster Risk       should be prioritized on the basis of
Reduction and       updated flood hazard/risk mapping and
Management          accounting for the climate change impacts.
                14. Upgrade to digital the existing radar           Direct            Medium term   Large
                    network for measuring precipitation             Investment                      Infrastructure
                    intensity, and installing a new radar station                                   OP
                    in Galati.




    Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                                  ix
                                  1. INTRODUCTION

1. The purpose of this report is to assess the climate change impacts on water resources in
   Romania from an integrated, multi-sectoral perspective, and to recommend priority
   actions for addressing the identified risks and opportunities. The analysis is presented
   from an integrated water resources perspective, thereby including all pertinent water-
   related sectors, viz. municipal water supply and sanitation, industrial water supply,
   agriculture, energy generation, environment, and disaster management. More details on
   specific water-related aspects can be found in the companion rapid assessment reports for
   the energy, urban, and agricultural and rural development sectors. The recommended
   priority actions are presented in the context of consideration for possible financing under
   the Operational Programs funded by the European Structural and Investment Funds
   (ESIF) in 2014-2020 planning horizon. This analysis is based on the available information
   on the current status of water resources sector in Romania, along with the existing
   knowledge on the anticipated impacts of climate change in this sector.




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                          1
   2. WATER RESOURCES AVAILABILITY AND USE IN ROMANIA

2. Romania’s surface water endowment consists of internal river basins as well as the
   Danube, which is a trans-boundary river basin shared by 19 countries. The natural surface
   water potential of Romania amounts to 127 Billion Cubic Meters (BCM)/year, with the
   internal river basins contributing 40 BCM and the Danube contributing 87 BCM per year.
   The groundwater endowment is estimated at 10 BCM/year. The utilizable fraction of the
   total (surface and ground) water resources, as defined by the existing capacity to extract
   and use water, is 40 BCM/year. In contrast the total water demand stands at approx. 8
   BCM. The details are provided in Table 1.

         Table 1: The potential and utilizable water resources for Romania, 2010
   (Source: National Report on the State of Environment, National Environmental Protection Agency, 2010)


                             Category                                     Volume (BCM)
     A. Interior River Basins
              Potential natural resource                                         40.0
              Utilizable resource                                                13.8
              Demand                                                              3.2
     B. Danube
              Potential natural resource                                         87.0
              Utilizable resource                                                20.0
              Demand                                                              3.7
     C. Groundwater
              Potential natural resource                                          9.6
              Utilizable resource                                                 5.4
              Demand                                                              0.8
     Total
              Potential resource                                                 136.6
              Utilizable resource                                                39.3
              Demand                                                              7.7


3. The Danube is the second longest river in Europe, with a length of 2,850 km, out of which
   1,075 km is in Romania's territory. The average flow of Danube at the point of entry is
   175 BCM/year, and Romania is entitled to use half of this quantum under the existing
   agreements. The Danube supports different water uses including irrigation, fisheries, and
   hydropower generation. The Danube delta has a number of environmental conservation
   areas covered by the EU Habitats Directive.

Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                                         2
4. There are 27 major inland rivers in Romania, belonging to 11 inland river basins. Mures is
   the longest river in Romania (761 km) and Viseu is the shortest (81 km). The Siret forms
   the largest river basin, with a surface area of 42,890 km2. Although the Danube
   theoretically contributes more than the internal rivers to the water resources potential of
   Romania, the constraints of spatial access and availability mean that the inner rivers are
   actually the more important water resource provider for Romania.
5. Romania has developed significant storage on the rivers. There are currently 1232 storage
   reservoirs, for the purpose of hydropower generation, irrigation and flood control, with a
   total storage capacity of 10 BCM (FAO, Aquastat 2012). The total untapped storage
   potential is estimated in the range of 50-78 BCM, out of which 25 BCM is considered
   feasible for development, if needed.
6. With a current population of 20.2 million, the average water availability in Romania
   amounts to 2000 cubic meters per capita per year. While this value is above the thresholds
   generally defined for water stress (1700 cubic meter per capita per year) (Falkenmark,
   1989), it is lower than the average value for Europe (approx. 4500 cubic meters per capita
   per year), and underscores the need for good management to ensure resource conservation
   and sustainability.
7. There is a significant natural inter-annual variation in water resources availability (See
   Figure 1). In the driest years the water availability has fallen as low as 20 BCM.

            Figure 1: Natural Variability of Utilizable Water Resources of Romania
    (Source: National Water Resources and their Evolution in the Context of Climate Change. National Institute
                                 of Hydrology and Water Management, 2011)




8. The average national-level value of 40 BCM/year also hides the significant range of
   variation within Romania, depending on the river basin. Table 2 presents the utilizable
   water resources corresponding to each of the 11 internal river basins.




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                                           3
                                             Table 2: Water Resources of Internal Basins of Romania
       (Source: Technical Report- Water Balance, National Administration of Romanian Water, 2011)


                                                    River Basin                         Utilizable Water Resources
                                                                                                (BCM/year)
                       Someş – Tisa                                                                     6.24

                       Crişuri                                                                          2.87

                       Mureş                                                                            5.77
                       Banat                                                                            3.56

                       Jiu                                                                              3.47
                       Olt                                                                              5.30

                       Argeş - Vedea                                                                    2.39

                       Buzău - Ialomiţa                                                                 1.39

                       Siret                                                                            7.54

                       Prut                                                                             1.76
                       Dobrogea-Litoral                                                                 0.11
             Total                                                                             40.41


9. The per-capita water availability for the internal basins is shown in Figure 2. It can be seen
   that the basins of Jiu, Arges-Vedea, Buzau-Ialomita, Siret, Prut-Barlad, and Dobrogea-
   Litoral face significant scarcity, with the last one being the most water-scarce basin in
   Romania.

        Figure 2: Per capita Utilizable Water Resources in Romania’s Internal basins
    (Source: National Water Resources and their Evolution in the Context of Climate Change. National Institute
                                 of Hydrology and Water Management, 2011)

                                                             Distribution of specific water resources
             Volume, mc /year/inhabitant




                                           4000

                                           3000

                                           2000

                                           1000

                                              0




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                                                   4
10. The total water demand in Romania, as measured by the volume of water made available
    to users, stood at 7.2 BCM in 2012, which was met by abstractions of 3 BCM from inland
    rivers, 3.5 BCM from the Danube, 0.7 BCM from groundwater, and a small volume (0.01
    BCM) from the Black Sea. The sector-wise break-up shows that the largest water demand
    comes from industry (67%), followed by agriculture (18%), and municipal (15%). The
    sources of demand and supply are shown in Figure 3. The actual water consumption in
    2012 amounted to 6.5 BCM.

                                      Figure 3: Water Demand and Supply Sources, 2012
                       (Source: Technical Report- Water Balance, National Administration of Romanian Water, 2012)

                                8
                                7
      Volume, mld mc




                                6
                                5
                                4
                                3
                                2
                                1
                                0
                                       Internal       Danube      Groundwate       Blak Sea        Total
                                        rivers                         r
                        Total            3.02          3.48          0.68           0.008          7.19
                        Industry         1.75          2.83           0.24          0.008          4.81
                        Agriculture      0.69          0.56           0.03            0            1.28
                        Population       0.6           0.09           0.41            0             1.1


11. The water demands have steadily decreased in Romania since the 1990s, mainly due to
    structural changes in the economy:
        a. Economically unviable irrigation schemes have closed.
        b. Industrial production has reduced, and the remaining industries have significantly
            reduced water consumption in production processes.
        c. Utilities have reduced losses and introduced tariffs, which have helped reduced
            water consumption in the domestic sector, even though the provision of water
            supply and sanitation services has expanded to an increasing fraction of the
            population.

12. As a result, total water demand has decreased from approx. 20 BCM in early 1990s to
    approx. 8 BCM now (See Figure 4, which shows the volumes of water made available to
    users in each sector. The respective sector consumptions follow the same trend).
    Therefore, on an average there is a significant degree of over-capacity in the systems,
    which were built to meet demand levels of 20 BCM, compared to the current demands that
    are less than half the capacity. However, the situation varies from basin to basin, and also
    many of the unused water extraction and conveyance facilities are now in disrepair.
    Another concern, on which data are not fully available, pertains to loss of storage capacity

Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                                                  5
   due to sedimentation in reservoirs (for example the effective storage of Bascov-Pitesti
   reservoirs is now estimated to have reduced by 90%).

             Figure 4: Evolution of Total Water Demand in Romania, 1990-2011
         (Source: Technical Report- Water Balance, National Administration of Romanian Water, 2012)




Sectoral Uses of Water

13. Agriculture: Irrigated area in Romania has decreased from 2 million ha in the late
    1908s/early 1990s to approx. 0.8 million ha (considered irrigable with functional
    infrastructure), as economically unviable schemes were closed down In fact, the land
    under irrigation has remained below 300,000 ha for the past 5 years. The corresponding
    water demand has reduced from about 8 BCM to 1 BCM per year. While the overall
    situation appears good because of over-capacity, there are areas of water scarcity in many
    basins where summer droughts are a significant concern. The situation will become more
    serious as the impacts of climate change become more pronounced, the most salient being
    increase in temperatures and reduction in water availability across all of Romania.
    Addressing this challenge will require adoption of climate-resilient agriculture, and
    updation of the basin plans while taking climate change impacts into account, to re-assess
    the sustainable levels and modes of irrigation in the water-scarce basins.

14. Industrial Water Supply and Domestic Water Supply/Sanitation: About 70% of the water
    supply for domestic use is sourced from surface waters, compared to 95% dependence on
    surface waters for industrial supply. From a quantitative perspective, a majority of the
    basins have no serious problems in ensuring sufficient volume for water for meeting the
    domestic and industrial demands. However, the basins with lower endowment of water
    (Jiu, Arges-Vedea, Buzau-Ialomita, Siret, Prut-Barlad, and Dobrogea-Litoral) face supply
Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                                    6
   reliability challenges during the summer months, especially in dry years. The Dobrogea-
   Litoral basin is the most severely affected in this regard. For example, almost 95% of the
   supply for the city of Constanta is being sourced from groundwater, which is being
   pumped from significant depths (300-700m). A number of cities in Banat and Moldova
   regions also face water scarcity in summer months. These cases stand apart from most of
   the other urban areas in Romania (and especially from Bucharest), which have multiple
   sources offering significant buffer supplies and a high degree of reliability. As mentioned
   above, groundwater accounts for almost 30% of the domestic water supply, but the
   incidence of nitrate pollution in upper layers of aquifers is increasing, especially in the
   south of the country, which will place further stress on surface water resources.

15. Hydropower: Romania’s hydropower potential is estimated at 36 TWh/year, and currently
    the total installed hydropower capacity amounts to 6,400MW. Hydropower generation
    accounts for 32% of Romania’s total electricity generation, and 16% of the total energy
    use. While coal and other fossil fuels remain the primary source of energy and electricity
    generation for Romania, the share of renewable sources of energy is large, increasing and
    higher than EU average. The Government intends to decommission/modernize some of
    the high-emission and obsolete thermal power plants, and therefore plans on a modest
    increase in hydropower generation capacity. While hydropower is not a consumptive user
    of water, operations rules for hydropower facilities constrain and are constrained by water
    uses in other sectors. Therefore the proposed new hydropower facilities would need to be
    planned taking into account the existing and anticipated future water uses in all sectors. In
    the basins where scarcity already arises in summers of dry years, hydropower production
    will be adversely affected for a short duration, as it was in the dry year of 1990. These
    constraints can be alleviated to a large extent by careful systems planning and operations
    optimization, and by accounting for the anticipated climate change impacts in the
    operations planning for these as well as existing facilities. Furthermore, the development
    of new hydro infrastructure will need to ensure that the environmental and hydro-
    morphological impacts are managed in compliance with the requirements of the EU Water
    Framework Directive

Water Quality

16. Out of the 3399 surface water bodies that are monitored at the national level, 2008 (59%)
    met the EU Framework Directive water quality designation of good ecological
    status/potential in 2009, based on biological, physio-chemical and specific pollutant
    standards. It is proposed to increase this fraction to 65% by 2015.

Water-related Hazards

17. Floods: Flooding occurs frequently in Romania, and the flood-prone is estimated at about
    1.1 million ha. Romania has made significant investments in flood protection
    infrastructure, which include 9920 km of embankments, 6300 km of river training works,
    217 temporary flooding areas, and 1232 reservoirs with active flood control operations.
    However floods happen almost every year, and the incidence of severe flooding is on the
Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                             7
   rise. The existing pipeline of infrastructure works proposed for flood management is
   estimated at approx.17 billion €.

18. While flood hazard mapping has been conducted for the large rivers (Category 1, 2 and 3)
    in all 11 river basins, smaller rivers have not yet been covered. Furthermore, ANAR
    recognizes the need to improve the analysis by using a high-resolution GIS-based
    approach, and to upgrade to 1% flood level protection for inhabited areas. It would also be
    important to take account of the expected climate change impacts on hydrology in
    updating the flood hazard mapping. The flood hazard and risk mapping for the Danube
    basin has been completed as a part of collaborative European exercise.

19. Flash Floods: The high-intensity and short-duration floods (flash floods) are also
    becoming increasingly common in the mountain areas, mainly due to increasing frequency
    of high-intensity precipitation events, but also exacerbated by land use changes. The
    National Meteorological Administration, with 160 meteorological stations, 8 radars and 7
    regional centers, conducts forecasting for flash floods. The current forecasting and early
    warning systems are able to provide a reasonable (12-48 hours, depending on the river
    system) lead time for flood events, but the warning time for small mountainous
    catchments which are prone to flash floods is about 2 hours, leaving the communities in
    these areas highly vulnerable to risk. This issue is of growing concern, since the incidence
    and toll of flash floods is increasing in Romania. It is possible to increase the warning
    time from the current level of 2 hours to 3-5 hours or more, and will require investments
    in upgrading the radar network for estimating rainfall intensity (including a new radar
    station in the Galati area), and for strengthening capacity of regional centers for flash
    flood forecasting.

20. Drought: Due to increasing temperature and decreasing river flows (see the following
    section on climate change) the frequency of droughts is increasing in Romania. The
    National Meteorological Administration maintains 55 agronomic monitoring stations
    throughout the country, and prepares 1 week and 1-3 month soil moisture forecasts based
    on integration of agronomic data with hydro-met data. It is not clear how these forecasts
    are integrated with other agricultural services to help farmers better manage the drought
    conditions.




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                            8
    3. INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY FOR INTEGRATED WATER
                  RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

21. Romania is one of the few countries that have many decades of experience in managing
    water resources using an integrated basin-level approach. Each of its 11 internal river
    basins has a functioning River Basin Water Agency (abbreviated as ABA), which is
    charged with water resources management planning and implementation, and operation of
    large facilities. All 41 counties of Romania have a dedicated water resources management
    unit, which reports to the ABA. The ABAs revise the basin water resources management
    plans every 6 years, which aim to address the emerging issues pertaining to both quantity
    and quality. The ABAs are institutionally federated into the “Romanian Waters” National
    Administration (abbreviated as ANAR), which is responsible for planning and
    management of water resources at the national level. The Directorate of Water
    Management in the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change is responsible for water
    sector policy making. Therefore, the separation of policy, administration, and service
    provision functions exists in water sector in Romania.

22. About 60 years of hydrological data is available on the main rivers of Romania; in case of
    Danube some records are available for the last 100 years. However not all these data have
    been fully digitized yet, which limits its ability for use in modeling and water resources
    planning.

23. Romania’s hydro-met network comprises of 882 monitoring stations, out of which about
    600 are automated. In addition to this network, the National Meteorological
    Administration operates 160 stations, 8 radars and 55 agronomic monitoring stations.
    While the major gaps in the hydro-met network seem to have been addressed through a
    series of recent projects (assisted by the EU), the meteorological network could be
    strengthened by up-gradation of radar stations, expanding the agronomic station network,
    adding a new radar station in Galati, and providing more resources for snowpack studies.

24. The operations of water resources infrastructure are reviewed and approved by the ABAs,
    as a part of the river basin management plan process. The operations rules for the facilities
    (referred to as “restriction logic”) are originally based on the results of optimization
    analysis conducted for the specific cascades/basins, with the priority (in decreasing order)
    being domestic water supplies, energy production, industry and agriculture. Given the
    recent changes, especially in demand patterns and incidence of floods, many ABAs have
    recently conducted review and updating of restriction logics for the major facilities in their
    respective basins, to ensure that the operations respond adequately to the ground reality.
    However, a quantitative accounting for climate change impacts in the operations planning
    still has not been attempted.




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                              9
             4. PROJECTED IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

25. The quantitative estimates for water-related climate change impacts in Romania broadly
    come from two categories of sources: (i) continental-level climate change studies of
    Europe; and (ii) studies aimed at assessing climate change impacts for specific selected
    river basins of Romania.

26. The results of the continental-scale studies include relevant findings for Romania. The
    observed changes in climate over Europe in the 20th century show that Southern and
    South-Eastern Europe has experienced decreases in annual precipitation of up to 20%.
    Precipitation has decreased at a rate of about 30 mm per decade in Romania, between
    1961 and 2006 (See Figure 5).

27. Annual mean precipitation is projected to decrease by 5-20% in southern Europe and the
    Mediterranean in the period 2071-2100, compared to the period 1961-1990 (See Figure 6).
    In line with the precipitation changes, annual river flows are increasing in the north and
    decreasing in the south, and this trend is projected to increase in the future. Large changes
    in seasonality are also projected, with lower flows in summer and higher flows in winter
    for Romania. As a consequence, droughts and water stress are expected to increase,
    particularly in summer. Flood events are projected to occur more frequently in many river
    basins, particularly in winter and spring, although estimates of changes in flood frequency
    and magnitude remain uncertain. In general, the range of climate change impacts across
    Romania includes a likely increase in cold spells, heat waves, heavy floods, landslides,
    formation of ice-dams on watercourses, damaging frost, and avalanches.

         Figure 5: Observed change in annual precipitation in Europe, 1961 – 2006
                       (Water resources across Europe, EEA Report No. 2/2009)




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                            10
 Figure 6: Projected changes in annual (left) and summer (right) precipitation between
                               1961–1990 and 2071–2100
                   (The European environment, State and outlook - EEA, 2010)




28. Climate change studies focusing on specific basins in Romania have been completed for
    only four river basins - Buzau, Ialomita, Arges, and Mures. A study on Crisul Alb and
    Barlad basins is currently underway at the National Institute of Hydrology and Water
    Management.

29. The results for Buzau and Ialomita basins (from the CECILIA project, funded by the EU)
    indicate a likely reduction of mean annual flow in these basins, of 15-20 % for the period
    2021-2050, and of 30- 40 % for the period 2070-2100 (See Figure 7). Also predicted are
    earlier occurrence of floods produced by snow-melt, and amplification of extreme
    phenomena. An analysis of changes in demands shows that the demand-supply gap will be
    manageable for the next 15-20 years, but significant measures will be needed to address
    vulnerability in the time period after that.




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                         11
        Figure 7: Changes to Mean Annual Flow due to Climate Change, Buzau and
                                      Ialomita




30. The results for Arges and Mures basins (from the CLAVIER project, funded by the EU)
    indicate a likely reduction of mean annual flow in these basins of 10-15 %, for the period
    2021-2050. More frequent winter floods are expected, and while torrential flood events
    are likely to occur more frequently, the frequency of floods with long duration and large
    volume is expected to decrease. Incidence of low water levels/discharges is expected to
    increase by 25% which will cause water shortages, especially for big users. This will also
    affect users by making water intakes inoperative and hampering navigability of
    waterways. Figures 8 and 9 present the expected number of low water occurrences for the
    Mures and (lower) Danube rivers.

                       Figure 8: Low water occurrences, Mures – Arad




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                         12
                       Figure 9: Low water occurrences, Danube-Bazias




Identified Vulnerabilities to Climate Change in Water-related Sectors

31. Water supply for agriculture, industrial and domestic use:
      a. Water supply will be adversely affected because the warmer and shorter winters
           will lead to the decrease of the seasonal snow volume and to the early and fast
           snow melting, leading to shortages in summer months.
      b. Hotter and drier summers will also cause a qualitative deterioration of the water
           resources, thereby effectively reducing the supply.
      c. Supply will also suffer from a lowering of groundwater table in summer months,
           due to reductions in the surface flow regime.
      d. Higher summer temperatures will lead to increased evapo-transpiration and
           therefore higher water demands in agriculture, during the same period when
           supplies will suffer a shortfall. The domestic water demands and supply will
           experience the same (but less pronounced) effect.

32. Sanitation: Wastewater treatment will be more frequently impaired by floods, due to
    storm-water infiltration in sewer systems, and also due to direct inundation of treatment
    facilities.

33. Environment:
       a. The flora and fauna in the aquatic ecosystems (rivers and lakes) as well as in those
           dependent on precipitation and river flows (such as wetlands) will suffer from a
           quantitative reduction in summer water flows, and from increased frequency of
           floods and droughts.
       b. Higher summer temperatures leading to water quality degradation (through
           decreases in dissolved oxygen, eutrophication and algal blooms) will also
           adversely affect the environment.
       c. Changes in aquifer levels will also adversely affect the water balance in wetlands,
           which are sustained by groundwater in the low flow season.
Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                         13
34. Hydropower: The summer generation from hydropower plants will be adversely affected
    in dry years (as they were in 1990), and therefore the operations rules will need to be
    reviewed and revised to ensure maximum energy production consistent with the objectives
    of maintaining the reliability of irrigation, industrial, and domestic water supplies. The
    hydropower facilities will also face increasing threat of intensive floods, and operations
    will also need to provide sufficient flood cushion in the storage reservoirs.




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                         14
                  5. RELEVANT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS


35. National Climate Change Strategy for Romania The recently approved National Climate
    Change Strategy for Romania (2013-2020) provides guidelines and framework for
    developing sector-level action plans for mitigation and adaption to climate change in
    Romania. It also emphasizes the upcoming EU budget cycle (Multi-annual Financial
    Framework for 2014-2020) as the opportunity and trigger for preparation of specific
    investment plans aimed at meeting climate change mitigation and adaption targets for
    Romania.

36. National Sustainable Development Strategy The National Sustainable Development
    Strategy for Romania identifies the specific needs and outlines the proposed plans in all
    key water-related sectors. These include:
        a. Conducting more detailed analyses on the effect of climate change on water
           resources, given its multi-sectoral nature and high degree of vulnerability to
           climate change.
        b. Construction of planned hydropower stations to increase the fraction of carbon-
           free energy generation, and also to replace the thermal capacity about to be
           decommissioned.
        c. Gradual development of inland waterways on the Romanian sector of the Danube,
           through upgrading and expansion of port infrastructure.
        d. To improve the quality of, and access to infrastructure for water supply and
           wastewater treatment, by providing safe potable water and sewerage services to the
           majority of urban areas by 2015 and establishing efficient regional structures for
           water and wastewater management. This in turn entails:
                 i. Municipal wastewater collection, discharge and treatment for 263
                    municipalities having more than 10,000 inhabitants, by 2015 (under the
                    terms Romania obtained for the EU Accession Treaty), and by 2018 for
                    2,346 smaller townships with 2,000 - 10,000 inhabitants.
                ii. Compliance with the EU acquis drinking water standards by 2015
               iii. Promoting integrated water and wastewater systems through a regional
                    approach, in order to ensure that the services can be provided at the
                    required quality standards and affordable prices.
               iv. Completing the implementation of the program for the gradual elimination
                    of discharges of hazardous substances in order to prevent the pollution of
                    inland surface water resources, coastal waters, marine environment and
                    underground aquifers; and to limit threats to aquatic ecosystems Also
                    included are measures to prevent water pollution from nitrates originating
                    from farming activities.
        e. It also emphasizes the need for the preparation of a medium to long-term program
           for the upgrading of irrigation systems, in order to assist the agriculture sector in

Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                           15
           adapting to higher frequency and intensity of drought and expanding
           desertification, in parallel with increasing scarcity of available water resources.

37. In addition, the National Strategy on Drought Effects Mitigation, the Action Plan for
    Addressing Nitrate Pollution from Agricultural Sources, and the National Plan for
    Irrigation Rehabilitation and Reform are among the key plans that are relevant for
    addressing climate change implications in water related sectors.

38. The Sectorial Operational Programme on Environment (SOP E) has been implemented by
    Romania with financing support from European Regional Development Fund and
    Cohesion Fund. SOP E has a significant resource provision for ensuring compliance with
    EU Aqui, especially on coverage of water supply and wastewater investments (under Axis
    1). There are also some funding provisions for investments in flood risk reduction (under
    Axis 5). According to the latest (2012) country evaluation report on Cohesion Funds for
    Romania, SOP E’s achievements in water-related sectors include:
        a. 1 new water treatment plant,
        b. 548 km of new water networks, and
        c. 388 km of sewerage networks
    Although a considerable amount of funding has been allocated, there are no physical
    indicators reported on pollution and climate change effects reduction. There is one
    approved project for floods risk reduction.

39. Operational Programs under ESIF Programming (2014-2020) It is planned to invest
    approx. €43 billion, allocated from European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIF) plus
    national co‐financing, under eleven thematic objectives in Romania. The EU has set a goal
    of at least 20% spending of the Union budget targeted on climate change related
    interventions in the 2014-2020 ESIF programs. The main OPs relevant for water sector
    investments in this context are:
        a. Large Infrastructure OP, with the key water-related areas being public utilities
           services (water and wastewater), risk prevention and climate (structural measures
           such as dams, flood control embankments, etc.), coastal areas and non-structural
           measures for risk reduction.
        b. Rural Development OP, with the key water-related areas being investments in
           agriculture and rural development (e.g. irrigation), and public infrastructure in
           rural areas.

40. Given the centrality of water-related sectors in how the climate change impacts will
    manifest in Romania, and given the requirement of ensuring that at least 20% of the
    allocated funds are targeted to climate change-related investments, the priority actions for
    these sectors are identified and presented in the following section, as relevant to the two
    main OPs under the ESIF Programming (2014-2020). Please note that some of the
    recommended actions do not directly pertain to climate change, however in some
    instances a case can be made to make these investments eligible for climate change-related

Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                           16
   funding. One example is the provision of reliable water supply service to small
   communities which have traditionally relied on natural supply sources - such investments
   are a part of adaptation to climate change because the traditional water sources cannot
   provide the required degree of reliability anymore.

41. It is also important to briefly address the possibilities for climate change mitigation in
    water-related sectors:
         a. Potential of reducing GHG emissions from wastewater treatment. The contribution
            of water and wastewater treatment systems is estimated to be around 2% of
            Romania’s GHG emissions. However, since expanding the coverage of water and
            sanitation services will remain a priority sector for investments to ensure
            compliance with EU accession requirements, there is a significant scope for
            incorporating climate mitigation actions by ensuring methane capture and flaring
            an using energy efficient pump systems.
         b. Potential of reducing GHG emissions from storage reservoirs - Depending on
            climate, vegetation and the methods used to remove the vegetation prior to the first
            filling of the storage reservoirs, there can be very significant methane emissions
            resulting from the decay of the organic matter at the bottom of the reservoir. Since
            no large storage reservoirs are currently being built in Romania, this opportunity is
            not relevant in the current situation.
         c. Improving energy efficiency of pumps in large water delivery systems - Given that
            the electricity production in Romania is primarily fossil fuel-based, improving
            energy efficiency in large-scale pumped-irrigation systems can lead to substantial
            carbon savings. However, most large lift irrigation schemes in Romania are now
            closed down, as irrigation sector has shed the economically unviable operations.
            Therefore this does not seem to offer a significant potential for climate change
            mitigation.




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                            17
      6. CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION ACTIONS IN WATER-
                     RELATED SECTORS

The main opportunities of climate change adaptation that are emerging from this analysis of
the water-related sectors are as follows:

40. Strengthening the Knowledge Base:
           a. There is an urgent need to improving the existing climate scenarios and
               conduct a quantitative assessment of impacts on water-related sectors. As
               mentioned earlier, only four basins of Romania - Buzau, Ialomita, Arges, and
               Mures - have the quantitative analyses available for estimating future water
               availability and demands under climate change scenarios. This exercise needs
               to be conducted for the remaining seven basins of Romania, with priority on
               the drought-prone basins of Jiu, Siret, Prut-Barlad, and Dobrogea-Littoral.
           b. A newer generation of global climate models (CMIP5 – which also forms the
               basis of the IPCC 5th Report) is now available, and in conjunction with
               regional climate models and statistical methods, it can be used to estimate
               climate change impacts at higher spatial and temporal scales, for the critical
               river basins of Romania.
           c. The results of the climate change studies need to be incorporated in the sector
               planning activities of all water-related sectors separately, and also in an
               integrated manner in the development of River Basin Master Plans, which are
               currently being prepared for 2015. These should therefore constitute a
               necessary input for national flood hazard/risk mapping, design of flood control
               infrastructure, operations rules for storage reservoirs, and for the planning
               processes in irrigation, domestic water supply/sanitation, hydropower,
               industrial development, disaster management and environmental sectors.
               Through the process of preparation of the River Basin management Plans, the
               water resources and demands should be re-evaluating at the level of
               hydrographical basins and sub-basins under climate changes conditions.

41. Irrigation:
            a. In view of the plans to expand irrigation in Romania, it is important to assess
                the specific levels and types of irrigated agriculture that can be sustained in
                each of the river basins. This exercise would entail quantitative assessments of
                water availability and crop water needs under different climate scenarios, and
                is best conducted in a Decision Support System framework, so that the
                tradeoffs between different choices can be explicitly analyzed and discussed
                with the stakeholders.
            b. It is recommended that Romania start piloting on a systematic basis the
                different models of efficient irrigation systems coupled with climate-smart
                agriculture practices.


Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                           18
           c. Analysis of the technical options and economic returns should be conducted
              for converting pumped-irrigation to gravity-based schemes, in areas with
              confirmed and steady demand for irrigation services.
           d. In the areas where groundwater over-abstraction is leading to serious depletion
              of aquifers, the use of groundwater should be reserved for domestic water
              supplies.
           e. Wastewater reuse in irrigation should be encouraged, especially in water-
              scarce basins. A new directive on water reuse, considered as a no-regret
              measure for droughts, should be proposed by 2015.

42. Water Supply and Sanitation:
           a. Quantitative assessments of water demands and supply reliability should be
              conducted for all the main utilities of Romania, taking into account the
              expected impacts of various climate change scenarios. This should cover all
              demand sectors, including industries and environment. This analysis should
              form the basis for providing inputs to the River Basin Management Plans, and
              review/updation of operations rules.
           b. The efforts aimed at reducing system losses in water distribution networks
              (currently estimated at approx. 50%) should be strengthened. Similarly, water
              demand management initiatives should be promoted in domestic and industrial
              sectors.
           c. While Romania is striving (in phases) to provide water supply and sanitation
              provisions to all habitations with more than 2000 inhabitants, it would also be
              important to assess the needs of the areas which will not be covered by these
              initiatives.
           d. Wastewater reuse for irrigation and industrial sectors should be encouraged.
           e. The feasibility of using aquifers coupled with artificial recharge for inter-
              annual water storage should be explored in suitable basins.
           f. Critical water supply sources (reservoirs or aquifers) in water-scarce locations
              should be actively protected through land use zoning measures. It is
              recommended that Romania should pilot different drinking water source
              protection models, to assess feasibility and efficacy of this approach.
           g. The national policy on groundwater use allows large abstractors situated in
              utility service area to abstract groundwater in large volumes (after due
              diligence of the permitting process), instead of using the utility supply. This
              has led to significant lowering of the groundwater table in vulnerable areas (e.g
              in the Dobrogea-Littoral basin), and it also adversely affects the viability of the
              water utilities due to loss of revenue and increased cost of pumping water from
              greater depths. The issue is being considered by the Ministry of Environment,
              and policy action on addressing it will be critical for ensuring the viability of
              groundwater as a buffer resource.
           h. Desalinization should be considered for provision of drinking water supplies in
              water-scarce coastal basins

Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                            19
           i. Feasibility of implementing new infrastructure for storage and inter-basin
              water transfers should be examined, if needed, to address the future challenges.

43. Environment and Natural Resources Management:
           a. Quantitative assessments for water needs of various ecosystems should be
              conducted and the results should be used as input for the preparation of the
              River Basin Management Plans in each basin, in order to ensure water
              allocation for environmental uses.
           b. Afforestation and other catchment improvement activities should be
              encouraged in flood- and erosion-prone uplands
           c. It is recommended to pilot suitable co-benefit models of natural resource
              management, in forest catchments and in wetland fisheries, whereby the
              ecosystems sustain local livelihoods while providing valuable environmental
              services.

44. Disaster Management:
           a. There is a need to improve the flood hazard and risk analysis by using a higher
              resolution GIS-based approach, so that the hazard/risk maps can be
              particularized at the level of localities/habitations.
           b. The analysis also needs to be upgraded to 1% (1 in 100 years flood) level for
              inhabited areas, and should take into account the expected impacts of climate
              change on local hydrological systems.
           c. Risk maps need to be formally introduced into the regional development and
              general city planning processes.
           d. A formal regulation could be considered for monitoring and managing
              construction activities in the high flood-risk areas.
           e. Local-level planning capacity for episodic events such as heat waves needs to
              be strengthened.
           f. The current pipeline of infrastructure investments proposed for flood
              protection is estimated at 17 billion €. These investments should be re-
              prioritized after the flood hazard maps are updated to reflect the climate change
              impacts and the required higher degree of flood protection, so that the
              investments at any given level of funding can ensure the maximum possible
              benefits.




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                          20
 7. CONCLUSIONS – NEXT STEPS AND RECOMMENDED PRIORITY
              ACTIONS FOR ESIF (2014-2020) OPs

The analysis presented in this report is significantly limited by the extent of the available
information. The most significant shortcomings of this analysis pertain to the following:

(i)    There is a need for developing quantitative estimates of climate change impacts on
       water-related sectors, especially since water is the one of the primary modalities through
       which the climate change effects are manifested. This analysis needs to be conducted on
       priority for the water-scarce basins, because a comprehensive list of actions for building
       climate resilience cannot be developed until the River Basin Management Plans are
       updated with the quantitative estimates of climate change impacts on supply and
       demands.
(ii)   The actions suggested in this report have not been validated through an economic
       analysis. Since the needs are high compared to the available resources in the short-term,
       it would be important to undertake a multi-sectoral techno-economic assessment,
       preferably through modeling, in order to prioritize the recommended actions for
       investment. Nonetheless, some of the obvious “no-regret” actions have been presented
       separately, with the recommendation that these be initiated at the earliest, given the
       strong need and significant benefits.

It should also be noted that while some of the recommended investments (such as those in
rural water supply and flood management) do not directly seem to be related to climate
change, these can be validly considered to be a part of the adaptation response and hence may
be eligible for climate change-related funding

The tables below summarize the recommended actions for improving climate resilience in
water-related sectors, for proposed financing and support under the ESIF (2014-2020) OPs.
The estimated time-frame for these actions is also indicated.

                         Table 3: Recommended “No-Regret” Actions

                         Action                             Type of Action         Time frame
  1. Conducting Quantitative Assessments of Climate        Research &            Short term
     Change Impacts on Hydrology, for estimating           Analysis/ Technical
     future water availability and demands under           Assistance
     climate change scenarios. This exercise needs to
     be completed for all basins of Romania (4 are
     already covered)
  2. Establish requirements that River Basin               Policy                Short term
     Management Plans (RBMPs) in each basin must           Training/ education
     be updated with the results of quantitative climate
     change assessments described in #1 above.
  3. Ensure that RBMPs currently being prepared for        Technical             Short term
     2015 are updated with quantitative climate change     Assistance
     assessments
  4. Conduct analysis to assess the specific levels and    Research &            Medium term

Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                              21
       types of irrigated agriculture that can be sustained    Analysis/ Technical
       in each of the river basins, accounting for climate     Assistance
       change impacts. This should feed into RBMP
       process.
 5.    Conduct analysis of the technical options and           Research &            Medium term
       economic returns of converting pumped-irrigation        Analysis/ Technical
       to gravity-based schemes, in areas with confirmed       Assistance
       and steady demand for irrigation services
 6.    Conduct quantitative assessments of water               Research &            Medium term
       demands and supply reliability for all the main         Analysis/ Technical
       WSS utilities of Romania, taking into account the       Assistance
       expected impacts of various climate change
       scenarios. This should feed into RBMP process
 7.    Establish regulations to ensure that large industrial   Policy/Regulation     Short term
       water users are provided through utility supplies,
       instead of private groundwater wells (The issue is
       being considered by the Ministry of Environment
       and Climate Change)
 8.    Conduct quantitative assessments for water needs        Research &            Medium term
       of various ecosystems. These environmental uses         Analysis/ Technical
       should feed into the RBMP process.                      Assistance
 9.    Update flood hazard and risk analysis by using a        Technical             Medium term
       higher resolution GIS-based approach; upgraded          Assistance
       nationally to 1% (1 in 100 years flood) level for
       inhabited area; and take into account expected
       climate change impacts.
 10.   Establish regulations to formally introduce flood       Policy/ Regulation    Medium term
       risk assessments into the regional development
       and general city planning processes.
 11.   Assess feasibility of regulation for monitoring and     Policy/ Regulation    Medium term
       managing construction activities in the high flood-
       risk areas.
 12.   Strengthen local-level planning capacity for            Capacity-building     Medium term
       episodic events such as heat waves.




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                                 22
        Table 4: Recommended Actions for Prioritization and Financing under ESIF (2014-
                                          2020) OPs

  Sectoral                                                            Type of        Time frame    Applicable
                                     Action
   Focus                                                              Action                          OP
Irrigation       1. Implement pilots to test different models of   Pilot             Medium term   Rural
                    efficient irrigation systems coupled with      Investments                     Development
                    climate-smart agriculture practices.                                           OP
                 2. Establish regulations to limit the use of      Policy/           Medium term   Rural
                    groundwater for domestic water supplies,       Regulation                      Development
                    in the areas where groundwater over-                                           OP
                    abstraction is leading to serious depletion
                    of aquifers.
                 3. Wastewater reuse in irrigation should be       Policy/ Pilot     Medium term   Rural
                    encouraged, especially in water-scarce         Investments                     Development
                    basins                                                                         OP
                 4. Investments in infrastructure to ensure        Direct            Long term     Large
                    water supply and wastewater provisions for     Investment                      Infrastructure
                    263 municipalities having more than                                            OP / Rural
                    10,000 inhabitants, by 2015 ( and by 2018                                      Development
                    for 2,346 smaller townships with 2,000 -                                       OP
                    10,000 inhabitants)
                 5. Assess scope and scale of methane capture      Technical         Medium term   Large
                    and flaring, as well as high efficiency        Assistance/                     Infrastructure
                    pumps, to reduce the GHG emissions from        Direct                          OP / Rural
                    the water and wastewater supply                Investments                     Development
                    investments, and to hence qualify these                                        OP
                    investments as climate actions.
                 6. Support utility investments aimed at           Direct            Long term     Large
                    reducing system losses in water                Investment                      Infrastructure
                    distribution networks (currently estimated                                     OP
                    at approx. 50%).
                 7. Wastewater reuse in industrial sectors         Policy/Pilot      Medium term   Large
                    should be encouraged.                          Investments                     Infrastructure
Water Supply
                                                                                                   OP
and Sanitation
                 8. Assess feasibility of using aquifers coupled   Technical         Medium term   Large
                    with artificial recharge for inter-annual      Assistance/Pilo                 Infrastructure
                    water storage should be explored in water-     t Investments                   OP
                    scarce basins.
                 9. Establish requirements for protection of       Policy/           Medium term   Large
                    critical water supply sources (reservoirs or   Regulation/                     Infrastructure
                    aquifers) in water-scarce locations, through   Pilot                           OP/ Rural
                    land use zoning measures.                      Investments                     Development
                                                                                                   OP/ Regional
                                                                                                   OP
                 10. Assess feasibility of desalinization for      Technical         Medium term   Large
                     provision of drinking water supplies in       Assistance                      Infrastructure
                     water-scarce coastal basins                                                   OP
                 11. Afforestation and other catchment             Direct            Medium term   Rural
                     improvement activities should be              Investments                     Development
                     encouraged in flood- and erosion-prone                                        OP
                     uplands
                 12. Implement pilots on suitable co-benefit       Technical         Medium term   Rural

     Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                               23
                    models of natural resource management, in       Assistance/                 Development
                    forest catchments and in wetland fisheries,     Pilot                       OP/ Regional
                    whereby the ecosystems sustain local            Investments                 OP
                    livelihoods while providing valuable
                    environmental service
                13. Undertake construction of flood                 Direct        Long term     Large
                    management infrastructure. Since the            Investments                 Infrastructure
                    potential investments pipeline is huge                                      OP
                    (estimated at 17 billion €), investments
Disaster Risk       should be prioritized on the basis of
Reduction and       updated flood hazard/risk mapping and
Management          accounting for the climate change impacts.
                14. Upgrade to digital the existing radar           Direct        Medium term   Large
                    network for measuring precipitation             Investment                  Infrastructure
                    intensity, and installing a new radar station                               OP
                    in Galati.




                                                      ---------




    Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                             24
                                     8. REFERENCES

[1] – Ministry of Environment and Forests, “Romania’s Fifth National Communication on
Climate Change under The United Nation Framework Convention on Climate Changes”,
Bucharest, January 2010

[2] – Ministry of Environment and Forests, ANPM, “National Report on the state of
Environment in 2011”, Bucharest, 2012

[3] – National Institute of Statistics, “Statistical Yearbook 2011”

[4] – The World Bank, “Green Growth and Climate Change Analytical and Advisory Program
in FYR Macedonia”, Sector papers: Water, April 2013

[5] – Romanian Water National Administration, Press Information, 2011

[6] – The World Bank, “Final Report of the Project Rehabilitation and Reform of Irrigation -
Economic Analyses of Irrigation Sector”, May 2009

[7] – EEA, Thematic assessment, Water resources: quantity and flows, 2010

[8] – EEA, The European environment, State and outlook, 2010

[9] – EEA, Water resources across Europe, Report No. 2/2009

[10] – National Administration of Romanian Water, Water balance – Technical Report, 2011

[11] - National Administration of Romanian Water, Water balance – Technical Report, 2012

[12] – CECILIA, Central and Eastern Europe Climate Change Impact and Vulnerability
Assessment, Project No. 037005, 2008

[13] – CLAVIER, Climate Change and Variability: Impact on Central and Eastern Europe,
FP7 EU, Contract number 037013, 2006-2009.

[14] – National Environmental Protection Agency, National Report on the State of
Environment, 2010.

[15] – Stanciu, P., E. Oprisan, I., Tecuci, National Water Resources and their Evolution in the
Context of Climate Change. National Institute of Hydrology and Water Management, 2011.




Integrated Water Resources Rapid Assessment Report                                           25
