                                                                                84946




Ethiopia and the World Bank
Over half a century of partnership towards sustainable development
                                                                     w w w. w o r l d b a n k . o r g / e t
Ethiopia and the World Bank
Over half a century of partnership towards sustainable development
Acknowledgments                                                                                                           Contact:
The Book was prepared by the World Bank Ethiopia Communi-            Production: content development, writing, editing,
                                                                                                                          ADDIS ABABA
cations Team lead by Gelila Woodeneh. The team would like to         Gelila Woodeneh, Greg Toulmin and Berhanu Kassa
                                                                                                                          +2511 (0) 11-5-176000
take this opportunity to express its appreciation to all those who   Photos: World Bank Collection, Arne Hoel
                                                                                                                          Africa Avenue, (Bole Road)
contributed to this project.                                         Research, Design and Layout: Impala Communication
                                                                                                                          Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, email: gwoodeneh@worldbank.org
                                                                     and Gelila Woodeneh
                                                                                                                          WASHINGTON
                                                                                                                          +1-202-458-1747
                                                                                                                          1818 H Street NW
                                                                                                                          Washington DC 20433, email: rtoulmin@worldbank.org
Contents
Preface by Minister of Finance and Economic Development                               2    Increasing and Improving the Delivery of Infrastructure                             25

Foreword - Country Director                                                           4              Expanding and Improving Ethiopia’ roads network
                                                                                                     Helping to Improve Water Supply and Sanitation
Overview                                                                              5
           Historical /Economic Context
           Development Challenges                                                          Enhancing Regional Integration                                                      33
           The Growth and Transformation Plan- Key development goals:
                                                                                                     Nile Basin Initiative Supporting Integrated Water Resources Development
The World Bank Group                                                                  7              Promoting Regional Connectivity ET/SU interconnector
                                                                                                     East Africa Power Pool
           International Development Association (IDA)
           International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                         Helping Ethiopia to Enhance its resilience and Reduce its Vulnerability
           Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                 Improving the Delivery of Social Services                                           35
           The World Bank Institute (WBI)
           The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)                    Enhancing the quality of Education

The World Bank in Ethiopia                                                            8    Empowering Citizens, Increasing Accountability, and Improving Service Delivery      41
         World Bank Country Partnership Strategy
         International Development Association (IDA)                                                 Promoting the Delivery of Basic Services
         International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                     Ensuring Food Security and Livelihood
         Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                             Expanding Ethiopia’s Impressive Successes in Health

Main Areas of Intervention and Key Results                                                 Supporting Comprehensive Social Protection and Risk Management                      49

Supporting Ethiopia to Create a Stable Macroeconomic Environment                      15             Reaching the underserved:
                                                                                                     Supporting the needs of Pastoral Communities
           Fostering Competitiveness and Employment                                                  Ensuring Sustainable Land Management
                                                                                                     Promoting Good Governance and State Building
Increasing Competitiveness and Productivity                                           17             Transforming Cities, Creating Jobs, Improving Livelihoods
                                                                                                     Urban Local Government Development Project (UGDP)
           Supporting Agricultural Growth and Rural Development                                      Aid harmonization and Partnership
           Increasing productivity through the Expansion of Irrigation and Drainage
           Promoting Private Sector Development                                            Way Forward                                                                         61
           Helping Women Entrepreneurs Unleash their Potential
                                                                                           Ethiopia at a glance                                                                63

                                                                                           Map of Projects                                                                     65
Preface


Ethiopia’s efforts to accelerate growth and reduce   The World Bank has been a key development part-
poverty have been rewarded with impressive re-       ner, supporting our development efforts in many       Minister of Finance and Econmic Development
sults. Ethiopia has registered a strong economic     areas for more than six decades, while ensur-
                                                     ing country ownership of development priorities.
over the last decade. We have also succeeded in
maintaining a strong and sustainable macroeco-                                                    -
nomic framework. As indicated in our Growth and      nership with the World Bank will remain strong
Transformation Plan (GTP), we are committed to       and we look forward to working together to
reaching the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)     promote sustainable development and im-
and becoming a middle-income country by 2025.        prove the living standards of all Ethiopians.


                                                             Minister of Finance and Econmic Development




                                                                                                                                                         2
Foreword                             Ethiopia is among the founding countries of the        strategy (2011-2015), entitled the Growth and
                                     World Bank Group. Since it became a member             Transformation Plan (GTP), aims to foster broad
                                                                                            based development in a sustainable manner
                                     from the Bank for over 140 projects related to all     to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
                                     major sectors of the economy. The International        This plan has been recognized by the Bank’s
                                     Development Association (IDA) is Ethiopia’s larg-      Executive Directors as setting out similar priori-
                                                                                            ties to the Bank’s own strategy for Africa’s Fu-
                                     Over the past 20 years, IDA has contributed over       ture. It is also the anchor for the current World
                                     US$10 billion to more than 60 projects in Ethio-       Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy.
                                     pia, through both credits and grants. The World
                                     Bank Group has also delivered a range of knowl-        The World Bank Country Team strongly be-
                                     edge services and policy advice to Ethiopia, by        lieves that the people of Ethiopia can over-
                                     undertaking analytical work, the preparation of        come the development challenges they face.
                                     policy notes and sectoral studies. This partnership    The World Bank will continue to provide assis-
                                     indicates the World Bank’s strong commitment                                                        -
                                     and desire to help Ethiopia in its efforts to reduce   nancial assistance, to support the development
                                     poverty and improve the well-being of its citizens.

              Guang Zhe Chen,        In recent years, Ethiopia has been one of the fast-    We hope this book will help you to better under-
     Country Director for Ethiopia   est growing economies in Africa. Over the past         stand how the World Bank Group is supporting
                                     two decades, with support from development             Ethiopia to reduce poverty and improve the living
                                     partners, the country has registered some impres-      standards of its people. We would also like to en-
                                     sive results in key human development indicators:      courage you to learn more about the World Bank
                                     primary school enrolments have quadrupled, child       by visiting our website. We welcome your feed-
                                     mortality has been cut in half, and the number of      back on how we can improve our services and
                                     people with access to clean water has more than        deliver lasting results for the people of Ethiopia.
                                     doubled. At the same time the Government has em-
                                     barked on an ambitious program of public invest-                                      Guang Zhe Chen,
                                     ment to remove constraints to economic growth.                              Country Director for Ethiopia




                                                                                                                                                  4
    Ethiopia
               Economic Overview                                  the causes of poverty among its population.
                                                                  GoE is already devoting a very high share
                                                                  of its budget to pro-poor programs and in-
               Ethiopia is the second-most populous coun-         vestments. Large-scale donor support will
               try in Sub-Saharan Africa with a population of     continue to provide a vital contribution in the
               about 85 million (United Nations, 2011). One
               of the world’s oldest civilizations, Ethiopia is   needed to meet these challenges. However,
               also one of the world’s poorest countries.         even if donor support is increased, using aid
               The country’s per capita income of US$370          effectively will require Ethiopia to improve
               is substantially lower than the regional aver-     governance, empower local authorities, and
               age of US$1,257 (Gross National Income,            further develop government accountability to
               Atlas Method). The Government of Ethiopia          its citizens.
               (GoE) aspires to reach middle income status
               (current threshold: US$1,025) over the next        Over the past two decades, there has been
               decade.                                                                                        -
                                                                  ment indicators and Ethiopia is on track to
               The economy has experienced strong and             meet many of the Millennium Development
               broad based growth over the past decade,           Goals (MDGs): primary school enrolment has
               averaging 9.9 per cent per year between            quadrupled, child mortality has been cut in
               2004/05 - 2011/12 compared to the regional         half, the number of people with access to
               average of 5.4 per cent.                           clean water has more than doubled, gen-
                                                                  der parity is being reached in education, and
               Economic growth brought with it positive           there has been substantial progress on HIV/
               trends in reducing poverty, in both urban and      AIDS and malaria. Good progress has been
               rural areas. While 38.7 per cent of Ethiopi-       made towards universal primary education,
                                                                  although this MDG target may not be met.
               years later this was reduced to 29.6 per cent      Reduction of maternal mortality remains a
               as measured by the national poverty line           key challenge.
               of US$0.6 per day. Under the Growth and
               Transformation Plan (GTP), the target is to        These gains, together with more recent
               reduce this further to 22.2 per cent by 2014-
               2015.                                              and HIV/AIDS, paint a picture of improved
                                                                  wellbeing in Ethiopia. Notwithstanding the
                                                                  progress on these critical aspects of hu-
               Development Challenges                             man development, given the country’s low
               g                                                  starting point, Ethiopia needs considerable
               The main challenge for Ethiopia is to continue     investment and continued policy reforms to
               and accelerate the progress made in recent         achieve some of the Millennium Development
               years towards the MDGs and to address              Goals by 2015.


5
                                                                                 This GTP is the anchor
                                                                                  for the World Bank’s
                                                                                       new Country
                                                                                  Partnership Strategy


The Growth and Transformation Plan
geared towards fostering broad-based development in a sustainable manner to achieve the MDGs. The GTP envi-
sions a major leap in terms of not only economic structure and income levels but also the level of social indicators.


Key Development Goals:
Rapid economic growth, targeted for 11 per cent per year at worst and, at best, to double the size of the economy
by 2015, with GDP per capita expected to reach US$698 by 2015;



An increased contribution from the industrial sector particularly focused on increased production in sugar, textiles,
leather products and cement;


each year;

The road network should increase from 49,000 kilometers to 64,500 kilometers by 2015;

Power generation capacity will increase from the current 2,000 MW to 8,000 MW, and the number of customers
from the current two million to four million by 2015;

Construction of 2,395 kilometers of railway line; and,

Achievement of all Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

The plan also aims to reduce the maternal mortality rate by more than half from 590 per 100,000 to 267 per
100,000.


                                                                                                                        6
 The World Bank Group
                 Since its inception in 1944, the World Bank has expanded from a single institution to a closely associated group

                 Development (IBRD) as facilitator of post-war reconstruction and development to the present-day twin goals of
                 ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity



                                              The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) lends to govern-
                                              ments of middle-income and creditworthy low-income countries.




                                              The International Development Association (IDA) provides interest-free loans called cred-
                                              its and grants to governments of the poorest countries.




                                              The International Finance Corporation (IFC) is the largest global development institu-
organizations:                                tion focused exclusively on supporting the private sector and helps developing countries
                                                                                                                                     -
                                              nancial markets, and providing advisory services to businesses and governments.




                                              The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) was created in 1988 to promote
                                              foreign direct investment into developing countries to support economic growth, reduce
                                                                                                                                   -
                                              ance guarantees to investors and lenders.




                                              The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) provides interna-
                                              tional facilities for conciliation and arbitration of investment disputes.




7
1945
                                       The World Bank in Ethiopia
Ethiopia became a founding member of the International Bank for
                                                                    ROAD IN ETHIOPIA IN NEED OF REPAIR (1950)




     credit for the rehabilitation and maintenance of roads, and

     Bank

Ethiopia Joined                                                        HEAVY EQUIPMENT LEVELS A ROAD
                                                                    NEAR ADOLLA WHILE YOUNG ETHIOPIANS
                                                                                WATCH (1950)

     The International Development Association (IDA) in 1960

     The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) in 1990



     Ethiopia has also signed the convention establishing ICSID
                                                                     ROADS AND BRIDGES WERE REPAIRED AS
                                                                                PART OF THE
                                                                     WORLD BANK’S LOAN TO ETHIOPIA (1950)
                                                                                                           8
World Bank Partnership with Ethiopia


 The World Banks’ engagement with Ethiopia
 is guided by a Country Partnership Strategy,
 which covers the period from July 2012 to
 June 2016 (CPS). The CPS builds on the pro-
 gress achieved by Ethiopia during the previous

 going challenges and assist in the implementa-
 tion of the GTP.

 The CPS is a results-based strategy developed
 after intensive consultations with a wide range
 of stakeholders in order to gain a broad-based
 perspective on the World Bank’s performance
 and development priorities. It sets out three ar-
 eas of focus: fostering competitiveness & em-
 ployment; enhancing resilience and reducing
 vulnerability; and good governance and state

 forms of engagement which are partnership
 with GoE, other parts of Ethiopian society and
 other international partners; knowledge devel-




                                                     CPS Framework




                                                                     10
Ethiopia is the
  International Development Association’s (IDA)


     The International Development Association is
                                                 -
     ment assistance: to date, it has committed
     over US$10 billion for development projects,
     most notably for the protection of basic ser-
     vices, health, HIV/AIDS, productive safety
     nets, food security, energy infrastructure,
     and roads.

     As of June 2013, IDA’s portfolio in Ethiopia
     consists of 24 projects with net commit-
     ments of around US$5 billion. On average
     Ethiopia receives around US$1 billion an-
     nually in new IDA commitments. This large
     and well managed portfolio has also enabled
     the World Bank to establish itself as a capa-
     ble administrator, of a large portfolio of Trust
     Funds from over a dozen Donors worth in
     excess of US$ 1.5 billion.

     Social protection accounts for almost half
     of current commitments; this includes ba-
     sic services such as health, education, rural
     roads, safety nets, etc. 30 per cent of com-
     mitments are for infrastructure (mostly roads
     and electricity). The rest is dedicated to other
     sectors such as water, agriculture and irriga-
     tion.




11
International Finance Corporation (IFC)
                                                                                 -

   advisory services to its clients.

                                              Derba Cement Factory
        invested US$55 million.


        for farmers.                                                         up to
        US$10 million

                                       Global Warehouse Financing Program.       -



            Ethiopia Commodity Exchange (ECX).




                                                                                       Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)

                                                                                     taxes and transferring skills and know-how. . In addition, local communities often receive
                                                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                     lar local investments and spur the growth of local businesses. In Ethiopia:

                                                                                                              guarantee of US$4.6 million to Africa Juice BV


                                                                                                                       US$4 million covering an equity investment
                                                                                                                                     National Cement Share Com-
                                                                                         pany of Ethiopia.

                                                                                                          guarantee of US$2.9 million to UniFruit Limited




                                                                                                                                                                                  12
Main Areas of Intervention and Key Results




                                         14
Supporting Ethiopia to Create a Stable
Macroeconomic Environment
Fostering Competitiveness and Employment
Economic Updates, Poverty Assessment, Poverty Mapping, Debt
Sustainability Analysis
                                                                                                                    Supporting Ethiopia to
The World Bank engages in economic policy dialogue with
                                                              Among the knowledge products the World Bank
                                                              produces are:
                                                                                                                       Create a Stable
GoE on key issues, including ways to improve the invest-
ment climate to help Ethiopia attract foreign investment.         Semi-annual economic updates,
                                                                                                                      Macroeconomic
The World Bank is supporting Ethiopia to create a stable
                                                                  Poverty assessment,
                                                                  Debt sustainability analyses as well as others.
                                                                                                                        Environment
macroeconomic environment by undertaking several activi-
ties mainly in the form of dialogue and knowledge sharing.




                                                                                                                                             16
Increasing Competitiveness and Productivity
Supporting Agricultural Growth
and Rural Development
Agriculture in Ethiopia is the largest contributor to overall eco-
nomic growth and poverty reduction.


45 per cent of national GDP

90 per cent of the goods exported

84 per cent of the labor force
Agriculture remains the economy’s most important sector. The
livelihood of 85 per cent of the population is fully or partially
dependent on agriculture.


                                             -
tial because of its water resources, its fer-
tile land areas, and its large labor pool, but

Agriculture in Ethiopia is dominated by small-holder and largely
subsistence farming with low productivity on often highly de-
graded lands. Leading the sector to higher productivity and in-
creased commercialization is fundamental to poverty reduction
and food security.



                                                                     Increase agricultural productivity,                    The World Bank also works with small
The World Bank brings much-                                          Promote commercialization,                             holder farmers to increase agricultural
needed attention to this critical                                                                                           productivity and household income by
                                                                                                                            strengthening value chains to increase
sector and is helping GoE to                                         Address food security and increase Ethiopia’s resil-   the value and volume of sales of key se-
                                                                     ience to climate variability.                          lected agricultural commodities.
19
Increasing Productivity
through the Expansion
of Irrigation and Drainage

Lack of irrigation is a major constraint to agricultural development
in Ethiopia. Addressing this challenge has become a key priority
for GoE. In the GTP, “Maintaining agriculture as a major source of

growth and development in the country. Expansion of small scale
irrigation is also being given priority while due attention is given to
medium and large scale irrigation to the extent possible”.

The World Bank, through the Irrigation and Drainage project that
it is funding, is helping Ethiopia to sustainably increase agricultural
output and productivity by enhancing sustainable irrigation man-
agement and achieving greater agricultural and market develop-
ment.




                                                                          “
                                                                            This project has the potential and the ambition to transform the

20,000 hectares of irrigation and                                         agricultural practice in the Project Area from subsistence, low in-
                                                                          put low output type of farming to a more entrepreneurial type of
related infrastructure (drainage and                                      farming generating surpluses out of which the smallholder ben-

access roads) are being developed
                                                                                                           ”
                                                                          ensuring long term sustainability.

for sustainable irrigation manage-                                                                                       Francois Onimus,
                                                                                                     World Bank’s project task team leader.
ment and agricultural market devel-
opment.


                                                                                                                                                20
Promoting Private Sector
Development
Ethiopia exhibits high potential for private sector-led growth and

growing as fast as it should. It remains weak and underdeveloped
due to multiple constraints.

Despite Ethiopia’s potential low labor cost advantage, few Ethio-
                                                                -
fore not attracting foreign investment. Constraints such as high
transport costs and low domestic demand contribute to the slow
growth of the private sector. A dominant public sector and a lack
of effective competition also present challenges to the sector.

To address these challenges, the World Bank, is helping to build
the capacity of the private sector by creating favorable conditions
for increased productivity, growth and competitiveness.

Through the upcoming competitiveness and job creation project,
the World Bank will:




         tool for investment generation, accelerating growth,
         and job creation, by strengthening linkages with
         small and medium enterprises.




                                                                      22
Helping Women Entrepreneurs Unleash
their Potential
Female entrepreneurs in Ethiopia’s economy face major obstacles including limited access to vital


Recognizing the substantial economic impact from promoting female entrepreneurship, the World
Bank is supporting the Women Entrepreneurship Development Program (WEDP), which aims to
address the two most severe constraints to women-owned Micro and Small Enterprises : lack of



least 17 thousand
of 20 thousand women entrepreneurs and provide them with larger loans, training and support in
developing, running and growing a business.




         by female entrepreneurs,




  “    employment opportunities to contribute to the country’s economic growth.

       The World Bank is committed to help in creating equal access to the necessary




                                                                         ”
       resources for both female and male entrepreneurs in Ethiopia so that they can


                                                                        Guang Z. Chen,
                                                           Country Director for Ethiopia.


                                                                                                    24
Increasing and Improving the Delivery
of Infrastructure
Expanding and Improving Ethiopia’s roads network


Ethiopia’s development has been held back by a large infrastructure gap—it has one of the lowest
road densities in Africa.

The World Bank has invested over US$2 billion since 1991 and has supported the formulation
of Ethiopia’s road sector development program, (RSDP) which helped to establish a dedicated
                                                                                                   roads increased from 22 per cent in 1997 to 64 per cent in 2012,
Bank continues to play a leading role in the development and improvement of the road network
in Ethiopia.
                                                                                                   1997 to 57 kilometers per 1000 sq. km in 2012,
Working in partnership with other donors the World Bank has helped increase both the size and
quality of Ethiopia’s highway network from under 20,000 kilometers of roads in 1991 to over
63,000 kilometers in 2012.                                                                         1997 to 8.7 kilometers in 2012.




                                                                                                                                                                      28
Helping to Improve Water
Supply and Sanitation
Considerable progress has been made in improving access to
safe water and hygiene and sanitation in Ethiopia. However, much
more remains to be done and millions are yet to be reached.
In 2010, out of a population of over 80 million, about 46 million
people were without access to an improved water supply, and 36
million practiced open defecation.

Provision of better access to safe water and sanitation facilities

ensure the GTP’s key pillar of improving citizens’ living standards.

The World Bank has helped GoE to improve access to safe wa-
ter.




         38.66 per cent (2005) to 65.80 per cent (2010),


         82 per cent (2005) to 91.50 per cent (2010),


         from less than 20 per cent at the beginning of
         2000 to 60 per cent in 2010, and 68 per cent
         in 2011, and forecast to have reached 76
         per cent by 2012.




                                                                 30
With the support from the World Bank and other De-
velopment Partners collaborating under WASH (the
Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Move-
                                                  -
cess to improved water supply and over 9,000 rural
water supply schemes have been constructed and
Improving Energy Access, Network Reinforcement,

Since 2005 electricity access in Ethiopia has been growing rap-
idly. Despite this progress only 41 per cent of rural towns and
villages are connected to the grid, which provides electricity to
two million rural citizens. The population’s limited access to      The World Bank
electricity is a major barrier to economic development and to
the provision of social services in rural areas.
At the same time, the demand for electricity in the country has
grown substantially. Expansion of the high voltage transmission              184 megawatt of electricity,

transmission backbone for electricity distribution systems.
Expanding access to electricity in rural communities will support            500,000 people) get access to electricity
broad-based economic development and help alleviate poverty.                 between 2006 and 2013,

The World Bank has committed close to                     under 7
projects to bring renewable energy potential to fruition.                    rural villages with electricity access from 648
                                                                             in 2005 to 6,269 in 2012 by supporting
                                                                             GOE’s Universal Access Program.

                                                                    In remote rural areas, off grid solutions are implement-

The World Bank has helped                                           ed with World Bank support with the following results:


                         -                                                   been distributed with an estimated reduction
                                                                             in the opportunity cost of fuel wood of
ing the replacement of 9.6                                                   US$270 million,


million conventional light                                                   370 rural schools and 545 health centers
                                                                             have been equipped with Solar Home
                                                                             Systems (SHS),


                             -                                               installation for rural households, through
                                                                             cooperatives,
ducing Ethiopia’s demand
for electricity by an estimat-                                               development of stand-alone renewable
                                                                             energy programs providing additional
ed 300 MW.                                                                   household access to energy.



                                                                                                                               34
                                                                                                                               32
Enhancing Regional Integration
Regional Cooperation
Historically, there has been strong tension over water usage rights between up-        The Eastern Electricity Highway Project (EEHP)
stream Nile riparians, such as Ethiopia, which contributes 85 per cent of Nile wa-
ters, and downstream countries, such as Egypt, for which the river is the lifeblood    The World Bank funded Eastern Electricity Highway Project (EEHP) is an example
of its economy. The World Bank supported the historic establishment of the Nile        of what regional cooperation can achieve. It is a transformational initiative that will
Basin Initiative (NBI) in 2001, which has fostered cooperation among the nations       connect Ethiopia’s electrical grid with Kenya, create power-sharing between the
through which the Nile runs - paving the way for potential investments in developing   two countries, reduce energy costs, promote sustainable and renewable power
water resources.                                                                       generation, better protect the region’s environment, and pave the way for more
                                                                                       dynamic regional cooperation between the countries of East Africa. This is indeed
The underlying principle of the program is that integrated planning and the manage-    a major phase in the establishment of the infrastructure platform, which will sup-
ment of water and land resources when synergized with critical investments, institu-   port the Eastern Africa power market under the Eastern Africa Power Pool (EAPP).
tional development, environment management, and the facilitation of private sector
development, can provide an effective framework to promote economic growth.

Ethiopia has the potential to become the electricity generation hub of Eastern Af-     The new line is bidirectional. This means Ethiopia will
rica. The country is bestowed with abundant hydro-electric generation potential
as well as several renewable energy sources such as geothermal, wind and solar.
                                                                                       through access to Kenyan energy at times of peak
Tana Beles Integrated Water Resources Development Projects
                                                                                       from additional jobs created by construction and in-
As part of the NBI, the World Bank funded Tana Beles project is developing
enabling institutions and investments for integrated planning and management, to
                                                                                       stallation activities.
optimize social, environmental, and economic opportunities in the Tana and Beles
Sub-basins, thereby accelerating sustainable growth.
                                                                                       The East Africa Agriculture Productivity Project (EAAP),
                                                                                       The World Bank is also supporting regional collaboration through the East Africa
                                                                                       Agriculture Productivity Program (EAAP), which enhances regional specialization in
                                                                                       agricultural research and facilitates increased sharing of agricultural technologies
                                                                                       across national boundaries, by upgrading existing national agricultural research in-
         about 83,000 ha,                                                              stitutions in Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda into Regional Centers of Excel-
                                                                                       lence.

         and 745 hectares of gully lands treated with improved soil and water          The Program is:
         conservation measures,


         training, community warning infrastructure and shelters developed
         Regional Energy.
Helping Ethiopia to Enhance its Resilience and
Reduce its Vulnerability - Improving the
Delivery of Social Services
Enhancing the Quality of Education




The rapid expansion of Ethiopia’s education system has not yet been              The World Bank’s support for the education sector—including through
matched by equivalent improvements in the quality of education delivered         the General Education Quality Improvement Program (GEQIP) and the
in some educational sub-sectors. GoE’s vision for education develop-             Protection of Basic Services program—has helped Ethiopia expand ac-
ment therefore gives high priority to improving quality at all levels. To this   cess to quality general primary education over the last few years. GE-
                                                                                 QIP has been supplying better educational materials, providing teacher
subsequent expansion in the sector.                                              training, school improvement programs, school grants, and building the
                                                                                 capacity of education management at all levels.




39
Results…                                                                              The World Bank is supporting im-
         A reduction of the gender gap for schooling. The gender parity index,
         the ratio of girls to boys in primary enrolment rates, increased from 0.74
                                                                                      provements in teaching and learning
         per cent in 2001/02 to 0.95 per cent in 2001/12,
                                                                                      conditions in primary and secondary
         17 million in 2011/12. As a result, the primary net enrolment rate           institutions, as well as management
         increased from 52.2 per cent to 85.4 per cent,
                                                                                      planning and budget capacity of the
         reached 36.9 per cent in 2011/12 (double the level of 2001/02),              Ministry of Education and Regional
         has increased from 42 and 18.7 per cent in 2001/02 to 73.8 and
                                                                                      Education Bureaus.
         52.1 per cent respectively in 2011/12,


         learning assessment has increased from 20 per cent to 29 per cent
         for Grade 1-4 and from 10 per cent to 18 per cent for Grade 5 to 8
         between 2006/07 and 2010/11.




 “10-year-old Senait who lives in Sele Kebele in the Oromia region is
                                                                                 -
ject.
                                       she says with bright eyes. Going to school
has become the highlight of her life. The ‘older’ classroom she studied in lacked
proper light and ventilation. She was excited to start studying in her new class-
room and was eagerly awaiting the completion of the facilities there. As a nation-
wide program, PBS has helped improve the lives of more than 70 million rural
Ethiopians: not least among them are children like Senait who now have access
to services previously denied to them.

                                                                                                                       40
Since 2006, the PBS program has helped hire over
Empowering Citizens,
Increasing Accountability,
and Improving Service Delivery
The Promoting Basic Services Program




                                         EFFICIENCY




                                       TRANSPARENCY




                                       ACCOUNTABILITY
45
The Promoting Basic Services Program (formerly the Protection of Basic Services Program) is a na-
tionwide program that contributes to: expanding nationwide access to quality basic services such as
education, health, water supply, sanitation, rural roads and agricultural extension services. It funds block


(district) level.

                                                                                                           -
tions in implementing social accountability activities.




 The PBS has greatly strengthened Ethiopia’s deliv-
 ery of public services, by enabling Woreda’s to:


 Results…
             from 66:1 in 2005/05 to 51:1 in 2011/12 for primary education,




             39.5 million in 2010 to nearly 46 million in 2011/12,


             under PBS,




                                                                                                         46
Social Accountability
Since 2006, under the PBS, the World Bank along with other development partners has been
supporting GoE’s efforts to promote and increase social accountability to improve the delivery of
services and make them relevant to peoples’ needs.


The initiative has empowered ordinary citi-
zens to assess the quality, adequacy and
effectiveness of basic services and to voice
their needs and preferences regarding the
provision of these services.
This has made it possible for citizens to hold policy-makers and service providers more accountable
for their performance, transforming the lives of ordinary Ethiopians.



                                                                                                      center that serves the Debre Libanos woreda - consisting of about 50,000 people. On a very busy day, the


                                                                                                      in the services provided at the health center, the number of visitors has more than doubled from 200 cases
                                                                                                      per month two years ago to over 500 visitors currently




                                                                                                                                                                                                             48
Ensuring Food Security and Improving Livelihoods
                                                                                                         Results…
                            Chronic food insecurity has been a salient feature of rural Ethiopia for
                            many years. The major causes of food insecurity in Ethiopia include land     PSNP
                            degradation, recurrent drought, limited capacity to manage for risks,
                            population pressure, and subsistence agricultural practices dominated
                            by rain-fed farming and characterized by low inputs and low outputs.                government to manage the risks of
                                                                                                                recurrent drought. (The effects of the
                            In 2005, GoE, the World Bank, and other development partners agreed                 2011 drought crisis in the Horn of
                            on the introduction of a predictable, long term and developmental Safety            Africa were mitigated in Ethiopia to a
                            Net, as an appropriate mechanism to address these challenges and                    great extent due to the presence
                            break the cycle of annual emergency appeals. The Ethiopia Productive                of the PSNP),
                            Safety Net Program (PSNP) is currently the largest safety net program in
                            Sub-Saharan Africa. PSNP provides support to over 8 million chronically
                            food insecure rural citizens (about 10 per cent of the population) in 319           insecure people with regular and
                            districts nationwide.                                                               predictable transfers,


                                                                                                                of 32 days for participating households,


                                                           Emahoy Belaynesh is one of the 8 million             undertaken every year, has rehabilitated
                                                                                                                degraded land and created productive
                                                           a grant under direct support since she
                                                           cannot participate in public works. She              feeder roads, and small-scale irrigation
                                                           became a nun after her husbands’ death               systems,
                                                           and is raising her 3 children and one
                                                           grandchild. With part of her grant, she
                                                           bought seeds of several varieties of fruits          nutrition levels of children less than
                                                           and vegetables and planted them in her
                                                           garden. Among other things, she grows                lactating women,
                                                           corn, yams, carrots, coffee, oranges,
                                                           and passion-fruit. She is also involved in
                                                           beekeeping. “When my husband died I                  kilometers new road, maintained 70,000
                                                           had no source of i                        -          kilometers of road, and constructed over
                                                                                                                15,000 springs and wells,
                                                                                                     -

                                                                                                                and 400 health posts were improved.
                                       Emahoy Belaynesh,




                                                                                                                                                           50
Expanding Ethiopia’s Impressive Successes in Health
                                                                                                                                        The World Bank is respond-
                                                                                                                                        ing to Ethiopia’s current
                                                                                                                                        health needs through a Pro-
                                                                                                                                        gram for Results (PforR)
                                                                                                                                        operation, which disburses
                                                                                                                                        funds upon the delivery of
                                                                                                                                        key results that are known
                                                                                                                                        to contribute to the achieve-
                                                                                                                                        ment of health MDGs.
Over the past few years, Ethiopia has made good progress in
the health sector and is on track to reach the Millennium De-
velopment Goals for child health, HIV/AIDS and malaria. The
                                                                      Results…
                                                                      Key results against which PforR funds will be disbursed in-
per 1,000 live births in 2005 to 88 in 2011. While the current        clude:
level of child mortality is still high, the rate of progress in the
country has been encouragingly rapid.
                                                                               health workers,
However, in order to achieve the remaining Health MDGs
Ethiopia still has many challenges to overcome, including the
high maternal mortality rate and improving access to quality                   vaccine-preventable diseases (diphtheria, tetanus,
health care services for the majority of its citizens.                         whooping cough, hepatitis B and haemophilus

The World Bank along with several development partners
is supporting Ethiopia to strengthen its health system and
ramp up the delivery of essential lifesaving health services.                  receiving antenatal care visits,
Together, they are providing harmonized support to the cur-
rent health sector development program which is estimated
to cost about US$ 4.5 billion including a GoE contribution of                  reporting by health centers and more transparent
US$ 1.5 billion.                                                                procurement.




                                   “                                                                                                ”     Ato Ahmed Shide,

                                                                                                                                                                   52
Supporting Comprehensive Social
Protection and Risk Management
                                                                                                                                                         SUSTAINABLE LIVELIHOODS ENHANCEMENT

Reaching the under-served:
Supporting the Needs of Pastoral Communities

As a community, pastoralists have been economically, socially and politi-   The World Bank through the Pastoral Community Development project
cally marginalized due to inadequate attention from policy makers in the    which will soon be in its third phase has helped to empower pastoralist           PASTORAL RISK MANAGEMENT
                                                                            communities to better manage local development in partnership with lo-
last ten years, pastoralists remain under-served in terms of basic social   cal governments. It promotes a community-driven process for expand-
services.                                                                   ing public services, builds grassroots institutions, and, has piloted com-
                                                                            munity-based pastoral risk management mechanisms.
Among the key development challenges in these areas are:


                                                                            Results…
         processes,
                                                                                     pastoral woredas,                                                         KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
                                                                                                                                                              AND PARTICIPATORY LEARNING




                                                                                                                                                         “
         poorly developed support services, and uneven                               pastoralists (70 per cent women) have become members of the
                                                                                     131 Pastoral Saving and Credit Cooperatives,                           PCDP represents a great opportunity for
         access to markets,
                                                                                                                                                                                                  -




                                                                                                                                                                               ”
                                                                                     system and the responsiveness of disaster mitigation and               ment in pastoral and agro-pastoral com-
         recurring droughts exacerbated by climate change, and
                                                                                     contingency funds (weekly and monthly early warning reports            munities in Ethiopia.
         increasing competition for natural resource use, and
                                                                                     are being disseminating to all concerned stakeholders in
                                                                                     pastoral and agro-pastoral woredas),                                                        Assaye Legesse,
                                                                                                                                                                  World Bank Task Team Leader for
         scale development schemes.
                                                                                                                                                                                         PCDPII.
                                                                                     processes and local development decision making.


                                                                                                                                                                                                      56
Ensuring Sustainable Land Management




                                                                                                      Results…
Ethiopia is one of the countries in Sub-Saharan Africa most seriously threatened by land degrada-
                                                                                                         successfully treated and managed,
national strategies.

Land degradation costs Ethiopia 2-3 per cent of its gross domestic product (GDP) each year—a             run-off,
major hit in a country where agriculture accounts for nearly 50 per cent of GDP, 90 per cent of ex-
port revenue, and is a source of livelihood and revenue for more than 85 per cent of the country’s
population.                                                                                              more than 500 kilometers of terraces,

The World Bank is helping Ethiopia to address some of these challenges through several projects
including the Sustainable Land Management Project.                                                       farmlands to stabilize bunds and gullies,


                                                                                                         homesteads, fertilizing about 53,000 ha,
                                                                                                  -

                                                                                                         seedlings by about 600 households,
Great Rift Valley.

                                                                                                         parcels,


                                                                                                         per cent are female headed) providing strengthened land tenure security for smallholder
                                                                                                         farmers.

                                                                                                                                                                                             58
Promoting Good Governance and State Building
Spanning nearly a decade, Ethiopia’s transformation agenda has

in capacity have hampered the state’s ability to ensure effective
poverty reduction and democratic development through respon-
sive service delivery, citizen empowerment, and good govern-
ance.

Through the Public Sector Capacity Building Program, the World
                                                                    -
ness of public service delivery at the federal, regional, and local
level, as well as to empower citizens to participate more effectively
in shaping their own development, by promoting good govern-
ance and accountability.




Results…
The project has led to considerable improvement in government
capabilities to:


         doubled in real terms,


         service delivery to districts has been scaled up from four
         regions to all 11,




         nation,


         in the preparation and execution of plans,


         service proclamation to ensure equal opportunities for
         women to enter the civil service. As a result, there was
         a 114 per cent increase in female recruitment between
         2004 and 2010, compared to only 42 per cent between
         1998 and 2004.



                                                                        60
Transforming Cities, Creating Jobs, Improving
Livelihoods through the Urban Local Government
Development Project (ULGDP)

Ethiopia’s urban areas are among the fastest growing in Africa, with
populations rising at about 4 per cent per year. By 2020, cities are
projected to be home to 30 per cent of Ethiopia’s population.
                                                                        Results …
Through its Urban Local Government Development Project (UL-
GDP) the World Bank helps to strengthen the capacity of urban
local governments to plan, deliver, operate and maintain priority           es, representing some 42 per cent of Ethiopia’s urban
municipal infrastructure and services.                                      residents,




Citizens appreciate the cob-                                                achieved 75 per cent of their annual revenue targets and
blestone roads, bridges, and                                                doubled the number of citizens’ groups participating in
                                                                            planning forums since the start of the project,

drainage systems so much,
                                                                            public on city functions, including the budget, planned
that they are now contributing
                                                                            etc,
their own funds to construct
more.                                                                       women, youth and people with disabilities..



The project has helped various cities to better plan and deliver pri-

City governments now have meaningful consultations with citizens
about their needs and plan for them accordingly. Previously cities
did not systematically consult with citizens.
                                                                        “                                    said an Adigrat
                                                                          citizen. “We needed better roads and drainage, our
                                                                                                                           -




61
                                                                                                     ”
                                    By the end of 2011, some 95,000 people were
Creating jobs for local residents   engaged in cobblestone and other infrastruc-

                                    cities.

                                                                              62
Aid harmonization and Partnership
                                                             The World Bank has taken the lead in                                                     DFID
to Ethiopia has been increasing steadily since 2000. A
large number of donors are active in Ethiopia, with ex-
                                                             developing a set of multi-donor pro-
ternal aid averaging more than US$3.8billion per year        grams to:
between 2008 and 2011. Both GoE and the majority of
international partners are keen to deepen the harmoniza-
tion process in the spirit of the Paris Declaration (2005)
Accra Agenda for Action (2008), and the Busan Partner-
ship for Effective Development Co-operation (2011). Ethi-
opia is a pilot country for the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD), Development
Assistance Committee (DAC) harmonization agenda, and
for the European Union’s initiative on donor division of                                                                                      Denmark Embassy
labor.

The World Bank, with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and African Development Bank, is
                                                             These instruments allow for large-scale leveraging of In-
one of the rotating co-chairs of the Development Assis-
                                                             ternational Development Association (IDA) support. Such
tance Group (DAG), the main forum for donor coordina-
                                                             approaches are used in key interventions.
tion in Ethiopia. A bilateral donor is the other co-chair.
Through the DAG, efforts are under way to make strong
                                                             For more traditional projects, such as roads, action plans
progress on the implementation of commitments made
                                                             are being implemented to harmonize implementation




                                                                                                                                       n
in Paris, Accra and Busan, including joint economic and
                                                             procedures (e.g., common environmental assessment




                                                                                                                                    operatio
sector work.                                                                                                                                                    A
                                                             procedures).
                                                                                                                                                             CID




                                                                                                                                         Co
                                                                                                                                   pment
                 African Development Bank
                                                                                            D
                                                                                        CI
                                                                                      AE




                                                                                                                            Develo                    European Commission
                                                                                                                          Austria

                                AusAid
                                                                                                             UNFPA

                  l gium     Embassy of Finland
               Be
           f
        yo
    ass                                                               Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)
Emb


                                            oope ration
                                ta li a n C
                               I




                                                                                                                               USAID
                                                                                             SIDA
 Embassy of France

                                                          Irish Aid



 German Embassy-German Development Cooperation                                     Netherlands Embassy




                                                      as  sy                      Turkish Int
Embassy of Norway /NORAD                           mb                                         ernational C
                                              nE                                                          ooperation
                                             a                                                                         Agency (T
                                        Indi                                                                                      ICA)



                                                                      ary Fund
    ILO                                      International Monet                                                       e (UNDP)
                                                                                                        t Programm
                                                                                        UN   Developmen
Way Forward

The World Bank will continue to address the deep and complex issues of
supporting bottom-up initiatives that:


      Foster Economic Growth;

            Reduce Vulnerability;

                  Foster Improved Governance;

                               Improve Access to and
                                                                         69




65
66
                                                                                                                                                      Life expectancy at birth (years)                                59          55         59
                                                                                                                                                      Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)                        52          69         63
                                                                                                                                                      Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)                      29          21         23                Access to improved water source
                                                                                                                                                      Access to an improved water source (% of population)            44          61         65
                                                                                                                                                      Literacy (% of population age 15+)                              39          63         63
                                                                                                                                                      Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)          106         100        105
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ethiopia          Low-income group
                                                                                                                                                         Male                                                        111         103        108




Ethiopia at a Glance...
                                                                                                                                                         Female                                                      101          96        103

                                                                                                                                                      KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1991       2001        2010       2011        Economic ratios*
                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                      GDP (US$ billions)                                  13.4        8.0       26.6        30.2
                                                                                                                                                      Gross capital formation/GDP                         11.1       21.5       24.7        25.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Trade
                                                                                                                                                      Exports of goods and services/GDP                    4.1       12.0       13.6        16.8
                                                                                                                                                      Gross domestic savings/GDP                           6.0        9.7        5.3        10.6
                                                                                                                                                      Gross national savings/GDP                           9.1       18.7       19.1        24.3


                                     Ethiopia at a glance                                                                                   3/17/13
                                                                                                                                                      Current account balance/GDP
                                                                                                                                                      Interest payments/GDP
                                                                                                                                                      Total debt/GDP
                                                                                                                                                                                                          -2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                          68.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     71.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -11.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                27.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            28.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Domestic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           savings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Capital


                                                                         Sub-                                                                         Total debt service/exports                          25.2       18.2        5.1         8.2
POVERTY and SOCIAL                                                    Saharan       Low-                                                              Present value of debt/GDP                              ..         ..         ..       14.7
                                                                                             Development diamond*                                     Present value of debt/exports                          ..         ..         ..      102.6
                                                          Ethiopia      Africa    income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Indebtedness
2011
                                                                                                                                                                                           1991-01    2001-11       2010        2011    2011-15
Population, mid-year (millions)                               84.7        875        817
                                                                                                               Life expectancy                        (average annual growth)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)                             370      1,258        571
                                                                                                                                                      GDP                                       4.8        9.3        9.9        7.3           ..
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)                              31.0      1,101        466                                                                                                                                                                          Ethiopia           Low-income group
                                                                                                                                                      GDP per capita                            1.7        6.8        7.6        5.0           ..
Average annual growth, 2005-11                                                                                                                        Exports of goods and services             9.6        7.6        0.3        2.7           ..
Population (%)                                                 2.2         2.5        2.1
                                                                                                 GNI                                       Gross
Labor force (%)                                                3.1         2.8        2.6
                                                                                                 per                                      primary     STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 2005-11)                                            capita                                enrollment                                                        1991       2001        2010       2011        Growth of capital and GDP (%)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)          30           ..         ..                                                             (% of GDP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
Urban population (% of total population)                       17          36         28                                                              Agriculture                                         64.1       47.7       46.7        46.4      30
Life expectancy at birth (years)                               59          55         59                                                              Industry                                             8.7       13.0       10.3        10.5      20

Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)                       52          69         63                                                                Manufacturing                                      3.0        5.7        3.9         3.6      10

Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)                     29          21         23                                                              Services                                            27.3       39.3       43.0        43.1       0
                                                                                                     Access to improved water source                                                                                                                 -10         06     07     08       09      10      11
Access to an improved water source (% of population)           44          61         65                                                              Household final consumption expenditure             83.0       75.6       86.1        81.4
Literacy (% of population age 15+)                             39          63         63                                                              General gov't final consumption expenditure         11.0       14.6        8.6         8.1                             GCF             GDP
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)         106         100        105                                                              Imports of goods and services                        9.2       23.7       33.0        31.8
                                                                                                          Ethiopia           Low-income group
   Male                                                       111         103        108
   Female                                                     101          96        103
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1991-01     2001-11       2010       2011       Growth of exports and imports (%)
KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS                                                                                                              (average annual growth)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                      Agriculture                                          2.8        7.5        5.1         5.2
                                                 1991        2001        2010       2011     Economic ratios*                                                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                                      Industry                                             6.0        9.6        8.1        11.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
GDP (US$ billions)                                13.4         8.0        26.6       30.2                                                               Manufacturing                                      6.8        8.4        9.0         8.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
Gross capital formation/GDP                       11.1        21.5        24.7       25.5                                                             Services                                             6.8       11.5       10.8         8.6
                                                                                                                      Trade                                                                                                                           0
Exports of goods and services/GDP                  4.1        12.0        13.6       16.8                                                             Household final consumption expenditure              2.7       12.1        8.3         4.0     -10         06     07     08       09      10      11
Gross domestic savings/GDP                         6.0         9.7         5.3       10.6                                                             General gov't final consumption expenditure         13.5        2.3       19.6        -0.8
Gross national savings/GDP                         9.1        18.7        19.1       24.3                                                             Gross capital formation                              8.4       12.2        5.4         5.1                         Exports             Imports

Current account balance/GDP                       -2.0        -2.9       -11.7       -7.5                                                             Imports of goods and services                        6.2       15.7        1.9        -5.5
                                                                                                 Domestic                             Capital
Interest payments/GDP                              0.3         0.8         0.2        0.3
                                                                                                 savings
Total debt/GDP                                    68.4        71.5        27.6       28.4                                                             Note: 2011 data are preliminary estimates.
Total debt service/exports                        25.2        18.2         5.1        8.2                                                             This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.
Present value of debt/GDP                            ..          ..          ..      14.7
                                                                                                                                                      * The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
Present value of debt/exports                        ..          ..          ..     102.6
                                                                                                                Indebtedness                             be incomplete.
                                     1991-01   2001-11       2010        2011     2011-15
(average annual growth)
GDP                                      4.8       9.3         9.9         7.3         ..
                                                                                                           Ethiopia           Low-income group
GDP per capita                           1.7       6.8         7.6         5.0         ..
Exports of goods and services            9.6       7.6         0.3         2.7         ..


STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
                                                 1991        2001        2010       2011     Growth of capital and GDP (%)
(% of GDP)
                                                                                             40
Agriculture                                       64.1        47.7        46.7       46.4    30
Industry                                           8.7        13.0        10.3       10.5    20
  Manufacturing                                    3.0         5.7         3.9        3.6    10
Services                                          27.3        39.3        43.0       43.1     0
                                                                                            -10           06    07      08       09    10       11
Household final consumption expenditure           83.0        75.6        86.1       81.4
General gov't final consumption expenditure       11.0        14.6         8.6        8.1                             GCF             GDP
Imports of goods and services                      9.2        23.7        33.0       31.8


                                               1991-01    2001-11        2010       2011     Growth of exports and imports (%)
 (average annual growth)
                                                                                            40
 Agriculture                                       2.8         7.5         5.1        5.2
67
 Industry                                          6.0         9.6         8.1       11.0
                                                                                            30
                                                                                            20
   Manufacturing                                   6.8         8.4         9.0        8.2
                                                                                            10
 Services                                          6.8        11.5        10.8        8.6
                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                          Total exports (fob)                              276      463         85         87    10,000
                                                                                                                                                                           Coffee                                          130      182        428        453
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8,000
                                                                                                                                                                           Pulses and oil seeds                              9       41        435        450
                                                                                                                                                                           Manufactures                                     66       86        143        173     6,000
                                                                                                                                                                          Total imports (cif)                            1,029    1,555      8,632      8,750     4,000
                                                                                                                                                                           Food                                            152      110        495        250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2,000
                                                                                                                                                                           Fuel and energy                                 102      292      1,444      1,665
                                                                                                                                                                           Capital goods                                   475      487      3,683      3,503           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 05        06        07        08          09       10      11
                                                                                                                                                                          Export price index (2000=100)                   114        95        142        140
                                                                                                                                                                          Import price index (2000=100)                    83        98        135        139                               Exports                 Imports
                                                                                                                                                                          Terms of trade (2000=100)                       137        97        105        100

                                                                                                                                                                          BALANCE of PAYMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1991      2001       2010      2011      Current account balance to GDP (%)
                                                                                                                                                                          (US$ millions)
                                                                                                                                                                          Exports of goods and services                    543      979      3,598      4,293     5

                                                                                                                                                                          Imports of goods and services                  1,226    1,934     10,240     10,594
                                                                                                                                                      Ethiopia            Resource balance                                -683     -955     -6,642     -6,301     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            05        06        07        08          09          10       11
                                                                                                                                                                          Net income                                      -73       -51       -212       -190     -5
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE                                                                                                                                             Net current transfers                           495       775      3,754      4,217
                                            1991    2001     2010     2011      Inflation (%)                                                                             Current account balance                         -261     -232      -3,099    -2,274    -10
Domestic prices
                                                                               40
(% change)                                                                                                                                                                Financing items (net)                           346       210      3,070      2,628    -15
Consumer prices                              20.9    -5.2      2.8     18.1    30                                                                                         Changes in net reserves                         -85        22         30       -354
Implicit GDP deflator                        19.1    -5.8      3.9     24.4    20
                                                                                                                                                                          Memo:
Government finance                                                             10                                                                                         Reserves including gold (US$ millions)          106       337      1,850      2,266
(% of GDP, includes current grants)                                             0                                                                                         Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)                 2.1       8.5      14.4       16.9
Current revenue                              10.9    18.7     15.0     13.5                     06             07             08           09           10           11

Current budget balance                       -2.5     1.7      6.2      5.7                                         GDP deflator                        CPI               EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
Overall surplus/deficit                      -6.9    -5.1      0.0      0.0                                                                                                                                              1991      2001       2010      2011      Composition of 2011 debt (US$ mill.)
                                                                                                                                                                          (US$ millions)
TRADE                                                                                                                                                                     Total debt outstanding and disbursed           9,134    5,752      7,347      8,597
                                            1991    2001     2010     2011      Export and import levels (US$ mill.)                                                        IBRD                                            20        0          0          0                                   G: 175
(US$ millions)                                                                                                                                                              IDA                                            883    2,150      1,804      2,208
Total exports (fob)                           276     463       85       87    10,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B: 2,208
  Coffee                                      130     182      428      453                                                                                               Total debt service                              138       183        184        353           F: 2,259
                                                                                8,000
  Pulses and oil seeds                          9      41      435      450                                                                                                 IBRD                                            9         0          0          0
  Manufactures                                 66      86      143      173     6,000                                                                                       IDA                                            11        36         15         23
Total imports (cif)                         1,029   1,555    8,632    8,750     4,000                                                                                     Composition of net resource flows
  Food                                        152     110      495      250
  Fuel and energy                             102     292    1,444    1,665     2,000                                                                                       Official grants                               782       449      2,628          ..                                                                         C: 484

  Capital goods                               475     487    3,683    3,503           0
                                                                                                                                                                            Official creditors                            145       434        983      1,069
                                                                                               05         06             07         08          09       10       11        Private creditors                             212       -10        647        358
Export price index (2000=100)                114      95      142       140                                                                                                 Foreign direct investment (net inflows)         ..      349        288        627                                                                   D: 1,198
Import price index (2000=100)                 83      98      135       139                                Exports                       Imports                            Portfolio equity (net inflows)                  0         0          0          0                         E: 2,273
Terms of trade (2000=100)                    137      97      105       100
                                                                                                                                                                          World Bank program
                                                                                                                                                                           Commitments                                      0       201        518        383
BALANCE of PAYMENTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A - IBRD                                                 E - Bilateral
                                            1991    2001     2010     2011
                                                                                                                                                                           Disbursements                                   58       455        389        430          B - IDA         D - Other multilateral                   F - Private
                                                                                Current account balance to GDP (%)                                                         Principal repayments                            12        22          4          8
(US$ millions)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C - IMF                                                  G - Short-term
Exports of goods and services                 543     979    3,598    4,293     5                                                                                          Net flows                                       46       433        385        422
Imports of goods and services               1,226   1,934   10,240   10,594                                                                                                Interest payments                                8        14         11         15
Resource balance                             -683    -955   -6,642   -6,301     0                                                                                          Net transfers                                   38       419        373        406
                                                                                          05         06             07         08          09          10       11
Net income                                   -73     -51      -212     -190     -5
Net current transfers                        495     775     3,754    4,217                                                                                               Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.                                                                                   3/17/13

Current account balance                      -261    -232   -3,099   -2,274    -10


Financing items (net)                        346     210     3,070    2,628    -15
Changes in net reserves                      -85      22        30     -354
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)       106     337     1,850    2,266
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)              2.1     8.5     14.4     16.9

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
                                            1991    2001     2010     2011      Composition of 2011 debt (US$ mill.)
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed        9,134   5,752    7,347    8,597
  IBRD                                         20       0        0        0                                         G: 175
  IDA                                         883   2,150    1,804    2,208
                                                                                                                                                     B: 2,208
Total debt service                           138     183      184       353           F: 2,259
  IBRD                                         9       0        0         0
  IDA                                         11      36       15        23
Composition of net resource flows
  Official grants                            782     449     2,628        ..                                                                                 C: 484
  Official creditors                         145     434       983    1,069
  Private creditors                          212     -10       647      358
  Foreign direct investment (net inflows)      ..    349       288      627                                                                          D: 1,198
  Portfolio equity (net inflows)               0       0         0        0                          E: 2,273
World Bank program
 Commitments                                   0     201      518       383
                                                                                     A - IBRD                                                        E - Bilateral
 Disbursements                                58     455      389       430          B - IDA          D - Other multilateral                         F - Private
 Principal repayments                         12      22        4         8          C - IMF                                                         G - Short-term
 Net flows                                    46     433      385       422                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      68
 Interest payments                             8      14       11        15
 Net transfers                                38     419      373       406
Map of Projects




69
  Reducing Poverty               Empowering Citizens




Improving Livelihoods     Increasing Competitiveness




                        w w w. w o r l d b a n k . o r g / e t
